The UK Treasury is on course for a windfall of more than £40bn over the next 20 years, new estimates show, as thousands of heirs of people who converted pension promises into a cash lump sum following “pension freedoms” in 2015 face inheritance tax bills.

The government estimates that pension tax changes will raise £1.46bn a year by 2029-30, but consultants at Lane Clark & Peacock, an actuarial adviser, estimate that revenue raised from UK-wide transfers out of defined benefit to defined contribution schemes will surge from £470mn in 2029-30 to more than £3bn a year by the mid 2040s.

“The figures in the red book [Budget documents] don’t do justice to the long-term scale of the tax increase which could easily be over £40bn over the next two decades,” said Sir Steve Webb, partner at LCP and former pensions minister.

Revenue is set to rise sharply because of a surge in pension transfer activity several years ago. In 2015, the then chancellor George Osborne introduced rights allowing individuals to move their defined benefit pension scheme to a defined contribution pot.

More than 100,000 transfers were undertaken in the five years after that, according to LCP, and six-figure transfer values were the norm. In many cases these transfers were undertaken specifically so the value of those pension pots could be passed on when the member died.

In last year’s Budget, chancellor Rachel Reeves announced that unused pension funds will be included within IHT from April 2027.

“Applying inheritance tax to pension balances could prove to be a real gold mine for the government for many years to come,” said Tim Camfield, senior consultant at LCP, who carried out the analysis.

While he acknowledged that some retirees may react to tax changes by drawing down on pension assets faster, the changes will still generate significant tax revenue because such withdrawals will be subject to income tax, he said.

“Either way, as the DB transfer generation gets older, the government will start to see a multibillion pound revenue stream from the income tax or IHT on their pension pots,” Camfield added.

According to a freedom of information request from investment platform Interactive Investor to the Office for Budget Responsibility, an estimated 31,200 more estates will be subject to IHT in the three years from the 2027-28 tax year than if pensions had not been included in estates.

The OBR estimates that 66,600 people will pay inheritance tax in 2029-30, up from 40,100 in the current tax year.

LCP calculates that these numbers should continue to surge because the peak in transfer activity from DB schemes to DC schemes was in 2017-18, after which tighter rules around financial advice followed by a fall in transfer values led to a dramatic reduction in the volume of transfers.

The typical person who transferred was in their late fifties, according to LCP. As these people gradually die over the coming years, any unspent balances in their transferred pension fund will be potentially liable to IHT.

Rob Morgan, chief analyst at wealth manager Charles Stanley, said that enhanced death benefits tended to be “the overriding factor” for people choosing to transfer out of DB into DC.

“On the basis that people will mostly have only done this where there is ample income and assets elsewhere, we can infer that there will be IHT consequences in many cases,” Morgan said.

Data from the Financial Conduct Authority shows that between April 2015 and September 2018, more than 170,000 people who received advice transferred their DB scheme to a DC pot, with an average transfer value of over £350,000. This suggests the total amount transferred in this period was over £50bn.

Shaun Moore, tax and financial planning expert at Quilter, a wealth manager, said a freeze in the inheritance tax threshold — which is set to last until 2030 — plus the inclusion of pensions from 2027 would enable the government to “cash in on an ever-expanding pool of taxpayers”.

The IHT tax-free threshold has been set at £325,000 since 2009. The impact of the frozen threshold alongside inflation and rising asset values means more people have been dragged into paying inheritance tax, with the trend likely to continue.



Pension trustees warn that allowing companies to access surpluses trapped in defined benefit pension schemes is unlikely to deliver the jolt to the economy that the government hopes for.

The UK government said this week that lifting the restrictions on companies using money from their DB pension schemes — in excess of what they owe members — would “unlock billions to drive growth”.

According to an FT analysis of company accounts there are over 30 companies in the FTSE 100 with DB schemes with surpluses of at least £100mn and a funding ratio of at least 110 per cent. Most declined to comment when contacted by the FT.

Energy company SSE said it was looking at the opportunities the reforms represent, but noted any impact would be relatively small.

Schroders said after the announcement its would use ‘’approximately 10 per cent’’ of its scheme’s DB section’s surplus per year to support funding for defined contribution members.

Most schemes can already access surpluses in their DB schemes, provided they passed a resolution in 2016 permitting them to do so, according to pensions consultant LCP. But in practice few do.

Only £180mn of surplus was accessed by companies between 2018 to 2023, according to government estimates last year. Any surplus extracted is taxed at a rate of 25 per cent, having been lowered from 35 per cent last year.

Where DB and DC pension funds are set up within the same trust, DB surpluses can be transferred to DC members if the scheme rules permit it without incurring a tax charge.

Trade groups have broadly welcomed the government’s proposals, provided appropriate guardrails are in place to protect members, but trustees have privately expressed doubts.

“Why would I want to give away my comfort blanket?” said one trustee of a FTSE 100 company pension scheme. He was sceptical that he would be prepared to release its surplus to executives, noting that for many years the scheme was in deficit and a fall in government bond yields could make its funding position more vulnerable.

“It’s not going to be the silver bullet that the government hopes for,” said another, adding that the total DB scheme surplus was only about £68bn on a buyout basis — the level at which companies with the right permissions can access their surpluses.

“First you have to work out how much to give members, then you have to agree how much to give the company factoring you will have to pay 25 per cent tax,” he said, adding that the time it takes to make these decisions was also “not trivial”.

Rob Gardner, former co-chief executive of pensions consultancy Redington and founder of Rebalance Earth, a flood mitigation investor, said if he were a trustee weighing the return of a surplus to an employer there would be “significant challenges”.

“My fiduciary duty is to act in the best interests of members, and the potential long-term risks to them may outweigh the short-term benefits to the employer,” he said.

The government estimates that around 75 per cent of the UK’s £1.2tn defined benefit corporate pension schemes are in surplus, worth a total of around £160bn. Some 96 per cent of these schemes — which provide pensions to 8.8mn people — are closed to new members.

Ministers have been working out how to extract money from DB schemes after a rapid rise in interest rates radically improved scheme funding levels in 2022. The government’s plans follow a consultation by the Conservative government last spring.

Policymakers also hope trustees will be emboldened to invest in more risky assets, rather than preparing schemes to be sold to insurance companies in a process known as buyout.

But Sankar Mahalingham, managing director at professional trustee firm Law Debenture, said it was “unlikely that there will be a large number who will suddenly take a very different look at their investment strategy”.

According to the Pension Protection Fund, schemes had a net deficit on a buyout basis of almost £500bn as recently as 2019. That figure is now a surplus of £68bn.

When the Financial Times asked the Treasury if it would lower the ‘buyout basis’ threshold, a spokesperson said that “schemes will continue to have to satisfy stringent funding requirements to be eligible to extract surplus”.

The previous government’s consultation explored enhancing protection from the Pension Protection Fund to 100 per cent to encourage trustees to be more comfortable with taking on more risk and releasing surpluses, as well as assessing if the tax rate for tapping surpluses should be lowered.

The Treasury told the FT it would set out these details “in the spring”.



Sir Keir Starmer is resisting pressure from business and some within his own party to tear up a new workers’ rights bill, even as government officials conceded that details of the policy were still up for grabs.

The prime minister’s allies told the Financial Times he was fully committed to the “make work pay” plan, which is seen in Number 10 as essential to tackling low pay, improving insecure employment and raising productivity even though it is expected to cost businesses £5bn.

But senior Labour figures argue it may have to be made more business-friendly in the coming weeks.

“It needs serious tooth removal,” said one Labour official close to Starmer. Another influential adviser said: “There is a view in the Treasury and DBT [business and trade department] that this shouldn’t upset the growth apple cart too much.”

The workers’ rights package was a key promise in Labour’s manifesto, but business leaders have warned that piling even more costs on to companies will imperil the growth ambitions that Starmer and chancellor Rachel Reeves have set out as their core mission for the government.

Starmer insisted in the House of Commons this week he would not abandon the principles of the legislation. “We believe in giving people proper dignity and protection at work,” he said, calling the bill “good for working people and good for the economy”.

One Starmer aide said: “We want the economy to grow and are prepared to take on the political fights to get that, but we also want some of the proceeds of growth to flow into the pockets of workers, especially tackling low pay and insecure employment.”

The aide added: “We have consulted on the application of how we do that. So the measures may adjust to reflect that policy objective, but they will not limit our ambitions.”

Ministers are consulting businesses, unions and others on details of the Employment Rights bill, which is due to report to the House of Commons before Easter, in an increasingly tense political atmosphere.

Businesses are already smarting from last year’s tax-raising Budget and a hike in the minimum wage that comes into force this April, while companies such as J Sainsbury and Airbus have already blamed higher costs for recent job cuts in the UK.

Nicola Smith, director of policy at the Trades Union Congress, said she believed ministers had strengthened their commitment to some parts of the bill, including a near-ban on employers using “fire and rehire” tactics to impose changes in contracts, which the legislation will allow only where a business is close to insolvency.

“From where I’m sitting, we don’t see any change of ambition,” she added.

The proposals in the controversial package include scaling back zero-hours contracts and giving staff full rights of redress from their first day of employment.

Conservative leader Kemi Badenoch this week branded it the “unemployment bill” and called on Starmer to ditch the entire package.

One imminent compromise will see ministers address concerns that employers could find themselves in endless consultation with unions over unconnected redundancies at different sites under the legislation as currently drafted.

At present, they are required to consult only when they make 20 or more workers redundant at a single site.

Ministers have said they will bring forward amendments to the bill at the next stage of the parliamentary process — and both business and unions believe the timing of this next stage could slip into March.

Craig Beaumont of the Federation of Small Businesses said two areas of focus for business lobbyists were around the proposals for day one protection against unfair dismissal, and the mechanism of the proposed “ban” on exploitative zero and low hour contracts. However, he acknowledged the FSB was “pitching for the stars” in urging ministers to change the day one right to a protection that kicked in after a year.

Angela Rayner, deputy prime minister and champion of the bill, has told colleagues that the idea of improving workers’ rights is one of the Labour government’s few popular policies, and a key weapon in the party’s fight against Reform UK in working class seats.

“The government is committed to implementing day one rights, ending insecurity, and strengthening the voice of working people,” said one ally of Rayner.



Big City firms are urging Rachel Reeves to scale back tax breaks for cash Isas, a form of saving beloved by millions of Britons, in an effort to boost UK financial services and the economy by channelling money into stocks.

Companies including insurance group Phoenix and the London Stock Exchange Group have told the chancellor that almost £300bn held in cash Isas could generate better returns for savers if invested in stocks and shares, while supporting the City’s dwindling equities market.

One senior banker said the issue had been raised by several finance executives at a recent meeting with Reeves and that she had not rebuffed the idea.

“The state should not be giving a tax break for us all to park our money in cash,” said Andy Briggs, chief executive of Phoenix, which operates the Standard Life brand.

“I am hopeful that Rachel Reeves will conclude that it makes sense to refocus Isa tax incentives to make them consistent with the government’s very welcome growth agenda,” added Briggs, who was at the meeting.

Scrapping the cash Isa would be the biggest shake-up of the savings market since the products were first introduced by then-Labour chancellor Gordon Brown in 1999.

Cash Isas allow savers to earn tax-free interest on up to £20,000 a year and are by far the most popular of the UK’s Isas. Surveys show that many Britons prefer keeping wealth in cash rather than investing in the stock market because they view it as safer.

One Treasury official lobbied on scrapping cash Isas by City firms said “they also like the idea that it could provide growth for their asset management arms. They say there is a huge amount of capital that could be doing much more.”

People close to the discussions said Reeves would be reluctant to change a popular form of savings, but the idea has not been ruled out.

“They are quite important products for a lot of people so changing cash Isas would be quite a big deal,” said another official.

The UK offers several different Isas, including a product for cash and another for stocks and shares

But the financial services industry has raised concerns that cash Isas are housing money that could be earning more in London-listed companies while supporting the UK’s capital markets. Banks earn fees by helping companies sell shares to retail and institutional investors, while asset managers have suffered in recent years from investors pulling money from their UK equity funds.

Steven Fine, chief executive of investment bank Peel Hunt, told the FT that he had “consistently been in touch” with the Treasury about Isa reform, “ideally to limit or remove cash, with the balance in London-listed stocks and shares.”

Another banker said that the government could limit the amount of cash held within an Isa, for example up to £5,000, while the remaining, larger portion could be held in stocks and shares.

The chair of a UK asset manager said the industry has been calling for Isa reform, noting that there should be “a single Isa, encouraging people to have more allocated into British stocks and shares.”

The Treasury said: “We want to help people save for their future goals and build greater financial resilience across the country. We keep all aspects of savings policy under review.”

According to an LSEG spokesperson, the group was not at the meeting with Reeves where the topic of ISAs was discussed.

About 14mn of the UK’s 22mn Isa holders held cash Isas alone, according to analysis of the most recent HM Revenue & Customs’ data, from 2021-22, by AJ Bell, a financial platform. Some 4.2mn investors held only stocks and shares Isas and 3.6mn had both cash and stocks and shares accounts.

Of the £726bn held in adult Isas, £431bn is held in stocks and shares and the remainder is in cash Isas, according to AJ Bell’s analysis of HMRC data for 2022-23.



Barclays has experienced significant technological issues that have left customers unable to access some of the most basic banking services, including transferring money and making payments.

Several functions were down on Friday including online banking, the Barclays app, and payments and transfers.

Barclays acknowledged the outage in an online statement and apologised to customers saying: “We know this isn’t ideal.” The bank has not explained what has caused the issue but it is because of a technical problem rather than a cyber attack, according to a person with knowledge of the matter.

The outage came at a particularly critical time for Barclays’ more than 20 million UK customers, many of whom were set to receive their first pay cheque of the year. It also prompted frustrated responses from those who were on deadline to file their self-assessment tax returns with HMRC and make payments.

“We know some customers may be having issues trying to make a payment to HMRC ahead of the deadline for self-assessment tax returns. We’re in direct contact with HMRC, they are aware of the technical issues with our system and have confirmed today’s issues will not result in late-payment penalties, as they don’t apply until 1st March,” said a spokesperson for the bank.

“We will ensure that no customer is left out of pocket because of delayed payments caused by this incident.”

A status update on the Barclays website at the time of writing showed that seven functions were having difficulties, including debit cards and their messaging service. No clear guidance was available on when the systems will be up and running again.

Barclays said earlier today that cards and cash withdrawals were working normally. However, a number of customers disputed this, saying they had been unable to make card payments.



Almost one-tenth of England’s farmland will need to be converted to low-carbon use such as woodland or heath by 2050 in order for the country to hit its climate targets, according to government estimates published on Friday.

About 760,000 hectares — or 9 per cent of England’s agricultural land — will need to “change away from agricultural land for environmental and climate benefits”, it said. A further 9 per cent will need to change to accommodate climate benefits, such as sustainable farming practices.

The National Farmers’ Union has warned that the sector is already being forced to scale back food production in favour of alternatives such as rewilding or growing crops for biofuels in order to keep their businesses viable.

Losing additional farming land would also increase the UK’s dependence on imported foodstuffs.

The estimates were published as part of the government’s consultation into a long-awaited “land use framework” that aims to balance competing demands on England’s land, from housing and renewable energy to food production and nature restoration.

“The primary purpose of farming will always be to produce the food that feeds the nation,” said environment secretary Steve Reed. He stressed that the framework would help decision makers protect “our highest quality agricultural land and make decisions about the long-term future of farm businesses”.

Alongside the estimates, the government said that any impact on food production from the land use changes could be offset by using technology and sustainable farming techniques to increase crop yields.

Successive governments have shied away from embarking on the framework over fears of the backlash it would receive from farmers.

NFU president Tom Bradshaw said: “We must have a land use plan in place, underpinned by sound science and evidence, that has British food at its heart.”

But Victoria Vyvyan, president of the Country Land and Business Association, said it could mean farmers being told “what they are and aren’t allowed to grow, plant and rear on their land” and called for safeguards to prevent “mission creep” from officials.

“Whenever the state gets involved, its tendency is to only become ever more prescriptive,” she added. “Today, the framework might be light touch, but tomorrow it won’t be.”

Liberal Democrat MP Alistair Carmichael, chair of the cross-party environment, food and rural affairs committee, said the framework was “long overdue”.

“Farmers need to be able to plan ahead and they and other stakeholders have long called for clarity amidst a myriad of often conflicting demands,” he said.

Two-thirds of England’s land is agricultural, according to official statistics, with 38 per cent made up of arable land and 29 per cent grassland. The country’s population is predominantly urban, with 83 per cent of people living in built-up areas.

England’s farmers are already under pressure from the impact of heavy flooding, high inflation and huge cuts to their subsidy payments.

Many are also furious about the Labour government’s decision to overturn inheritance tax rules, which means some will be liable to pay tax on inherited agricultural and business assets that were previously exempt.

Farmers also face a shift to a new post-Brexit subsidy scheme that offers them incentives to restore the natural environment, sometimes at the expense of food production.

The Environmental Land Management schemes, or ELMs, provide payments for farmers to adopt sustainable farming practices such as soil management, or to take land out of farming altogether. Scotland and Wales have separate devolved systems.

The schemes have been criticised by farming groups such as the NFU, which say farmers are being paid to inadvertently lower the country’s food production, despite the last government’s commitment to maintaining food self-sufficiency.

The sector had hoped that a land use framework would offer clarity about the intentions behind farming policy.

Downing Street said: “It’s important to be clear that this isn’t about the government dictating how land is used, or taking valuable, productive land away from farms.

“The government recognises that land is in high demand, and that is why we are starting a national conversation with those involved, whether it be landowners, farmers, developers and more, about how we use it to its full potential, not least for food production.”



Sir Keir Starmer is using a long-standing statistical quirk to bolster his attempts to fend off Donald Trump’s threatened tariffs, relying on US data that shows the UK is one of the few major economies with which America has a trade surplus.

British ministers are focusing on the US data in their discussions with officials in the Trump administration, because its methodology is more helpful to their cause than the UK’s own statistics.

“Using America’s own trade data provides a shared and strong foundation when engaging in discussions with our American friends,” joked one senior British official.

According to US figures, America ran an overall trade surplus with the UK in 2023, amounting to $14.5bn. That puts Britain in a favourable position as Trump threatens tariffs targeting countries with significant deficits.

However, the Office for National Statistics reports that the UK ran a trade surplus with the US of £71.4bn, or around $89bn, in 2023.

Trump has threatened punitive tariffs on countries with which the US runs trade deficits, though his focus appears to be goods rather than services.

While the bulk of the UK trade balance with the US is services, in 2023, the country reported a small goods trade surplus with the US of about $3bn. This still contrasts with the $9.7bn goods trade surplus the US reports with the UK.

Starmer and Lord Mandelson, the new UK ambassador to Washington, are arguing that Trump should spare Britain from any general application of tariffs given the trading position between the two countries.

The statistics offices across the Atlantic are aware of the differences and have been co-operating to realign the data since 2017. Both highlighted how the differences are larger when measuring trade in services.

Trade asymmetries are common and differences “can be caused by a range of conceptual and measurement variations between the estimation practices of different countries,” warned the ONS.

A key issue in the UK-US figures is the treatment of Crown Dependencies, the three offshore island territories in the British Islands that are self-governing possessions of the British Crown.

The US Bureau of Economic Analysis includes trade with Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man in the UK data, while the ONS does not.

Given that Jersey alone hosts over 35,000 financial firms managing more than £450bn in assets, this omission has a material impact.

The US reports exporting $4.8bn more in services to the UK than it imports, while the UK claims to export nearly £70bn more to the US than it imports.

The UK said the exclusion of the Crown Dependencies from the UK trade data is in line with the European System of Accounts.

The US Statistics Office said it “will explore the feasibility of modifying its data collection instruments to exclude these dependencies from its geographic definition of the United Kingdom”. This is something many UK officials might not want to happen just yet.

An analysis by HM Revenue & Customs into US-UK trade asymmetries on vehicles does seem to not settle the issue.

Before 2022, US-origin goods that cleared EU customs in another EU country before coming to the UK were counted as European imports. This makes it harder to compare with US data.

“This explains the negative asymmetry,” the analysis stated.

The study refers to negative asymmetries when US exports of vehicles to the UK are larger than the corresponding UK imports from the US.

From 2022, UK imports from the US on a country-of-origin basis should be comparable with US exports to the UK. “Instead, there is positive asymmetry in 2022, which cannot be explained,” concluded the analysis.



After a lifetime of being a responsible saver, perhaps denying yourself luxuries in the pursuit of a comfortable retirement, your hard work has paid off. Your pension can provide a more than comfortable investment income. Plus, your calculations (often with the reassurance of a financial adviser) tell you that there’s no way you’ll run out of money. Yet spending still scares you.

What’s the problem? It’s not maths, it’s psychology. And it can have a pernicious and damaging effect on the experience of retirement.

Financial advisers say navigating the change in mindset from saver to spender is a challenge many clients are unprepared for. A study by the Institute for Fiscal Studies found around age 62, more than half of the sample have incomes higher than expenditure, and this figure increases to about 80 per cent by the end of retirement.

“It is incredibly common to work with clients who have more than enough wealth to last them their lifetime, if not several, yet most feel at some level that they may still run out of money,” says Katherine Waller, co-founder of wealth manager Six Degrees.

One problem is the preconditioning that comes through a savings habit lasting 30 to 40 years. Dan Haylett, director of TFP Financial Planning, says: “We’re spoon fed saving and associate money in the bank with security. But in a modern retirement we need to flick the switch to spending.”

Another issue is that there are no retirement “role models” to learn from. People retiring now have a very different experience to that of their parents and grandparents. Someone with a defined benefit pension retiring 25 years ago went from a regular income through their work salary to another secure guaranteed (albeit lower) income through the pension scheme. “We’re now going from income, to no income and a pot of money that we have to deplete intentionally,” says Haylett. “Also, that’s a pot of money that gives us social status and a feeling of achievement. The sense of loss from spending it is huge in modern day retirement. People struggle with it.”

Vicky Reynal is a psychotherapist who focuses on people’s relationship with money. When it is hard to shift from saving to spending, she says it might be because saving was a psychological defence against negative feelings. “Changing our behaviour could leave us feeling too vulnerable or unable to manage the emotions that emerge as we try to spend our hard-earned money,” she says.

Most experts cite childhood as a key influence. It doesn’t matter how old we are, our spending is still influenced hugely by what we’ve observed when growing up. Haylett says: “There’s no blueprint if you look to parents or grandparents. For them, frugality was a badge of honour.”

In the worst cases, the emotions preventing spending may be strong feelings of anxiety and fear. “Some people . . . cling anxiously to every penny just in case a catastrophic — and unrealistic — series of events could materialise,” says Reynal. “Spending threatens a sense of security and evokes almost primal fears.”

At the same time, people often overestimate how long they’ll live, says Haylett. “If you’ve had four aunts live to 101, I get it. But not many people know someone aged 100. I think the idea of a 100-year life is completely ruining people’s retirement.”

In the UK, people aged 65 can expect to live on average a further 19.7 years for men and 22.0 years for women, according to ONS data. This is projected to rise to 21.9 years for males and 24.1 years for females aged 65 years in 2045.

One way is to think of money left behind after death as a “lost opportunity”. Haylett says: “If I fast forward 20-30 years and you still have 70 per cent of your net wealth on the table, people say it feels stupid and they have missed out.” The potential for the government to tax it at the end is another incentive to spend and enjoy it now.

But the balance is difficult to get right, especially since advisers disagree on whether retirement spending should follow a U-shaped path or a straight line.

Many advisers talk about the three phases of a 30-year retirement, roughly divided into 10 years each. First is “go-go”, when people have lots of energy and may want to explore the world and spend money. Then comes “slow-go”, when spending slows. Finally, they enter the “no-go”, or resting years, when health may be poor. Spending is higher at the start and at the end too, if long-term care is needed.

The prospect of a large care bill at the end of life is what most people’s anxiety centres around. “People usually want a back-up plan in place,” says Waller.

This is often your housing wealth. But it might also include gifting to family in tiers, holding some gifts back for later in retirement. Or using a gift and loan trust, where you can have access to the capital, but won’t benefit from any investment growth.

Analysis by Interactive Investor, an investment platform, shows that someone living until age 100 could need an extra £260,000 pension wealth to give them a comfortable retirement, compared with someone who lives until 83 years old. The average nursing home costs around £61,000 each year, so two years in a care home could cost around £122,000.

Doug Brodie, founder and chief executive of Chancery Lane Retirement Income Planning, disputes the fact that spending is higher at the start of retirement. While some of his clients plan to spend an extra £10,000 to £20,000 a year on holidays in the early years of retirement, he says in every single case he’s found they don’t. He puts this down to lifestyle being fixed by the time they reach retirement. “If you have all the time on your hands, would you go and spend a week living in a fancy hotel in Paris? Most people say ‘that’s not the lifestyle that makes me feel comfortable.’ You’ve spent 40 years embedding your lifestyle with kids, family and local relationships.”

More often than not, Reynal says the feeling evoked around spending is guilt, either over its profligacy or the fact that money spent on themselves will reduce the amount their children inherit. “Sometimes it’s the guilt of not having been better parents emotionally,” she says.

All advisers agree that it’s important to try to identify these unconscious discomforts — and this can be done in conversation with family or a trusted adviser. “Talking can be emotive but writing it down or seeing it in writing can be different,” says Waller.

Moira O’Neill is a freelance money and investment writer. Email: moira.o’neill@ft.com, X: @MoiraONeill, Instagram @MoiraOnMoney



For years, “spend your pension last” was the financial planning mantra recited by wealth managers. Following the Budget in October, this has changed to “spend your pension before Rachel Reeves does.”

Inheritance tax will be extended to unspent pension pots from 2027 — prompting the well-advised wealthy to have a radical rethink of their retirement plans. Whether retirees opt to take money out of pensions and spend it, gift it to the next generation or leave it where it is, it is set to be a “gold mine” for the Treasury, generating £40bn in additional taxes over the next two decades, according to former pensions minister Sir Steve Webb.

This will be music to the ears of whoever might be chancellor by the year 2030 (I bet it won’t be Reeves) when tax revenues from this change are predicted to accelerate. But could behavioural changes offer a near-term boost for the property market and the consumer economy?

Webb is well placed to calculate the potential upside. Now a partner at consultancy LCP, he has based his estimate on the huge number of final salary pensions that were transferred out of defined benefit schemes between 2015-2020, typically by men in their late 50s working for blue-chip companies.

The era of ultra-low interest rates ensured high transfer values, tempting over 100,000 retirees to trade the security of an income that would die with them for a more flexible investment pot they could pass to their heirs free of IHT (and in some cases, free of income tax) — until now.

Spouses and civil partners aside, from 2027 anyone inheriting a pension pot could have to pay IHT and income tax at their highest marginal rate. To avoid this “double taxation”, financial advisers and their clients are weighing up the merits of upping pension withdrawals. These would be subject to income tax, but prudent use of gifting allowances (including the so-called “seven year rule”) could lessen IHT liability, or remove it altogether.

Gifting property deposits to children or grandchildren will be the first thought for many. Last year, the bank of mum and dad spent £9.2bn supporting 335,000 house purchases in the UK, according to Legal & General, with almost half of buyers under 35 receiving family assistance. If this ratio rises as Reeves tweaks mortgage affordability for first-time buyers, it could boost property prices and stamp duty revenues.

David Hearne, a chartered financial planner at FPP, says the measures will reshape the great generational wealth transfer. Many of his clients are now considering making regular pension withdrawals (incurring income tax on the way out) and funding pension contributions for their adult children, who will receive tax relief and employer contributions on the way in.

He predicts equity release to extract value from the family home will be a popular tool. Money taken that way can be spent or gifted, with debts reducing the value of the estate and lessening the sting of IHT bills.

To encourage wealthy retirees to spend and enjoy their money, Hearne keeps a big reel of 40-per-cent-off stickers on his desk as a conversation starter. “Spending £20,000 on the trip of a lifetime could be seen as only costing £12,000 as the money won’t be subject to 40 per cent IHT when you die,” he says.

As advisers and their clients rejig plans, could this pulling forward of spending help to turbo-charge VAT receipts and boost the lacklustre UK economy?

Despite LCP’s punchy predictions, Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, has doubts. “It’s not a huge difference for the overall economy”, he says, “although it could be for individuals or their heirs.”

Much will come down to timing. If retirees pull more out of pension pots sooner than expected, this will reduce their spending power in later years. And while the wealthiest can spend (or gift) with confidence, the biggest worry for those less affluent is balancing investment risk against longevity risk.

Those in my own circle who netted tidy sums by transferring their defined benefit pension into a Sipp have had a nerve-racking week as DeepSeek roiled global stock markets.

Run down the pension too much, and they risk running out of money in retirement. Plus, they will have given up any spousal benefits in their defined benefit scheme and will need to provide enough for a surviving partner. This, and the lottery of care costs, could be a brake on spending and gifting.

Difficult choices lie ahead. But with more than half of all those retiring between now and 2060 forecast not to be saving anywhere near enough, these are nice problems to have.

Claer Barrett is the FT’s consumer editor and author of the FT’s Sort Your Financial Life Out newsletter series; claer.barrett@ft.com; Instagram and TikTok @ClaerB

claer.barrett@ft.com



Mercurial Donald Trump may be, but he has a gift for shifting the debate. And sometimes, he is right. When it comes to defence spending, the only surprise is how long Europe’s Nato members have managed to freeride on American taxpayers.

Europe is rearming, and not only because of the fear that Trump will call for members to spend 5 per cent of GDP on defence at Nato’s June summit. Russia’s nuclear rhetoric, cyber attacks, the sabotage of undersea cables in the Baltic Sea and China’s vast new military command centre demonstrate that, as Ursula von der Leyen, European Commission president, said last year, “the world has got rougher”.

Russia’s neighbours have been upping their game for some time. Poland’s military outlay is already 4 per cent of GDP and its armed forces are now the third biggest in Nato. In Sweden, every household recently received a government leaflet, “In Case of Crisis or War”, advising on emergency evacuation and how to store food if power fails.

In Britain, the threat still feels remote. The government refuses to say when it will meet its target of raising defence spending from 2.3 per cent to 2.5 per cent, fearing unpopular deep cuts elsewhere. But time is not on its side.

The UK still has a good story to tell. Our special forces, our intelligence services and our nuclear deterrent are a strong card for London in its relationships with Brussels and Washington. We play a leadership role in the Joint Expeditionary Force of northern and eastern European Nato members, we provide nuclear attack submarines to Australia through the Aukus partnership with the US and we are part of the Global Combat Air Partnership to build a next-generation warplane, with Italy and Japan.

Without commensurate funding, however, these involvements accelerate overstretch. Defence experts repeat the phrase “hollowed out”. Britain is relying on shiny totemic kit — its aircraft carriers and Trident — to project a level of underlying muscle that it no longer has.

Even the 2.3 per cent is not quite what it seems, since it includes pensions. New “hunter killer” submarines have been stuck in port because of a lack of repair docks. General Sir Patrick Sanders, former chief of the general staff, has warned that Britain is no longer capable of launching the kind of operation it did in southern Iraq in 2003. The defence select committee complained a year ago that it could not even adequately judge Britain’s readiness, because the Ministry of Defence is so much more secretive than Nato allies.

Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer is waiting for the strategic defence review in the spring. The reviewers include Fiona Hill, a former White House adviser once described by Trump as “a deep state stiff with a nice accent” (she hails from County Durham). Hill knows better than most that Trump takes a maximalist position. Her memoir quotes the president, in his first term, complaining that advisers who criticised his threats to leave Nato were “ruining my leverage”.

But even if Trump settles for more like 3.5 per cent, the UK is still in a fix. Starmer needs to decide, now, what spending envelope to give the reviewers. Some Labour backbenchers have warned that dithering is a grave mistake. Not all MPs or voters would support cutting transport, say, to fund defence. But few would want to see Britain let down Ukraine, after all we have done.

Britain now faces an existential question: are we going to remain a serious player or be exposed as a Potemkin power, talking a big game while resources dwindle? There is always disagreement behind the scenes on whether we should be fighting “the last war” or the next one. But the experience in Ukraine suggests winning requires both cutting-edge technology and conventional weapons, not one or the other. And that mass matters: in terms of troops, tanks and artillery. The ceasefire envisaged by Marco Rubio, US secretary of state, is likely to require America’s European allies to help maintain a frozen zone between Ukraine and Russia, perhaps for some time.

There are always tensions, too, between the different armed services. But without a bigger fiscal envelope, it is unlikely that Britain can continue to be a serious player on both land and sea.

The fiscal constraints make this a hellish situation for the government. Chancellor Rachel Reeves didn’t mention defence this week in her speech on growth, but it is a core part of the industrial strategy, and rightly so. Although the ministry of defence does not publish a complete analysis of where it sources weaponry, we know that parts of the F-35 fighter jets are being made here. The Typhoon weapons system, according to BAE Systems, has contributed £1.4bn to the UK economy in export sales. The industry supports an ecosystem of suppliers which contribute to regeneration.

Behind the scenes, there has been lobbying for both London and Brussels to exempt defence from fiscal rules on national security grounds — this seems unlikely to appeal to Reeves.

But there is yet another challenge brewing, from calls to boycott the defence industry. In 2020, the Supreme Court over-ruled the then Conservative government’s attempts to stop the Local Government Pension Scheme divesting from defence, after an action brought by the Palestine Solidarity campaign. A number of local authorities have dumped defence stocks.

Successive governments have performed a delicate dance of the veils on defence, trying to maintain prestige while fudging resources. But now the music has stopped. The decision that Reeves and Starmer make in the coming months will have an impact on the UK’s alliances, our perceived position in the world, and our perception of ourselves.

camilla.cavendish@ft.com



Parking in the UK has become a major annoyance for drivers. There are the fiddly apps, the cashless machines that never seem to work and the ever-increasing rates. Fall foul of the rules and you can expect a parking charge notice to be posted through your door within days.

Motorists have taken to online message boards to rail against what they see as profiteering, alleging unfair fees, confusing signage and heavy-handed enforcement, with many believing the process has become more vindictive in recent years.

Drivers are certainly getting more fines. In the 2023-24 tax year, private car park operators handed out a record near-13mn parking charge notices. In the six months to last October, they were being issued at a rate of one every two seconds.

Private parking companies have grown rapidly over the past decade and now manage more than 50,000 sites across the UK, up fivefold from 2012, according to the International Parking Community (IPC), a trade body. Over the same period, penalty ticket issuance has skyrocketed, rising more than eightfold.

Operators say their growth has been commensurate with a rise in demand for parking spaces and an increase in the number of people repeatedly flouting the rules.

Will Hurley, chief executive of the IPC, is keen to point out that most people pay for their parking without incident — 99.77 per cent of “parking events” are “seamless”, he says. “It’s absolutely right that we look to improve,” he adds, “but unfortunately the sector only gets talked about when something goes wrong.”

Nevertheless, it’s a sector that has enjoyed bumper profits recently. Seven of the UK’s top 10 largest private car park operators have brought in record operating profits in the last three years, according to a Financial Times analysis of Companies House filings.

The industry has also undergone significant change. A wave of takeovers since 2017 has brought most of the biggest players under the ultimate ownership of private equity groups such as Wall Street behemoth KKR.

Hurley claims that, across the industry, the money from “paid-for parking” far exceeds that from “enforcement”. That isn’t true of every car park operator. In its latest accounts, ParkingEye, the fifth-largest operator by revenue, claims it earns most of its turnover “from the issue of parking charge notices”. Smart Parking, the UK’s 11th largest car park operator, earned almost 90 per cent of its global revenue last year — the majority of which originated in the UK — from issuing penalty tickets, according to its 2024 annual report.

Most of the top 10 did not respond when contacted by the FT. National Car Parks, the largest operator, declined to comment and Q-Park, the second largest, says it operates barriered facilities and does not issue parking tickets. Apcoa says the “vast majority” of its income is “derived from client management fees where we do not take a share from parking/penalty charge notices”. (Creative Car Park, NCP and Q-Park have not achieved record profits in the past three years.)

Although often described as parking “fines”, the tickets issued by private companies are technically parking charge notices, invoices that allege a motorist breached the contract to which they implicitly agreed by parking on private land.

Only local authorities can issue fines, says Scott Dixon, a consumer advocate and founder of The Complaints Resolver blog. Parking charge notices often “look the same [as local authority tickets] and that [means] most motorists see them as fines to pay off as soon as possible,” he explains.

More than 80 per cent of paid parking charge notices are settled soon after they are issued, according to a submission to parliament by Euro Car Parks. Those who have paid the charges generally aren’t allowed to appeal them subsequently.

Parking companies can obtain car owners’ details from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA), which sells them on request to approved members of the parking industry’s two trade associations — the British Parking Association and the IPC. Last year, the DVLA netted at least £31.9mn from the practice. The RAC Foundation, a think-tank, uses the number of vehicle keeper requests made by car park management companies as a proxy for the number of penalty tickets issued — and FT Money has done the same.

So how did we get here? Many consider the original sin to be the ban on vehicle clamping on private land, introduced by the government in 2012.

According to Hurley, the lack of deterrent resulted in many more people breaking the rules. Others disagree.

Steve Gooding, director of the RAC Foundation, says: “What no one foresaw [in 2012] was the scale at which parking firms would subsequently go after registered keepers. A big part of the issue is that cheap camera technology and ready access to DVLA data means pursuing car owners to ‘enforce’ parking offences is less expensive than driving around to apply wheel clamps used to be.”

There have been numerous calls for reform. In 2022, the government attempted to regulate the industry and impose a £50 cap on most charges. That year, car park operators launched multiple legal challenges, leading the government to withdraw its proposals.

Last October, the industry set up its own code of conduct and in January 2025 formed a new panel — that it claims is independent — to oversee it.

Hurley, whose IPC organisation was not involved in 2022’s legal challenges, says: “What I want to achieve is for people to read the signage, follow the signage and then avoid a parking charge, because ultimately it’s really easy not to get a parking charge if you’re told how to avoid it.”

The first item on the new panel’s agenda was to stop motorists being penalised for taking more than five minutes to pay for parking.

In December, Excel Parking dropped its court claim against Rosey Hudson, a 31-year old from Leicestershire, whom it had charged nearly £2,000 in accumulated penalty tickets. Her case, disputed by Excel, was that she was delayed in paying for her parking on multiple occasions due to a poor mobile phone signal when trying to use the car park’s app.

From 2017 to 2024, Excel Parking tripled its operating profits to £5.1mn and last year its operating margin stood at 28 per cent, the highest level since it started filing public accounts. Owner and founder Simon Renshaw-Smith was paid a dividend of £522,000 last year on top of at least £150,000 for his role as a director. He did not respond to a request for comment.

Excel has nearly halved its headcount since 2017 and slashed its wage bill by over a third, according to its 2024 annual report.

“We need parking to support our high streets, towns and city centres, but something is clearly going wrong,” says Catherine Atkinson, the Labour MP for Derby North, who has raised the issue of unfair parking charges in parliament.

She says that many of her constituents paid for parking but had received parking charge notices for exceeding grace periods allowed by car park operators. “For a lot of people, it’s been because they’ve been older or assisting others, or they’ve really struggled with [parking payment] apps and broken machines.”

Atkinson called for “an independently set code of practice” and says she will broach the subject with parking executives at a roundtable in February.

Back when the government tried to set new rules for the sector, parking companies made the argument that a full impact assessment had not been carried out. A survey by audit firm Mazars on behalf of the BPA argued that the government’s fee caps would bankrupt almost half of private car park operators affiliated with the trade body within a year.

Speaking to MPs in 2021, Philip Boynes, chief executive of ParkingEye, said the drop in revenues resulting from the changes would be “unsustainable” without significant cost-cutting and job losses.

Boynes told the MPs that the “average profit of a car parking operator was about 2.1 per cent”, citing a report by IbisWorld.

The FT’s analysis shows that ParkingEye’s operating margin that year was 15 per cent, up from 5 per cent in 2020. From 2015 onwards, aside from the pandemic years of 2020 and 2021, the company’s margins have remained above 20 per cent.

Boynes did not respond to a request for comment.

ParkingEye issued roughly one in five of all UK parking charge notices last year. It is owned by the world’s largest infrastructure investor, Macquarie, which previously owned distressed utility provider Thames Water. ParkingEye manages car parks for clients ranging from McDonald’s to the NHS.

In 2023 the company made an operating profit of £15.5mn from revenues of £57.5mn — a margin of 27 per cent.

ParkingEye says it “operates responsibly and fairly”. The company adds its growth has “been in response to the increase in demand [from] landowners who wish to ensure an increasing motorist population can access [facilities] that might otherwise become congested by non-compliant motorists who misuse the parking facilities”.

The industry’s own code of conduct, which came into effect last year, was largely similar to the government’s original, but omitted the proposed £50 cap on parking charge notices and restrictions on debt recovery fees.

At the time, the RAC Foundation said the industry’s code “conveniently avoided some of the biggest issues [that] badly need[ed] to be addressed to prevent drivers being taken advantage of.”

Sir Greg Knight, the former Conservative MP who introduced legislation to regulate the sector, is urging the new government to “take up the gauntlet” and introduce a “national parking code”.

“The present situation is highly unsatisfactory; parking companies are in effect policing their own rules,” he says. “The threat of legal action was unfortunate, but the government appears to have let this matter drift.”

The government says it is “determined” to protect motorists and “drive up standards in the industry”. It adds that it will “set out further details on the private parking code of practice as soon as possible”.

“In my book, this is unfinished business,” says Knight.

Additional reporting by Alistair Gray. Data visualisation by Stephanie Stacey



It’s a cold January afternoon in Kent, patches of snow still on the ground despite bright sunshine. On the North Downs Way, just outside Sevenoaks and 20 miles from the centre of London, a dog-walker pauses and steps to one side of the narrow, muddy path to make space for a group of young people coming the other way. But a strange thing happens. As the man and the dog wait, the people just keep coming — two or three abreast, all seemingly in their 20s, smiling and chatting animatedly as they pour out of the woods along the path, a gregarious Gen-Z column almost 400-people strong.

Though he didn’t know it, the man was witnessing the latest outing of Overground, one of a new breed of walking groups that is taking an activity previously associated with sedate middle-age and reinventing it for a Gen-Z and millennial audience. Information is shared on TikTok and Instagram, and the groups often meet in the Home Counties or within a short train ride of other major cities.

For many of the organisers, it’s about building community, harnessing the mental-health benefits of spending time in nature, encouraging participation from under-represented groups and getting away from hectic city lives. And for an increasingly sober demographic, the early starts on weekend mornings are no problem.

Before starting their hiking group Dykes Who Hike in March 2024, neither Lucy Cooper nor Yas Message had been big hikers. “We wanted to see more of the countryside whilst making new connections. . . without relying on alcohol,” says Cooper.

When the pair advertised their first hike on social media, the “Seven Sisters walk” from Seaford to Eastbourne, 60 people turned up. When 250 turned up for their second, they realised they might need to formalise a ticketing system to avoid hikes becoming “too intimidating for people to enjoy”. Tickets now cost £2, and all 200 spaces typically sell out in minutes; in the past year, new branches have sprouted in Manchester, Leeds, Shropshire and Birmingham.

Last weekend I joined another new group, the Adventure Girls Club, meeting up with 12 women and two dogs at Bath station for a foray into the Downs. “The [traditional] hiking community can often focus on hiking the farthest, fastest or the most challenging route,” says the group’s founder Alice Keegan, “whereas I love to hike slowly, take in the views, notice the nature around me — a more mindful approach.”

Keegan, a qualified mountain leader, used to live in London’s bustling Bethnal Green and work as creative director of a design agency catering to the music industry. Feeling burnt out, she took herself solo hiking in the Lake District and began to appreciate how beneficial the outdoors was for her mental health. Now she wants to support others to “escape the stress of modern living”.

We file out of town and wind up steep woodland footpaths towards Sham Castle, built in 1762 for Ralph Allen, one of the key figures in Bath’s Georgian revival. As we meander through Smallcombe Wood, Keegan points out species of fungi including the frills of a turkey tail, and the black bulbs of King Alfred’s cakes.

But if connecting with nature is a key obsession, it is the digital world that is enabling these new communities. Lauren La Faci, TikTok’s London-based consumer communications lead, says that “in recent months, hiking enthusiasts have been captivating millions with stunning landscapes and hiking tutorials”. On the platform, #hiking has 5mn posts (and #hiketok has 270,000). In comparison, #swimming manages 2.1mn posts.

For Jeb Jagne, who founded Overground in July 2023, “walking became a way of taking a breather and a way to decompress” after suffering a bereavement, relationship breakup and job loss within the course of a few months. Overground hosts monthly walks within an hour’s train journey of the capital. On their first, 43 people showed up; now there can be as many as 500.

The walks are free and non-ticketed which means the organisers can’t limit numbers. “There are already so many barriers when it comes to finding space in the outdoors, I wouldn’t want to introduce another one,” says Jagne. Overground is now fundraising to set up a training programme for people from marginalised groups to become mountain guides.

Jagne, who previously worked as a DJ and nightclub promoter, has been sober for the past year. “I’ve seen people meet at Overground and form solid friendships, move into new homes and even go on holiday together. The walks will always be our North Star but what really matters is being that first domino in forming a new connection.”

Back in Bath, 13km trodden and legs aching, the Adventure Girls Club troops back to the train station. The group splits, exchanging social-media contacts and “nice to meet you’s”, returning to suburbia with new friendships forged — if a little muddier than four hours earlier.

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning



Thanks to your generosity, the FT’s joint seasonal appeal in aid of Financial Literacy and Inclusion Campaign “FLIC” and school food charity Magic Breakfast has now reached its baseline target of raising £100,000.

The appeal, which was launched in early December, was due to close at the end of this week. But we are now extending the deadline by a week, until Friday February 7, thanks to a late intervention from the Rosetrees Trust, which has generously offered to match-fund donations to get us to a new £200,000 target.

The offer is only valuable if readers donate. So if you haven’t yet given, please do consider supporting our work at ft.com/donate. Individual and corporate donations alike will be enormously appreciated.

Proper nutrition via healthy breakfasts at school, such as those provided by Magic Breakfast, boosts the capacity of young people — many of whom would otherwise go hungry and struggle to concentrate — to learn.

FLIC’s work boosts young people’s capacity to prosper in later life, thanks to the charity’s full school curriculum of core financial skills training.

Richard Ross, chair of Rosetrees, said: “Ensuring children from deprived homes start the day with a proper meal is good for their health and gives them the best chance of learning at school. We are also supporting research that is looking at the mental health problems of young people, which [is] growing for a variety of reasons.” Financial stress, often compounded by gaps in foundational financial understanding, is a proven contributor to mental health problems.

Ross, whose charity is a leading backer of “venture philanthropy” in the area of medical research, is convinced of the related relevance of the FT’s appeal and is a passionate advocate for a broader push to increase philanthropy. “People who are well provided [for] financially should contribute to the needs of others,” he said.

Ross’s family fortune stems from his parents’ multiple business start-ups, which range from a market stall to a property investment empire. That wealth once topped £100mn, according to the Sunday Times Rich List, but Ross has since given away a large portion of it. Medical research grants of more than £50mn have generated follow-on funding of £1.2bn, Ross said.

The trust’s match-funding offer to FLIC and Magic Breakfast was conditional on the appeal first reaching its original baseline target of £100,000. Notable donors to the appeal so far include Morgan Stanley International, as well as hundreds of FT readers.

In two months of appeal coverage of the work of FLIC and Magic Breakfast, as well as other organisations operating in related fields, the FT has reported on the growing realisation across the world — from Finland to Indonesia — that both nutritious food and financial education in schools can make a vast difference to future lives.



A large inheritance, warned Victorian novelist Charles Dickens, is one of man’s chief corrupters. Great Expectations is his cautionary tale, as sweet protagonist Pip, believing he is the sudden heir to a fortune, abandons his humility and life-long friends.

It’s an idea that holds little sway with most middle-class Britons today. But London-based Andy, 79, is not one of them. He and his wife do not plan to leave their four adult children an inheritance. Instead, the couple have spent what’s left of their funds, sailing and travelling the world before they “pop their clogs”.

“For me, it’s about equality of opportunity and fairness. It seems unfair that some kids get huge assistance while others get nothing,” he says. “We’re arranging our finances so they have just enough to bury us.”

Andy, who asked us not to use his surname, worked in public education and retired in his early 50s. He says he’s politically “leftwing-ish”, but his views aren’t just about politics — it’s also a question of parenting.

“I don’t want to be a helicopter parent . . . I hate when I see kids who are 40 and their parents are still looking after them.”

It’s a noteworthy stance, given the monumental wealth transfer that’s expected globally over the next few decades. A record £5.5tn in wealth is due to be transferred to the next generation in the UK alone. With over 90 per cent of the country’s wealth currently held by Generations X and older, many Boomers and millennials are set to become “inheritance millionaires”.

Yet Andy is not entirely alone. In the US, a 2015 survey by HSBC found that one in four Americans planned to spend their money rather than pass it down, a phenomenon known as SKIs — “spending the kids’ inheritance”. A Hargreaves Lansdown survey in 2021 found around 11 per cent of parents in England choose not to leave an inheritance to their families. (In Scotland, there are “forced heirship” rules.)

Their motivations range from hedonism (wanting to spend the money themselves), not wanting to spoil their children, or philanthropy. Others — such as actor Daniel Craig — say they simply find the concept of an inheritance “distasteful”.

I should mention here that my own parents also belong to this contrarian group. Since as early as I can remember, I’ve known they don’t believe in leaving a large inheritance — something my dad has spoken publicly about himself. They have instead pledged the overwhelming majority of their wealth to their charity, The Safer Roads Foundation, along with other humanitarian causes.

The Bank of Mum of Dad has taken excellent care of my sibling and me (including generously paying off our student loans, and allocating funds for a future deposit on a flat — both immense gifts, and more than many will receive in inheritance). So now, it’s pretty much closed for business.

To be clear, they haven’t cut us out in anger. Nor are they Marxists — politically they’re pretty centrist. They simply feel that there are life-saving causes that will benefit from their money more than their two well-educated adult children.

Renaissance philosopher Niccolo Machiavelli once wrote that “A son can bear the loss of his father . . . but the loss of his inheritance may drive him to despair.” For anyone wondering if I’ve succumbed to despondency, fear not: I’m genuinely proud of my parents’ legacy. I feel incredibly fortunate for the support I’ve had during their lifetime. There’s a silver lining too, in that I won’t be at risk of any familial angst once they die (40 per cent of people report conflict over inheritances).

If anything, I’m intrigued as to why it’s so provocative, especially among their peers. On the rare occasions that it’s come up, I’ve encountered shock or thinly veiled criticism of my parents. Sometimes I’m met with reassurance that I am in fact in their will and this is a motivational ploy (I checked. If it is a bluff, they’re not breaking the act yet).

Andy also says his friends have been critical of his stance. That’s despite all his children “landing on their feet.”

“People are horrified,” he says. “That includes my well-balanced friends . . . They can’t understand it.”

Online forums froth with furious commentators wondering how people can “watch their kids living in a ‘hole’ while they go and enjoy their cruises.” Anonymous op-eds voice dismay over parents “selfishly” spending their inheritance. There is near delirium each time a member of the super-rich — including Bill Gates and Michael Bloomberg — publicly vows not to leave their wealth to their offspring. Sure, there’s being charitable, they say, but to such extremes?

Fundamentally, wanting to shrink your children’s inheritance is seen as counter to the primitive desire to protect one’s offspring — no matter how well off they are. The majority of people are dedicated to hoarding for their family, with more than £100bn inherited and gifted in the UK alone each year, according to Demos, a think-tank.

“Taking care of the kids is the cultural norm. So it’s countercultural if you will,” says psychology professor Janet Reibstein and author of Good Relations. “It’s seen as neglecting the natural role of parent and child.”

It’s a luxury itself to contemplate trimming your will, given many families are scared they won’t get a choice amid rising social costs. Fewer than 30 per cent of Brits expect to benefit — or have benefited from — an inheritance, according to a 2022 YouGov poll. The ONS reported that the median inheritance for those who received one was £11,000 (this excludes lifetime gifts), and on average occurs in one’s 60s.

Indeed, political interventions that limit the wealth that’s passed down tend to spark controversy, including recent reforms to UK inheritance tax (IHT), often described as “Britain’s most hated tax”. Today, around 4 per cent of estates are affected by IHT — charged at 40 per cent on any part of an estate worth over £325,000 (or over £1mn when a main residence is passed down to children and reliefs are pooled with a spouse). The decision to include pension wealth within the scope of IHT from 2027 has come under fire from some corners of the media, while ending the exemption of agricultural property from IHT caused farmers to march on Downing Street.

Inheritance naysayers have a simple argument: lots of money isn’t always the best thing for us. It can damage people — and wealthy kids need specific guardrails, a theory exposed by the Carnegie Conjecture, which holds that people receiving a substantial inheritance are much more likely to leave the workforce. The party line is that guardrails are crucial, whether parents are handing over life-changing amounts or just a generous leftover that might ease their children’s paths.

In other words, it’s tough love.

Joe Reilly, an adviser to US family offices and host of The Inheritance Podcast, says too much money is a real concern.

“It’s a source of anxiety for parents, knowing their children are growing up in affluence . . . It can impede their search for internal meaning,” he says. “Wealth doesn’t have to deprive motivation, but getting rid of all the challenges does.”

Sarah Coles, a personal finance analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says hyper-successful entrepreneurs in particular want their children to make their own way (though this is softened with substantial gifts during their parents’ lifetime).

Part of the issue, according to Reilly, is that inheritance was historically reserved for the aristocratic class, who would reserve “a lot of time and effort” learning to adapt to a big wealth influx, including focusing on public service — though many still squandered it. Today, inheritance comes to broad swaths of the middle class, who have little or no training.

Receiving a hefty inheritance can come with real baggage, says author Eliza Filby. In her book, Inheritocracy she cites several examples of people who inherited large sums who felt guilt, and a loss of meaning. There’s a danger of “economically infantilising” your offspring too, she says, especially in light of the “nepo baby” debate.

To counter this, family office adviser Elena Nuñez Cooper works with clients to adopt a policy of “severe responsibility” with their children. This includes teaching them tough financial lessons from a young age and training them to be philanthropists. It also means managing rich people’s funds so they “die with zero”, with the majority allocated to a charitable foundation — ideally led by their conscientious, financially savvy children.

“Kids do not benefit from an attitude of ‘you’re going to inherit later’,” Nuñez says. “I work with the children of billionaires who have everything, and they’re a lot worse off in the long run.”

For parents it can be a big ideological step to consider trimming their children’s or grandchildren’s inheritance instead of boosting it — even if they are well set up.

It’s perhaps an even tougher pill to swallow for the offspring expecting to receive a chunky inheritance, says financial psychotherapist Vicky Reynal. “We all have a normal amount of greed,” she says. “Most people want to be wealthier.”

The framing around cuts in inheritance is therefore key. This includes “highlighting that it has nothing to do with not loving or caring about them,” Reynal notes. Their responses may vary depending on the individual’s maturity and how early on these expectations are set.

Professor Reibstein goes further. She says that families where there’s little philanthropic precedent will need to work hard to rewrite their “culture” if they want to take this route — otherwise, “your children will feel it as a blow.”

Hargreaves Lansdown analyst Cooper stresses that it doesn’t have to be all or nothing. Simply, leaving your kids everything doesn’t have to be the default.

“You can think about giving them comfort without spoiling them,” she says. “There’s an element of adding to their quality of life versus taking away the impetus to work.”

Whatever route you choose, however, experts agree: communicate your wishes early. Emotionally, being disinherited without being told can be devastating. But the other danger, Cooper says, is people can be in for a financial shock when an expected inheritance doesn’t materialise.

“You absolutely cannot rely on an inheritance,” she warns.

Still, it’s hard to escape the fact that for many an inheritance can make an outsized difference, especially in light of rising house prices — the average first-time buyer deposit in London is now over £140,000, according to Zoopla — and diminished pensions. That includes segments of the middle class, many of whom are poorer than their parents. Inheritance is bridging that intergenerational gap, says Filby.

“Whether or not you’re from a wealthy family . . . [inheritance] is more important in determining your lifetime income than it has been in the past,” says David Sturrock at the Institute for Fiscal Studies.

The IFS forecasts inheritance will make up a record average 14 per cent of lifetime earnings for the 1980s-born generation. That means for some families, an inheritance will dictate whether they own a house, clear their debts, or can retire comfortably, Sturrock explains. In rare cases, it could be a pathway to social mobility.

Yet few born into the top quartile can make that argument. Statistically, most adult children in this camp will enter their 40s with a decent income and firmly on the housing ladder — often funded by historic parental gifts. A bulky inheritance in this group’s case has been described as insurance against calamity, or laziness.

For Andy, this is precisely the problem.

His advice is to think about inheritance as a sporting analogy. Imagine, he says, if there was a rule in F1 whereby if you won the first race, you’d do five fewer laps in the next race. You’d probably win again, and allowed five fewer laps again, and so on.

That’s what leaving an inheritance does to our society, he argues.

I temper that people might struggle to take affirmative action when they see all the other kids getting to skip five laps. Isn’t it hard to make yours the odd ones out?

“Well,” he laughs. “I just say, you should have brought them up better then.”



Five years after the UK left the European Union on 31 January 2020, the country is still adjusting to life outside the bloc.

Brexit has strained small businesses more than big ones, changed university campuses and the NHS, and contributed to a three-way fracture in the British political firmament following a post-Brexit surge in legal migration.

With Sir Keir Starmer committed to a “reset” of relations with the EU, how far could his negotiations with Brussels change life in Britain?

One of the EU’s central demands is the introduction of a youth mobility scheme that would restore the right to pay “home fees” of £9,535 a year for EU students at UK universities.

The UK government is firmly resisting this, not least because it would put financial pressure on cash-strapped universities. The sector is reliant on overseas students who typically pay two or three times domestic rates.

Official data shows a more than 50 per cent drop in new EU students after Brexit, while universities increased recruitment from other markets in Asia and Africa, including India, Nigeria and Pakistan.

Boris Johnson promised in 2020 that his Brexit deal would not interrupt the “va-et-vient” of people-to-people contacts with the EU, but in practice the intake of UK universities has shifted substantially.

Jamie Arrowsmith, director of Universities UK International, which represents the industry, said the changes had brought greater diversity to British campuses, but had narrowed the field of subjects studied as international students tended to favour science and business studies courses.

“While the diversity in terms of country of origin has changed, diversity in courses has been lost,” he added.

Brexit also saw the introduction of a points-based immigration system by Johnson’s government from January 1 2021 that coincided with a massive expansion of the NHS workforce, necessitating far more overseas recruitment.

Mark Dayan, policy analyst at the Nuffield Trust think-tank, said that a government decision to lower thresholds for medical workers had led to a radical reshaping of the NHS workforce.

Between 2016 and 2023 the number of ethnic minority doctors in the NHS grew at almost 8 times the rate of white doctors, according to the General Medical Council, with arrivals from India, Pakistan, Egypt, Nigeria and the Philippines rising sharply.

Dayan said the challenge of integrating doctors who trained overseas into the NHS was one reason why an increase in staff numbers in recent years had not delivered a commensurate increase in productivity.

“Absorbing so many new staff, many at [the] start of their careers, who are used to a different system of working, requires a lot of work on training, and introducing them to how things are done in the NHS,” Dayan said.

The government is planning to train more UK doctors as well as continuing to recruit from abroad, but its red lines on free movement of workers mean that it is unlikely that EU-UK reset negotiations will see a significant increase in recruitment from the EU.

Brexit was sold during the 2016 referendum campaign as the means by which the UK would “take back control” of its borders, curbing both legal and illegal migration.

In the event, both surged after 2020, fuelling accusations of betrayal on the political right and helping to drive support for Nigel Farage’s Reform UK party, which has recently drawn level with both Labour and the Conservatives in the polls.

This political splintering is the opposite of what former Tory premier David Cameron intended when he called the referendum to head off the threat posed by Farage’s UK Independence Party and resolve long-standing divisions over Europe inside the Conservative party.

But Reform’s rise has come despite a decline in the overall popularity of Brexit, with 58 per cent of voters now saying Brexit was the wrong decision, according to polling by the National Centre for Social Research.

A “key element” of this shift, according to pollster Sir John Curtice, is driven by demographic trends as older, pro-Brexit voters die off and younger voters, who were unable to vote in 2016, express their overwhelming pro-EU views.

“If you look at the demographics story, the ceiling for a Farage party should be lower than 10 years ago, but Reform is more popular in 2024 than Ukip was in 2014,” said Rob Ford, professor of politics at Manchester University.

Ford credited this counter-intuitive outcome to the platform Brexit gave Farage, and to the political opportunity offered to him by the Tories’ struggle to deliver benefits from the UK’s break with the EU.

The past few years have laid bare Brexit’s damaging impact on business. Countries usually strike trade deals to reduce border bureaucracy, but the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement did the reverse, restoring the customs requirements that had disappeared with the advent of the EU single market.

Labour has said it will not rejoin a customs union with the EU or go back into the EU single market, so trade will continue to face customs barriers.

Starmer’s negotiations with the EU could reduce friction for some individual sectors, such as food and drink exporters, if Labour makes good on its promise to strike a veterinary agreement with Brussels.

Aligning industrial standards and relinking the EU and UK carbon trading schemes could also reduce other forms of red tape, such as licensing requirements and carbon border adjustment taxes, or CBAMs.

However a mountain of paperwork will remain. In 2023, the last year for which data is available, there were more than 41mn customs declarations for trade between the UK and the EU. The much criticised Brussels red tape became ‘red white and blue’ tape.

As a result, UK goods exports underperformed other rich-world countries, with the total value rising by just 0.3 per cent per year, compared with 4.2 per cent annually across the OECD, according to the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank.

New Brexit red tape has hit small businesses hardest, with research by the London School of Economics calculating that 16,400 firms stopped exporting to the EU after the TCA came into force.

William Bain, head of trade policy at the British Chambers of Commerce said smaller companies had less capacity to deal with “the deluge” of new bureaucracy, while larger businesses had the money and staff to adapt.

“Exporting to the EU was often a gateway for SMEs to enter new export markets across the world, so the urgency of making border processes cheaper and simpler is clear,” he added.

The BCC has urged the government to use the reset negotiations to simplify border processes and promote regulatory co-operation on customs matters, particularly as the bloc introduces new rules in the coming years.

Chris Southworth, secretary-general of the International Chamber of Commerce, said that given the UK’s red lines the government should invest in digitising trade, using AI and improving access to trade finance in order to help business.

“You don’t need TCA for any of this and it will improve EU co-operation and repair some of the damage,” he added.

Poll tracker by Jonathan Vincent



AstraZeneca has cancelled plans for a £450mn UK vaccine manufacturing plant after months of wrangling with British officials about state support for the project, in a major blow to Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer’s government.

UK officials put forward a revised offer of financial support for the site close to Liverpool this month that was significantly higher than the £40mn offered last year, according to people familiar with the matter.

Starmer’s Labour government had initially sought last summer to reduce the amount of public money provided to the project in Speke from about £90mn to £40mn.

“Following protracted discussions with the government, we are no longer pursuing our planned investment at Speke,” AstraZeneca said in a statement on Friday.

“Several factors have influenced this decision including the timing and reduction of the final offer compared to the previous government’s proposal.”

The new plant was going to make the next generation of flu vaccines and help the UK be more resilient in future pandemics.

The existing Speke site will continue to produce and supply a flu vaccine, said AstraZeneca, the largest UK-listed company by market capitalisation.

The decision comes just days after chancellor Rachel Reeves sought to position the UK as a highly attractive place for life science companies to invest in a major speech on growth.

Starmer and Reeves have faced criticism from business for their £40bn tax-raising Budget last year and other measures including stronger worker rights, which executives have warned will make the UK a less attractive place to invest.

The UK’s previous offer to the pharmaceutical group under former Conservative chancellor Jeremy Hunt included up to £70mn in grants to develop an existing AstraZeneca vaccine facility at Speke, as well as £20mn in research and development support from the UK Health Security Agency.

Hunt, who announced the deal to great fanfare in March of last year, told the Financial Times that AstraZeneca’s decision was a “massive own goal by the government”.

“Manufacturing high-end vaccines is a huge opportunity for us to move away from over-dependence on the R&D part of the value chain,” he said. “I intervened personally to get this deal over the line in 2023 and am mortified the government has dropped the ball on it.”

The Treasury said: “A change in the make-up of the investment originally proposed by AstraZeneca led to a reduced government grant offer being put forward. All government grant funding has to demonstrate value for the taxpayer and unfortunately, despite extensive work from government officials, it has not been possible to achieve a solution.”

It added: “AstraZeneca remains closely engaged with the government’s work to develop our new industrial strategy.”

One person with knowledge of the relationship said that AstraZeneca had become “deeply frustrated” with the government, with Speke just one point of tension in a wider industry clash over drug prices and the future of life sciences investment.

People close to the pharmaceuticals group said it was looking at other possible international manufacturing sites for its new vaccine plant now that it has abandoned the Speke plan.

A person close to AstraZeneca said the company could look to relocate the project to Philadelphia where it already manufactures the company’s nasal vaccine for influenza.

In November, AstraZeneca said it planned to invest $3.5bn in research and development and manufacturing in the US, the world’s largest pharmaceutical market, which generates 44 per cent of the company’s sales.

AstraZeneca’s chief executive Pascal Soriot said at the time that the investment reflected “the attractiveness of the business environment together with the quality of talent and innovation capabilities”.

The company is also planning a $1.5bn manufacturing facility in Singapore, and last week pledged a $560mn investment in Canada.

People with knowledge of the business said its decision on the Speke facility would not affect any of AstraZeneca’s other investments in the UK.

The Speke decision comes at a time when the US is offering very attractive perks to companies planning to invest in manufacturing, including through state infrastructure investment, and loans and grants for research and development.

President Donald Trump has called on “every business in the world” to “come make your product in America”.

“We will give you among the lowest taxes of any nation on Earth,” Trump said in a video stream at the World Economic Forum in Davos last week. “But if you don’t make your product in America, which is your prerogative, then, very simply, you will have to pay a tariff.”

Trump has said he wants to cut corporation tax from 21 per cent to 15 per cent.



European stocks have outpaced other major global equity markets this month, as fears of sweeping US tariffs subside and investors flee the shakeout in Wall Street technology stocks.

The Stoxx Europe 600 index edged up to a record closing high on Friday, leaving it up 6.3 per cent for January, its best monthly performance since November 2023. The US’s S&P 500 index has risen around 3 per cent, while Japan’s Topix is up 0.1 per cent over the same period.

London’s FTSE 100 index also finished at a record high on Friday, taking its returns for the year to 6.1 per cent and marking its best monthly performance since November 2022, when markets rebounded following then prime minister Liz Truss’s ill-fated “mini” Budget two months earlier.

The gains have sparked renewed hopes of a sustained revival in the region’s equity markets. While some have at times performed strongly — Germany’s Dax rose by nearly one-fifth last year — as a whole Europe has lagged well behind the US over the past decade.

“After so many years of underperformance, not much needs to happen before everyone becomes excited . . . Everyone is getting warm about Europe,” said Roland Kaloyan, a strategist at Société Générale.

Investors piled into US stocks last year amid excitement about the growth of artificial intelligence, with a small group of tech stocks once again driving gains.

At the same time, US President Donald Trump’s tariffs threats weighed on Europe, which sends roughly one-fifth of its exports each year to the US, while homegrown political crises in countries such as France diminished investors’ appetite for bonds and equities alike.

But January saw the biggest rotation from US stocks into Eurozone stocks in almost a decade, according to Bank of America, as investors fled richly valued tech stocks in favour of European defensive and growth stocks, including banks, pharmaceuticals and luxury retailers.

This week’s global tech sell-off sparked by Chinese start-up DeepSeek’s advances in artificial intelligence has only accelerated this shift, analysts said.

After the AI wobbles, “investors have been moving towards . . . Europe”, as the region has less exposure to technology stocks, said Mohit Kumar, an economist at Jefferies.

Just eight per cent of the Stoxx Europe 600 is made up of companies in the IT sector, compared with 30 per cent of the S&P 500, according to calculations by Société Générale. The US index’s tech share rises to 45 per cent if stocks such as Amazon and Alphabet — categorised by the French bank as consumer and communications companies respectively — are included.

In addition, Trump’s softer stance on tariffs — the White House has said the US will go ahead with 25 per cent duties on goods from Mexico and Canada and 10 per cent on goods from China, although as yet it has failed to hit the euro area with levies — has come as a relief to investors.

“Expectations for Europe were on the floor,” said Sharon Bell, a senior equity strategist at Goldman Sachs. “This has changed.”

After years of underperforming Wall Street, European shares are also trading near their widest valuation discount to the US since at least the late 1980s, according to data from SocGen. The UK market in particular has benefited from low valuations, say analysts.

“I have been quite surprised by the increased interest in UK equities, it is probably because the growth expectations are pretty high compared to the rest of Europe,” Bell said.

“And obviously it is cheap. It could also be seen as a hedge against tech . . . for diversification.”

The strong performance of European stocks comes even as the Eurozone struggles to recover from a sharp rise in energy and food prices triggered by Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, while the US economy continues to grow strongly. Data this week showed the Eurozone economy unexpectedly stagnated in the fourth quarter.

However, the prospect of further interest rate cuts by the European Central Bank may cheer investors, analysts said. In the US, markets believe inflationary pressures will force the US central bank to keep rates higher for longer.

“If the market starts to freak about inflation in the US that will also be more positive for European equities in comparison,” said SocGen’s Kaloyan.

Additional reporting by Ray Douglas



Education regulator Ofsted is pressing ahead with plans for a colour-coded scorecard to assess school performance across eight core areas that critics have compared to a Nando’s spice chart.

Sir Martyn Oliver, chief inspector of Ofsted, will launch a consultation on a new system for assessing schools in England in which single-word judgments would be replaced with one- or two-word judgments across eight main areas, according to an internal presentation seen by the Financial Times on Thursday.

The system would replace the old process where schools were given an overall judgment ranging from “outstanding” to “inadequate”, which teachers have long complained was overly simplistic, often unrepresentative and extremely difficult to appeal against.

The eight core assessment areas that schools will be judged against are achievement, leadership and governance, curriculum, developing teaching, personal development and wellbeing, attendance, behaviour and attitudes, and inclusion.

The assessment areas of “preparation for next steps” and “opportunities to thrive” have been dropped since a previous iteration of the scorecard was circulated to stakeholders in November.

The consultation is expected to be launched next week, according to a senior figure in the school sector.

Ofsted did not comment.

The proposals to colour-code the performance designations have faced strong pushback from senior figures in the teaching sector, with some comparing it to the spice-ranking system used by fast-food restaurant Nando’s.

“It’s still Nando’s. It’s still lemon and herbs, extra hot,” said a senior figure in education, adding that the “profession’s going to go wild when they see these plans”.

The person noted that the new assessment system created even more areas for schools and teachers to receive “harsh” and anxiety-inducing judgments, and they failed to see how inspectors could make meaningful evaluations across so many areas in a 48-hour visit.

The colours will range from “causing concern” in red to “exemplary” in dark green.

The Labour government scrapped the previous single-word judgment system last year after lobbying from teaching unions, who said the inspection regime put extraordinary pressure on teachers.

An independent review last year criticised Ofsted’s handling of the suicide of headteacher Ruth Perry in January 2023, which was linked at the time to a negative Ofsted report that downgraded her school from “outstanding” to “inadequate”. The review said the regulator’s response to the tragedy was “defensive and complacent”.

An inquest concluded that the negative Ofsted report had contributed to Perry’s death.



Chancellor Rachel Reeves has sought to place rocket-boosters under the UK economy this week – with a vow to prioritise growth over the environment or nimbyism. But how long will her plan take to work, is it too concentrated in the south of England, and what cabinet splits will it spark? Host Lucy Fisher is joined by Political Fix regulars Robert Shrimsley and Miranda Green, as well as the FT’s public policy editor Peter Foster, to dissect Labour’s strategy. Plus, the panel looks ahead to Sir Keir Starmer’s first meeting with EU leaders in Brussels next Monday as he seeks a fresh defence and security pact with the bloc. Will Britain acquiesce to the EU’s key demand for a youth mobility scheme?

Follow Lucy on Bluesky or X: @lucyfisher.bsky.social, @LOS_Fisher, Robert @robertshrimsley, @robertshrimsley.bsky.social, Peter @pmdfoster @pmdfoster.bskyb.social and Miranda @GreenMiranda @greenmirandajhere.bskyb.social

Want more? Free links:

Labour is facing two ways on growth

The contradictions at the heart of Rachel Reeves’ growth plan

How five years of Brexit reshaped Britain

Sign up here for 30 free days of Stephen Bush's Inside Politics newsletter, winner of best newsletter at the Future of Media Awards, 2023 and 2024

Presented by Lucy Fisher. Produced by Laurence Knight. The executive producer is Manuela Saragosa. Audio mix and original music by Breen Turner. The FT’s head of audio is Cheryl Brumley.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



In Bad Education, Matt Goodwin argues that diversity of opinion is under threat in universities which “are no longer protecting and promoting things like free speech”. Sadly there is clear evidence to support his case — from attempts to monitor “microaggressions” to shocking attempts to suppress the views of gender critical academics such as Kathleen Stock and Jo Phoenix.

Goodwin is angry about hostility he himself has encountered because of his support for the populist right and has made a journey from university academic (until last year he was professor of politics at the University of Kent) to political activist. But his anger gets in the way of analysing the convergence on the university system of a range of very different forces.

First is the intellectual climate, itself shaped by universities. They are where critical theory began and flourished. It is a theory which appeals to academics because it says that words matter: language is a tool of oppression. So our language and the curriculum have to be decolonised in order truly to deliver diversity, equity and inclusion. It is an agenda far removed from classic concerns of the left such as what people earn and what access they have to public services. And there is another crucial difference. There were always left-wing academics — as well as some of a more conservative disposition. But the university as an institution was not engaged in their arguments and did not take a view. Now there are universities, especially but not only in America, where advocates of critical theory have recruited university administrators who use university-wide EDI programmes to advance their agenda and try to require academics to comply.

Secondly there is the intense transgender debate, exacerbated in the UK by misinterpretation of the Equality Act. Too many universities, perhaps influenced by the LGBTQ+ rights charity Stonewall, interpreted the Act to mean any form of self-identified gender is a protected characteristic. The Reindorf review of problems at the University of Essex is a clear and authoritative account of serious mistreatment of academics as a result. Since it was published in 2021 no British university should repeat such behaviour.

The third trend is how students are changing. The psychologists Jean Twenge and Jonathan Haidt have persuasively argued that the rise in access to social media is leading to mental health issues for young people. This can lead to the introduction of trigger warnings and a belief that freedom of speech is less important than protecting people’s feelings. However, higher education appears to provide some resilience to these pressures, lowering the risk of young people withdrawing from work because of mental illness.

There is a class divide too. Young white working-class men are even less likely to go to university than many ethnic minority groups. We should encourage more to go. The real luxury belief is advantaged graduates saying there is no point going to university when for many young people from disadvantaged backgrounds it is the most powerful tool of social mobility we’ve got. For those who were previously on free school meals, average graduate earnings growth in their first decade is 75 per cent, while for non-graduates it is 26 per cent. But instead of promoting the value of higher education, social mobility advocates have put more weight, probably excessive, on the early years.

There has also been the shift in attitudes away from globalisation, represented by Trump and Brexit. David Goodhart, cited by Goodwin, makes universities the arch-culprits in his moral divide between citizens of Somewhere or Nowhere. This is particularly hard on universities as most of them have places in their names. They are definitely somewhere and a good thing too. They are very likely to stay rooted in their place even if the big employers move out or the local paper closes down. Towns and cities in the UK such as Chester, Coventry, Worcester or Bournemouth have been revitalised by the emergence of a strong local university. The government may be underestimating the shockwaves if a university closes.

Add to this mix empowering the student as consumer. The student is not just a consumer, though the university fee is a contract to deliver a service and that strengthens the student voice. Most local student unions don’t want Marxist revolution but to get their academic work back promptly and seminars that are less crowded. But student satisfaction rankings have been given exaggerated weight and empowered students to threaten academics on very different issues.

There are university leaders who see that all these forces mean they have heavy new responsibilities which they cannot avoid. Universities should be the place where diverse young people learn how to disagree. The 2015 Chicago Statement of the principles of free speech in university is important and Goodwin wants “to force universities, through government action, to sign up” and then to practise what they preach.

His many anecdotes move between UK and US as if our two university systems are interchangeable. But there are important differences such as greater labour market protections in the UK (and even more in Europe). Protection from unfair dismissal matters if an academic is caught in a social media frenzy. This might explain the paradox that American and to some extent British universities have been far more susceptible to some of these forces than Continental Europe despite their intellectual origins in Continental postmodernist philosophy.

Goodwin wants to use “the powers of the state to restore justice and balance”. The loss of confidence in the ability of universities to protect freedom of speech justified the 2023 freedom of speech legislation with new powers for the university regulator, which I support. But this is tricky territory.

The problems began on the morning the previous Conservative government launched the initiative. On the Today programme the minister responsible was asked if this meant Holocaust denial would be protected, and she said yes. Holocaust denial is not itself a legal offence in the UK so her statement made sense for a proper free speech absolutist. Within hours, however, No 10 corrected her: it was not protected under the new legislation. We have never known what this free speech code is that does not permit some legal free speech. We do need stronger protections, but Goodwin doesn’t really engage with the issue of whether there are to be any constraints at all.

There is a great American tradition of academics worrying that the modern university is rejecting the culture which nurtured it — William Buckley’s God and Man at Yale, Allan Bloom’s The Closing of the American Mind, and now Greg Lukianoff and Jonathan Haidt’s The Coddling of the American Mind. In Britain we have tended to express our anxieties instead through the campus novel, a genre of which we are masters. Malcolm Bradbury’s The History Man skewers a certain sort of progressive academic with more skill and subtlety than Goodwin manages. Goodwin has some genuine grievances but he mashes different problems up together and then calls it all a row between right and left — if only it were so simple.

Bad Education: Why Our Universities Are Broken and How We Can Fix Them by Matt Goodwin Bantam £20, 256 pages

David Willetts is a former Conservative Minister for Universities and Science and is author of ‘A University Education’ (OUP)

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X



UK house price growth slowed more than expected in January as mortgage rates ticked up and affordability remained stretched, mortgage lender Nationwide said.

The average house price rose to £268,213, up 0.1 per cent from the previous month and 4.1 per cent year on year — less than the annual rise of 4.7 per cent recorded in December.

Economists polled by Reuters had expected a monthly rise of 0.3 per cent and an annual rise of 4.3 per cent.

The slower than expected house price growth was “not too surprising given the rise in quoted mortgage rates at the end of last year”, said Alex Kerr, economist at the consultancy Capital Economics.

Separate data from the Bank of England on Thursday showed that mortgage interest rates rose in December, with the average rate for a two-year fixed mortgage with a 60 per cent loan-to-value ratio rising to 4.47 per cent, up from 4.39 per cent in November and 4.21 per cent in October.

The average rate was well below its 6.22 per cent peak in the summer of 2023, but up from 1.1 per cent in mid-2021, meaning mortgage affordability remained stretched.

The BoE is expected to announce a quarter percentage point cut in interest rates to 4.5 per cent on Thursday. Markets are pricing three rate cuts throughout this year.

Mark Harris, chief executive of mortgage broker SPF Private Clients, said: “With the Bank of England expected to reduce interest rates next week, the outlook for borrowers is looking up.”

Experts say house prices are also being supported by a potential increase in demand ahead of the expiry of a recent stamp duty holiday. From April, first-time buyers, for example, will start paying the levy for properties worth £300,000 or more, instead of £425,000 at present.

Nationwide reported improving housing affordability last year in part thanks to wage growth.

However, a prospective buyer earning the average UK income and buying a typical first-time buyer property with a 20 per cent deposit would still have a monthly mortgage payment equivalent to 36 per cent of their take-home pay — well above the long-run average of 30 per cent.

Furthermore, house prices remain high relative to average earnings, with the first-time buyer house price-to-earnings ratio standing at 5.0 at the end of 2024, still well above the long-run average of 3.9.

Robert Gardner, chief economist at Nationwide, said the market had shown resilience “despite ongoing affordability pressures”.

“While there has been a modest improvement over the last year, affordability remains stretched by historic standards,” he said.



Driverless cars were once something we used to watch in sci-fi movies. Now, we’re closer to watching sci-fi movies in driverless cars.

This week, as the UK government took new steps to achieve its 2030 electric vehicle target, Sarah O’Connor discussed the merits of another ambitious automotive goal — self-driving cars whose record on safety could ultimately “save lives”.

Both Google’s Waymo and Tesla founder Elon Musk — who plans to launch a driverless ride-hailing service in Austin, Texas, this year — have claimed that automated road travel is not only imminent, but also safer than the status quo.

Road safety is a worthy goal, O’Connor writes, but the status quo is surprisingly safe. In 2022, the latest year for which there is data, the fatality rate was a mere 1.33 deaths per 100mn vehicle miles travelled. The data for driverless cars is less forgiving, partially because there is so little of it.

Nevertheless, Musk, head of the new Department of Government Efficiency, is gearing up for a step-change. On Wednesday, he announced plans to start production of a fleet of autonomous taxis, known as “cybercabs”, in 2026. But his enthusiasm contrasts sharply with public sentiment.

Many US drivers have expressed reservations about fully driverless technology. The share of US drivers who say they are “afraid” of automated cars has risen from 54 in 2021 to 66 per cent in 2024, while trust has dropped from 14 per cent to 9 per cent in 2024.

There may be less evidence that driverless cars are dangerous, but there is little evidence that it is any safer than the human alternative.

So what do you think? Are driverless cars safer than those driven by humans? Tell us your view by voting in our poll or commenting below the line.



When garden designer Arne Maynard and his partner William Collinson acquired their Monmouthshire home, Allt y bela, from the Spitalfields Trust in 2008, with it came a 4-acre plot that circled the medieval house. It was enough space to create a jewel-box garden studded with clipped yew and beech topiary, exquisite borders, an ornamental kitchen garden and swaths of meadows that were gently and patiently coaxed back from scrubland.

But the 15th-century house, which sits in a deep basin with pasture and woodland rising up around it, had originally been part of a much larger estate of 160 acres. In 2022 this “lost” land — the largest single Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in Wales — became available to buy. “It always felt like we were connected to the landscape,” says Maynard. “But bringing the land back in ownership with the house — all of a sudden, the house had a completely different feel and a different purpose. It was like a divorce that we reunited.”

The land had been largely unmanaged, which meant an enormous variety of wild flowers had flourished — but so too had pernicious weeds. “Most of the land was covered with brambles and bracken, some of it to chest height,” explains Collinson, who first had to repeatedly flail the land to clear it, a process they had already carried out on the wild-flower meadows. “The pastures regenerated quickly, and the bank of wild flowers in those areas which we’ve uncovered has been fantastic. We have huge quantities of orchids. They’re just everywhere. You can’t step on to the pastures without standing on an orchid.”

Part of the management plan set out by Natural Resources Wales — who oversee the SSSI designation — was that the land should be grazed properly, and that provided Collinson with the opportunity to realise a long-held dream. He’s descended from a long line of farmers — his maternal ancestors had farmed a block of land on the Somerset Levels since the Domesday.

They acquired a small herd of White Park cattle in 2022. It’s an ancient breed — its distinctive head, with long elegant horns, has been the logo of the Rare Breeds Survival Trust since its inception in 1973, when there were only around 65 breeding females of White Park left; there are around 750 today. It’s widely considered to be the most ancient British breed, descended from the country’s original wild white cattle and prized for its hardy nature. For the novice farmer, this was a key consideration, since the herd can happily live outside year round.

But the White Park is also valued for its excellent foraging abilities and gentle grazing, making it the perfect breed for coaxing back the land, clearing overgrown patches and opening it up in “a completely natural way”. Once the process of clearing patches begins, the cows then go in and forage to fully clear it, exposing the soil and, at the same time, exposing the seed bank, allowing native wild flowers to grow and kick-starting a regenerative cycle.

“It’s fantastic to see how the land is improving, to see how the land has become different during the period of our ownership. You can see quite clearly how our pasture is different,” says Maynard. The grasses on their land are all native, in contrast with modern hybrid grasses used on many nearby farms. “Pastures owned by farmers who farm more intensively and fertilise look completely different. Ours feels medieval.”

As well as a sea of orchids, including the common spotted orchid and southern marsh orchid, the land is now rich with wild flowers including cardamine, knapweed, cranesbills, yarrow, vetch, buttercups, sorrel and betony. Abundant birdlife has followed, including nightingales in summer.

The White Park herd roams between pasture and woodland, allowing it to self-medicate with herbs and wild flowers, and to eat bark from hazel and fruit trees. “In the old days, farmers used to cut green branches to feed the cattle and they would graze off all the lower leaves,” says Maynard. “They might kill off the young bark of hazel, but there’s this whole ecosystem that starts to happen.”

Conservation grazing has grown substantially over the past 15 to 20 years says Christopher Price, chief executive of the Rare Breeds Survival Trust. In the charity’s latest watchlist rare breeds including Dartmoor sheep, New Forest ponies, saddleback pigs and native goat breeds are among those increasing in number. It’s a welcome return. “The landscapes and habitats that we cherish were largely created by wild or semi-feral grazing animals,” says Price.

Maynard and Collinson currently have 13 cows. Caring for the herd has, says Collinson, been a daily adventure, everything from dealing with the grisly fallout from a broken horn (“shocking in the extreme”) to the awe of the first calves being born last spring. The cows take themselves off to find a hollow or dense copse where they give birth alone, before calling for the rest of the herd, who then form a protective crèche for the new addition.

“Every day I’m learning something new,” he adds. “They are quite docile, quite friendly, but terribly strong. You can rub their noses, and they’ll eat out of your hand. And I know them well, but they’re also wilful. They won’t do what they don’t want to do.”

He’d like to slowly expand the herd to perhaps 15 or 20 in total. “It wouldn’t be enough to make any kind of a living from, but the sense of wellbeing that comes from managing them is fantastic. Something that money can’t buy.”

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @ft_houseandhome on Instagram

This article has been amended



The UK government’s border security bill will lead to about 100 more people being sent to prison each year, according to internal government estimates, while criminalising asylum seekers who seek to prevent rescue operations at sea.

Experts have questioned whether the measures will lead to a reduction in overall arrivals of migrants by small boats.

In moves aimed at targeting smuggling gangs the new border security, asylum and immigration bill will give the government counterterrorism-style powers, such as seizing electronic equipment — including mobile phones — belonging to migrants when they cross the Channel into the UK.

It will create an offence of “endangering life at sea”, aimed at criminalising people who prevent offers of rescue while at sea — in order to ensure their boat reaches English shores.

The legislation will also make it illegal in this context to supply or handle small boats and related equipment, including engines and life jackets. Those caught will face up to 14 years in prison.

Chris Philp, shadow home secretary, said the bill “only engages in minor tinkering . . . that won’t stop the boats”.

While most of the former government’s Illegal Migration Act, which blocked anyone arriving via small boats from claiming asylum in the UK, is set to be repealed, several of its provisions are being maintained.

These include a ban on migrants claiming protection under modern slavery laws, the power to detain children for up to 28 days, and a cap on the number of people who can come to the UK via safe and legal routes.

While the legislation is primarily targeted at those in the UK who are involved in facilitating people-smuggling operations, it also gives the government powers to criminalise people who have been involved in activities overseas, including supplying inflatable boats.

Officials confirmed that the government could use existing powers to extradite foreign criminals to the UK so they can face charges for crimes under the new legislation, which is expected to pass into law by the end of the year.

They said that the goal of the legislation is to disrupt criminal gangs and ultimately reduce the number of people arriving on small boats to the UK.

About 37,000 people came to Britain via small vessels in 2024, a rise of a quarter on the 29,500 who arrived in 2023.

People briefed on internal calculations said the Ministry of Justice estimated the new powers and offences would result in about 100 extra people being sent to prison each year,

Colin Yeo, an immigration barrister, said that while the legislation could theoretically result in that number of arrests, “it seems highly unlikely that would actually reduce arrivals” of migrants by small boats.

“Prosecuting people smugglers who never set foot on British soil is impossible and more would spring up to meet demand anyway,” he said.

Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, praised the government for repealing much of the previous government’s legislation — including its scheme to deport asylum seekers to Rwanda — saying it had “averted a meltdown, cutting delays and preventing higher hotel costs”.

However, he said he was “very concerned that, by creating new offences, many refugees themselves could also be prosecuted”, which would be “a gross miscarriage of justice”.



The UK government has been accused of “deprioritising” mental health after a number of NHS targets were scrapped under a planned overhaul.

Hospital bosses in England will be judged against far fewer targets under updated annual guidance published on Thursday, which saw the number of goals pared back from 32 to 18.

Health secretary Wes Streeting outlined a renewed focus on A&E waiting times and reducing appointment backlogs, but critics have warned that fewer targets means other areas will inevitably be cut.

Axed objectives include ensuring 75 per cent of people with severe mental illness receive a full annual physical health check, and a goal to increase the number of adults completing a course of treatment for anxiety and depression.

More than 2mn people are on NHS waiting lists for mental health treatments or courses, according to campaigners.

Ministers are still protecting mental health spending, and require NHS trusts to raise investment in mental health in line with overall budget increases.

New guidance published on Thursday also states that health leaders should seek to reduce average length of stay in adult acute mental health beds and improve access to children and young people’s mental health services.

The updated document contains fewer “national priorities”, which are broader NHS goals, but major objectives on A&E waiting times and reducing waiting lists have remained.

At the heart of the new guidance is a target to ensure 65 per cent of patients on a waiting list for routine hospital care are seen within 18 weeks.

Ministers have vowed that 92 per cent of patients will begin treatment for an ailment — or get the all-clear within this timeframe — by the end of the parliament in 2029. This NHS target was last met at the end of 2015.

Andy Bell, chief executive at the Centre for Mental Health, said waiting times are “just as important” as those for other care.

“We are deeply disappointed that waiting lists for elective care have been given priority over those for mental healthcare,” he said.

He added that placing these NHS patients on a “lower footing” was “unjust”.

Sarah Hughes, chief executive of Mind, added: “The lack of a credible plan to get the 2mn people on mental health waiting lists the help they need, the dropping of key mental health targets, and lack of adequate funding means this government appears to be deprioritising mental health.”

The dementia diagnosis rate target, which requires 67 per cent of people living with dementia in England to receive a diagnosis, was also scrapped from the guidance.

Fiona Carragher, chief policy and research officer for the Alzheimer’s Society, called the decision “unacceptable” and said it “sends the message that dementia doesn’t matter”.

The guidance also calls on NHS organisations to simultaneously “reduce their cost base” by at least 1 per cent and achieve 4 per cent improvement in productivity, which health leaders warned would be “unbelievably stretching” for the NHS to achieve.

An additional target set out on Thursday is for 75 per cent of cancer patients to have their first treatment within 62 days, compared with the current target of 70 per cent.

Streeting said: “If everything is a priority, then nothing is. I want to empower NHS leaders to deliver the innovation and reform required to fix the NHS, rather than overload them with targets which have failed to deliver better outcomes for patients.

“This new approach will see the NHS focus on what matters most to patients — cutting waiting lists, getting seen promptly at A&E, and being able to get a GP appointment.”



Fossil fuels will account for more than three-quarters of fuel used by airlines beyond 2040 — according to the British government’s own projections — undermining Rachel Reeves’ claims that new technologies will turn aviation green.

The UK chancellor said on Thursday that “sustainable aviation fuels” are a “game-changer” in the debate over airport expansion, as she forecast that flights could take off from a new runway at Heathrow by 2035.

Reeves has angered environmentalists — but delighted some business groups — by encouraging Heathrow’s management to put forward plans for the third runway by this summer, with the hope of achieving planning permission before the next election in 2029.

“We’ve asked Heathrow to come forward with plans for that third runway by the summer, and we’ve said that it needs to meet strict rules about environmental and carbon emissions . . . I do believe they can. And Heathrow believes that they can as well,” Reeves told the BBC.

“I believe [sustainable aviation fuels] are a game-changer in the way that we fly and the carbon emissions,” she said.

But the government is only expecting 22 per cent of UK jet fuel to be supplied by SAF by 2040, according to a document dated December 2024.

SAF is made from a diverse range of sources, including crops, used cooking oil, household waste or hydrogen and can emit about 70 per cent less carbon dioxide over its life cycle than traditional aviation fuel.

It is also much more expensive than traditional jet fuel and is currently only available in small quantities.

The government in January introduced a mandate that required fuel producers to supply a portion of SAF for flights departing the UK.

The mandate is for 2 per cent of fuel to be SAF this year and steadily rises to reach 10 per cent by 2030 and 22 per cent by 2040.

The targets are in line with the aviation industry’s road map to reach net zero by 2050, which is heavily reliant on SAF but includes other measures such as more efficient conventional jets and air traffic control management.

But Tim Johnson, the director of the Aviation Environment Federation, said that under current forecasts the aviation industry would need all the available SAF in the UK in 2035 just to meet the growth in flight numbers from a third runway at Heathrow.

“This is not just this government having an over-optimistic take on SAF. It is consistent with every government in the world, because falling back on SAF allows them to continue to pursue growth,” he said.

Airlines are concerned that not enough SAF is being produced to hit the government’s targets and some have suggested that the SAF mandates might need to be watered down.

To help build a homegrown SAF industry, airlines and airports have urged ministers to speed up the rollout of a financial support mechanism to encourage investors to put money into production.

“There needs to be an alignment between the hugely welcome language around growth and boosting capacity at airports and incentivising the production of SAF,” said Tim Alderslade, chief executive of lobby group Airlines UK.

The government has outlined plans for an industry-funded “revenue certainty mechanism”, which would guarantee a minimum price for the fuel, similar to schemes used to underwrite nuclear and offshore wind projects.

But it is not expected to be introduced until the end of next year.

A Government spokesperson said: “We are committed to delivering greener aviation to support our mission to kick-start economic growth and to make Britain a clean energy superpower.

“We are already making great strides in the path to greener aviation, with new targets for sustainable aviation fuel starting this year. Yesterday we also announced £63 million to boost UK production of sustainable fuels and set out measures to attract investment in in the UK sustainable aviation fuels market.”

Noaman Al Adhami, head of UK at fuel company Alfanar, said he cannot close the financing for a plant to produce more than 130,000 tonnes of SAF a year on Teesside without the guarantees from the government on a revenue certainty mechanism.

“Without it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to close the project,” he said.

The previous Tory government’s plan to scale up SAF production called for five refineries to be under construction in the UK by the end of this year. None have been financed or built.

Global SAF production volumes reached 1.3bn litres last year and accounted for 0.3 per cent of global jet fuel production, according to Iata.

Given the challenges to scaling up SAF globally, Al Adhami said the UK was still ahead of many other countries, following its introduction of both the mandate and promise of a revenue support mechanism.

“At least now from a risk perspective and the capital we have invested in the UK, there is more certainty,” he said.



Good afternoon on this, the eve of the fifth anniversary of the signing of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement and the week that Rachel Reeves tried to put the rocket-boosters under Labour’s economic growth strategy.

Her upbeat speech in Oxford observed that getting Britain growing again was based on three pillars: political stability, regulatory reform and the combination of private and public investment.

There wasn’t much to disagree with, but because of the damage done by the Budget, it will take more than a sprightly speech for Reeves to dispel the underlying sense that this is a government still struggling to find the “political stability” that is essential if they are to plausibly present themselves as agents of enduring change.

Reeves praised MakeUK, the manufacturers’ organisation, but reacting to the speech, chief executive Stephen Phipson warned that the government needed to resolve the contradiction between its growth-suppressing Budget and the paper ambitions set out by the chancellor.

And therein lies the challenge.

The headline announcements that the government is backing a third runway at Heathrow, is getting behind the Oxford-Cambridge Arc again and will support the Manchester United regeneration project sends a clear signal to international investors that the UK is “open for business”.

Less clear is whether a government led by a prime minister who is now less popular than Rishi Sunak at his nadir, has the political gumption to make the arguments necessary to deliver on ambitions that will pay relatively slow dividends.

This is not to be churlish, but to observe that Reeves’ speech was delivered by a chancellor already on the back foot. Last summer this would have sounded like Labour firing the starting gun on its rescue mission for Britain, not a government trying to rescue itself.

New administrations usually start with an announcements phase followed by a period of delivery and then a recrimination phase when, inevitably, they come up short. This government managed to skip straight to the recrimination phase.

Goodwill hunting

The bungled Budget has starved the government of goodwill with the public and business community that it badly needs. Because the road ahead will be hard — there will be opposition to Heathrow, downside risks from deregulation and furious Nimby protests.

The revival of the OxCam Arc is a case in point. Hitting the high-growth scenarios outlined by Reeves, will require driving through the final section of the East West Rail line from Bedford to Cambridge while building a lot of houses along those tracks in one of the most congested areas of the country.

The last attempt by the Tories failed because of local opposition. As Local council leaders in Cambridge told me this week — including the Labour leader of Cambridge City council, Mike Davey — it’s imperative that this government doesn’t repeat the political mistakes of the last one and lose public goodwill.

As Lucy Nethsingha, the Liberal Democrat leader of Cambridgeshire county council, put it:

To put in context the scale of the task. Reeves announced that the Environment Agency had finally cleared the long-delayed 5,400 home new town development at Waterbeach in Cambridge.

But according to research by Public First for the Oxford-Cambridge Supercluster Board seen by the Financial Times, the region will need 15,000 homes a year on average to hit a high-growth trajectory — that’s a threefold increase above 2023 levels in Greater Cambridge, Oxford and Milton Keynes.

Brexit blues

The Budget is not the only place where election manifesto red lines have generated policy contradictions that are now hobbling Reeves in her growth mission.

The chancellor talked about the need for greater investment and trade, but the UK’s “reset” with Europe — which might have convinced investors that the UK was “back” — is severely limited by the decision to rule out rejoining a customs union or the EU single market.

Five years after the TCA came into force, what is notable is how little anything has changed, despite the change of government.

Labour pledged to “tear down the barriers to trade” with the EU while sticking to the same Tory red lines that created the Tories’ “failed” Brexit deal — Reeves’ words, not mine — in the first place.

There was some positivity this week when (finally) the UK indicated it would look to relink the UK and EU carbon-pricing schemes and may consider joining the Pan-Euro Mediterranean customs agreement, but like Reeves’ growth plans, for now these are paper commitments.

EU officials now tell my colleagues in Brussels they expect a UK-EU summit “in the first half” of the year. That could be April or June, given the purdah period around local elections in May. The EU then needs to collectively agree a mandate. Don’t expect talks until September or even October.

And as the UK in a Changing Europe think-tank observed in its comprehensive survey of the past five years, Labour’s plans for the EU reset, including a veterinary agreement and a deal for creative artists will deliver only marginal reductions in friction.

“Whilst benefiting certain sectors, these proposals would do little to address the overall economic impact of Brexit,” it found.

The reality, as we reported this week, is that the EU “reset” discussion is going nowhere fast, with even the legally non-binding Security Partnership now hung up on the familiar issues of fish and youth mobility, including restoring the rights of EU students to pay “home” fees when they come and study at UK universities.

You can blame the EU, and the French in particular, for being stuck playing old tunes about “no cherry picking” despite the strategic fears over Ukraine, but in truth the UK has done nothing to really shift the dial or build momentum. It has put no prizes on the table that would make EU member states behave any differently.

As with the October Budget and business, the government has managed to put itself into the “recrimination phase” with Brussels before it has even announced what it wants. That is a remarkable own-goal.

In a braver world, Starmer would have done a fast deal on fish (the last government already failed the fishermen) and embraced youth mobility as a cultural and economic opportunity, driving the negotiation with Brussels into a genuinely different place.

Indeed, even very recently, as the Treasury and No 10 went into panic mode over growth, there was a moment to make arguments that going deeper with the EU should be part of the fix, as much as a third runway at Heathrow.

But that didn’t happen, trapped as the government is by its framing of the problem and the potential opportunity. As one despairing Whitehall insider put it: “It is eerily reminiscent of 2017. We are now in serious danger of sinking back into a low-ambition doomloop.”

Are you enjoying The State of Britain newsletter? Sign up here to get it delivered straight to your inbox every Thursday. Do tell us what you think; we love hearing from you: stateofbritain@ft.com

Reeves described investment as “the lifeblood of economic growth”, but as she also acknowledged, the UK has a long-standing problem with both public and private investment, sitting at the bottom of the G7 pack for much of the past 25 years.

Brexit deepened those investment struggles, according to Stephen Hunsaker, the trade specialist at UKICE (see pp90-94), with public investment taking a particular hit after 2016 as a result of the UK’s withdrawal from the European Investment Bank (EIB).

The UK has done its best to create domestic alternatives, such as the National Wealth Fund, but Hunsaker calculates these are still “years, if not a decade” from reaching the levels of investment the UK was accustomed to receiving while a part of the EIB.

As things stand, UK investment banks’ financing levels are still 58 per cent less than what the country received from the EIB in 2016, he calculates.

The numbers look even gloomier if you consider “what might have been” by comparing actual UK post-2016 investment with the level of EIB investment received by France — a country with a comparable record to the UK’s when it was an EU member.

The gap, according to Hunsaker, means that in real terms the UK has suffered a potential “loss” of more than £44bn since 2017, compared with the UK remaining in the EU and continuing to receive similar levels of financing to France.

That’s a lot of bat tunnels, as they no longer say in the Treasury.

I am now away for two weeks, travelling for both business and pleasure. I am going to leave you in the hands of two colleagues, Delphine Strauss and Jen Williams, who will give you a change of pace and subject matter.

The State of Britain is edited by Gordon Smith. Premium subscribers can sign up here to have it delivered straight to their inbox every Thursday afternoon. Or you can take out a Premium subscription here. Read earlier editions of the newsletter here.



Wine and ice-cream – two things that spark joy, though rarely simultaneously. But at The Dreamery, an otherworldly new wine bar and ice-cream parlour in leafy De Beauvoir Town, north London, they come together magically.

The pint-sized bar is the work of Alex Young and George de Vos, also the creators of Goodbye Horses, a convivial natural wine bar and restaurant on the same street that proved one of the underground hits of 2024. Around the same time, the pair also launched Day Trip, an artisan coffee shop in the same building. “Both George and I see creating hospitality venues as creating worlds in themselves,” says Young, who used to work in tech. “We wanted to create a little village, an ecosystem that has a feeling of escapism.”

Ice-cream and wine can be a tricky match from a purely technical point of view, as the sweetness of the former can make the latter taste flat. But whatever nuance is lost in the pairing is far outweighed by the spirit of fun it creates. “Our approach to pairing is rather anarchic,” admits Young.

There’s an improvisational feel to the whole enterprise – yet there are some significant names behind the scenes. Goodbye Horses was designed by the Swiss architect Leopold Banchini, who also has a permanent installation at the Centre Pompidou. The courtyard garden at Day Trip was created by garden designer Jihae Hwang, who has won several gold medals at the Chelsea Flower Show. Head of wine at Goodbye Horses is Nathalie Nelles, formerly of Noble Fine Liquor. De Vos himself was formerly GM of Brilliant Corners, a music venue and Japanese restaurant in Dalston.

The Dreamery is housed in an ex-grocer’s shop. There is no sign outside – just a steamed-up three-paned window filled with animated silhouettes against a wash of colourful lights. The front door looks just like any other on the Victorian terraced street; but then you notice the stoop, which is painted, slightly spookily, with rune-like suns, moons and birds. Inside, it has the bones of an espresso bar – there are stainless-steel counters and mirrored walls. But the eye is drawn to the ceiling, where a dazzling backlit mural by artist Lucy Stein fills the space with colour. In the corner, a 1980s-style boombox plays whimsical Studio Ghibli scores.

Goodbye Horses chef Jack Coggins makes all the ice-creams, which are chalked up in marker pen on the wall: on my visit they included fig leaf, prune & oolong tea, gingerbread and pear and verjus sorbet (£4 per scoop). There’s no printed drinks list, which will irritate some, but there’s a small, regularly changing selection of easy-drinking, “glou-glou” wines: sparkling rosé moscato; crunchy, red-berry beaujolais served cool; Alsatian riesling and one or two dessert wines (from £7.50 a glass). The emphasis is on natural and low-intervention producers.

I squeeze in at the bar and order a post-prandial scoop of coffee and butterscotch, and a glass of tawny passito moscato by Cascina Cerutti, which is caramelised and nutty; my friend has the fig-leaf ice-cream and a glass of lychee-scented riesling. Both wines have a degree of natural sweetness and so the end result is actually lovely.

The ice-cream comes in a stemmed steel gelato cup, like you might see in a cartoon. The wine glasses are printed with a crescent moon eating an ice-cream cone by Stein. Her folkloric illustrations are also a centrepiece of the more naturalistic Goodbye Horses across the street; they run the full length of the 10m bar and weave their way down the gauzy curtains. “There’s a sort of childlike quality to Lucy’s work,” says Young, “like you’re seeing things with fresh eyes.”

One influence for The Dreamery was the Paris bar Folderol, a fashionable glacerie-bar-à-vin in the 11th arrondissement. Young also tips his hat to GlouGlou in Amsterdam, “which has a big by-the-glass selection and is fun and easy-going in a way that wine bars often aren’t”. “The real guiding principle for all our bars is that we just want people to have a really nice time,” he says. “And I don’t think there’s anything more fun and joyous than eating ice-cream and drinking wine.”

@alicelascelles



Rogue operators that offer poor-quality courses on behalf of English universities in order to exploit the student loan system face a crackdown, under plans outlined by ministers on Thursday.

The Department for Education is proposing reforms to tighten controls on university franchising arrangements, after an investigation by the National Audit Office found fraudulent providers cost taxpayers £2mn in 2022-23.

Under the plans, course operators with more than 300 students will need to register with the Office for Students “to ensure their courses meet rigorous quality standards” in order to receive funding, or face fines or possible suspension.

More than half of 341 franchised institutions are currently unregistered, the department said on Thursday.

The growing number of franchised providers in higher education has been partly driven by the financial crisis facing universities, which are looking to increase student numbers in a bid to offset high costs and a long-running freeze in domestic tuition fees.

The number of students enrolling on franchised courses more than doubled from 50,400 in 2018-19 to over 130,000 this academic year, according to departmental figures.

The NAO report found that 53 per cent of the £4.1mn fraud detected by the Student Loans Company involved courses from franchised providers, despite accounting for only 6.5 per cent of total loan-funded students during the 2022-23 academic year.

The investigation uncovered a range of fraudulent activity, including loans being paid to students who had not met course admission criteria and were unable to provide an acceptance letter to the Student Loans Company, the government body that oversees course financing.

It also found that some providers were not checking whether students were attending their courses despite this being a condition of loan funding.

Some franchised providers also used agents or paid cash bonuses to persuade students to sign up to courses, it found.

Education secretary Bridget Phillipson said: “We are committed to cracking down on rogue operators who misuse public money and damage the reputation of our world-class universities.

“The credibility of our universities is at stake, but these proposals seek to protect students and safeguard taxpayers’ money.”

The DfE’s move to protect standards in the higher education sector comes during a period of financial uncertainty for universities.

Several universities have reopened voluntary severance schemes, which could potentially lead to the loss of nearly 1,000 jobs, as they struggle to recruit lucrative international students, whose fees account for a growing share of the sector’s income.

Data published on Thursday by the university admissions service Ucas revealed that a number of Russell Group universities were among the dozens of institutions hit by a double-digit decline in new international undergraduates during the 2024 application cycle.

The hardest hit Russell Group members were Newcastle University and the University of Sheffield, where admissions declined 26 per cent and 23 per cent respectively.

Newcastle University announced its voluntary severance scheme last week in an attempt to save £20mn, 5 per cent of its pay budget — or the equivalent of 300 full-time positions, according to a memo seen by the Financial Times.

Newcastle University said it was “not immune” to the funding challenges facing the higher education sector.

Universities outside of the Russell Group have also been affected. The University of East Anglia is looking to reduce its headcount by 163 full-time equivalent staff in order to save £11mn, despite experiencing a 73 per cent increase in international undergraduate admissions for the current academic year.

Jo Grady, general secretary of the University and College Union, said her organisation was willing to ballot for strike action in response to job cuts. “Our members refuse to stand by and allow university managers to commit academic vandalism on such a grand scale . . . Unfortunately, serious industrial unrest cannot be ruled out.”

Cardiff University on Tuesday announced plans to cut 400 jobs, as well as the merging of departments and cuts to multiple courses including nursing.

The Department for Education said: “We’ve been up front about the tough financial situation we’ve inherited in relation to [higher education] providers in England, and we are determined to put our universities on a secure footing after years of financial challenges.”

The government announced last year that tuition fees would start to rise in line with inflation from 2025-26.



Central banks around the world are expected to lower borrowing costs as global inflation eases from the multi-decade highs reached in many countries over the past two years.

Some institutions, particularly in emerging markets, have already started cutting rates, but many more are forecast to follow this year, including the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England.

The FT global inflation and interest rates tracker provides a regularly updated visual narrative of consumer price inflation and central bank policy rates around the world.

This page covers the factors affecting policymakers’ decisions on borrowing costs, showing how central banks responded to rising prices with a synchronised increase in interest rates.

Higher borrowing costs have helped ease the fast pace of price growth that swept the world over the past three years during the pandemic and war in Ukraine.

While inflation in most nations has come down from its peak, many policymakers have warned that the last leg of the journey to central banks’ target — which in most advanced economies is 2 per cent — will be the hardest.

You can use this page to monitor inflation and interest rates in most individual countries.

This page also tracks measures that are closely monitored for signs of how inflation and policy rates might evolve in the months ahead.

The latest figures for the world’s largest economies show that inflation remains elevated in some countries, excluding food and energy, a key measure of underlying price pressures.

Wholesale energy costs provide a timely measure of the price pressures consumers might face in the coming months.

A rise in energy prices was the main driver of inflation in many countries in recent years, but gas and electricity costs have now retreated from their peaks during the energy crisis that emerged after Russia invaded Ukraine.

This page also tracks the yields on 2-year government bond yields, which are strongly affected by market expectations of interest rates over that time.

Asset prices have been another point of concern, especially for houses. The cost of homes soared in many countries during the pandemic, but high mortgage rates have led to a significant slowdown in house price growth in a number of countries.



The UK’s postal regulator has proposed easing the Royal Mail’s obligations, allowing the company to make fewer deliveries as the group prepares for new ownership under Czech billionaire Daniel Křetínský.

The planned changes would allow Royal Mail to make second-class deliveries on alternate weekdays rather than six days a week at present, and reduce its requirement to deliver first-class mail on the following day from 93 per cent to 90 per cent.

Ofcom admitted that the “world has changed”, with people in the UK “sending a third of the letters we were 20 years ago”.

“We need to reform the postal service to protect its future and ensure it delivers for the whole of the UK,” said Ofcom’s networks director Natalie Black.

The regulator’s proposals, which will be put out for public consultation until April, come after intense lobbying from Royal Mail’s owner International Distribution Services.

The lossmaking group had been seeking regulatory approval for the changes, which also include ending second-class letter delivery on Saturday.

Royal Mail’s chief executive Emma Gilthorpe welcomed the proposals, saying Ofcom’s analysis showed that “it is no longer financially sustainable to maintain a network built for 20bn letters when we are now only delivering 6.7bn”.

Ofcom’s plans come about a month after the government approved the sale of Royal Mail to Křetínský in a £5.3bn deal that will pave the way for the once state-owned postal monopoly to pass into foreign ownership.Křetínský had cautioned that Royal Mail was facing a “deadly downward spiral” as it sought to defend its position while navigating rising competition in the parcels market.The company must adhere to the “universal service obligation”, under which Royal Mail is the only delivery group required to deliver letters anywhere in the country, at the same cost every day besides Sunday. As part of Křetínský’s deal, he committed to respecting the universal service obligation for as long as he controls Royal Mail.

Royal Mail had been fined £10.5mn in December for failing to meet its delivery targets. The regulator also called on Royal Mail to “invest in its network” and bolster efficiency and service across both parcel and letter delivery.

The Post Office, which is separate to Royal Mail, said that its postmasters and customers “do not want to see a reduction in the universal service obligation”.

It added: “The UK is the only country in the world where the delivery arm is separate from the physical retail shop and the proposals announced today put more pressure on postmasters who are already facing tough trading conditions.”



Rachel Reeves said flights could be taking off from a new Heathrow third runway “within a decade”, as she also in effect banned new “bat tunnels” in big UK infrastructure projects to help growth.

The chancellor defended her support for a third runway at Heathrow — a project opposed by London Labour mayor Sir Sadiq Khan — saying she had to make decisions “in the national interest”.

Asked by the BBC’s Today programme when she hoped the project might get planning permission with spades in the ground, Reeves replied: “By the end of the parliament.” The next election is expected in 2029.

She claimed flights on the new runway could be leaving by 2035. “We think we can get flights off within a decade,” she said, adding that Heathrow had to compete with other hub airports in Amsterdam and Frankfurt.

Heathrow chief Thomas Woldbye told the Financial Times the government’s timeline was “ambitious, but not undoable”.

Although a third runway is opposed by Khan and some Labour MPs — particularly those representing seats in the capital — it has the support of the Conservatives.

“On Heathrow we are in principle in favour of this move,” said Mel Stride, shadow chancellor, adding that he would back Labour’s efforts to get infrastructure projects built.

“Labour don’t appear to be entirely united on this,” he said. “But I think the main point is we should absolutely be talking about long-term investment in this country.”

In the same interview, Stride declined to say whether the Tories would reverse last year’s £25bn increase in national insurance for business, saying he would set out the party’s fiscal plans closer to the election.

Daisy Cooper, Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesperson, said expanding Heathrow was “the wrong thing to do” and that “the damage to the climate will be huge”.

On Thursday, the chancellor also bemoaned the HS2 bat tunnel, claiming that costly schemes to protect wildlife were one of the reasons Britain was failing to deliver affordable new transport and housing schemes, and said that the situation had to end.

“The balance has gone too far in the direction of always protecting every bat and every newt,” she said on Thursday, arguing that Britain had higher costs for new building projects than virtually every other country.

Reeves said one of the reasons costs on the HS2 rail project ran out of control was because of “things like £100mn on a bat tunnel”.

The tunnel, which was intended to protect a rare species of bat, has become a symbol of the myriad costly regulations that hold up national infrastructure work.

Asked by the BBC whether she would block a proposed bat tunnel on a railway line for the government’s new “Oxford-Cambridge arc” project, she said: “Other ways will be found.”

The chancellor said a new “nature restoration fund” would allow developers to put money into schemes to protect wildlife diversity “but not necessarily where the project is happening”.

Reeves claimed this new approach would maintain Britain’s wildlife in a more cost-effective way. Liz Truss, former Conservative prime minister, also wanted to reduce wildlife protections to promote growth.

HS2 said last year the railway had been forced to build the structure to protect a species of bat because of legal requirements in the planning process to protect an endangered species.



Social media platforms operating in the UK should be forced or incentivised to promote content from trusted sources to avoid an “American news swamp”, according to the boss of broadcaster Channel 4.

Alex Mahon said content from respected broadcasters was being “shadow banned” by computer technology that selected what was promoted online, and regulated providers should be given “algorithmic prominence” to prevent this from happening.

“We’ve got to make sure that we fight for what I’m calling ‘algorithmic prominence’, and prioritisation and identification on those platforms,” she told the Financial Times ahead of a speech on Thursday to the Royal Television Society.

“The way the algorithms works is salacious and attention grabbing. Things travel quicker, which tend to be more rightwing,” said Mahon, who said the likes of Meta and X should be made to change their behaviour, potentially via tax breaks or regulation.

She added: “Here, in the UK, we still have the option to resist a slide into an American news swamp.”

Mahon said US consumers received most of their information from social media platforms that were economically incentivised to spread the popular above the factual because it made more money.

“We definitely see evidence that trusted sources are being shadow banned because you see stories kind of disappear,” she said. “Are we on platforms where we will get prioritised? How do we make sure they can’t just change the algorithm tomorrow?”

Mahon’s views will put her at odds with the large US technology groups that control the majority of social media, with the Channel 4 boss saying the proliferation of online disinformation was exacerbating a crisis in society, affecting younger audiences in particular.

“We’re losing social cohesion. We’re splitting into atomised groups who won’t discuss different perspectives, who listen separately to different streams of knowledge,” she said.

Mahon also criticised the move by Facebook owner Meta to drop fact checking on its platform in the US, calling it as “antithetical to a cohesive society”.

In the UK, the Media Act passed last year requires TV platforms to carry and give appropriate prominence to designated public service broadcaster TV apps and content.

Mahon can see a similar approach for algorithmic prominence, saying: “You can regulate it. Or you could say ‘to operate here, we give you a tax break’.”

Mahon is pushing for a new quality “trustmark” to indicate fact-checked content from professionally produced and regulated media, and urged better means of monetisation for news providers on social media platforms.

She worries how social media giants such as TikTok, Meta and YouTube avoided responsibility for the content on their sites because they are not classified as publishing businesses — unlike broadcasters.

“We put rules on television when it took up a vast amount of people’s time” to comply with them, she said. “All these platforms are pretending not to be publishers.”

Traditional broadcasters such as Channel 4 are fighting for their future on digital platforms, where their audiences have migrated to but where making money can be harder. The Financial Times this week revealed plans by Sky News to shift resources away from its linear channel to premium paid content.

Mahon said Channel 4 was “way ahead” of rivals in its transition to digital, while the group would also diversify its revenue over the next five years by creating its own TV shows for the first time.

The UK changed the law last year to allow Channel 4 to make and own rights to its own productions for the first time in its 40-year history, rather than outsource production to the independent sector.

This could include taking equity stakes in TV production groups, Mahon said, but Channel 4 would not spend “billions buying companies”.

Channel 4 had 1.83bn views on social media platforms last year, the majority on TikTok. It has weekly “reach” of about 35mn on social media, about eight times greater than on live television.



Good morning. Rachel Reeves delivered her big speech on growth. It contained a number of measures: some good (the Oxford/Cambridge arc tops that list), some bad (the third runway at Heathrow) and some added to give the list of growth initiatives the appearance of a more even regional distribution (the regeneration of Old Trafford).

Some thoughts on the political implications and challenges of them below.

Rachel Reeves announced (or in some cases re-announced) a swath of measures as part of her drive to fix the most alarming chart in British politics.

This is the biggest subplot to essentially everything else in British politics. Our economic model took a huge hit in the global financial crisis, it hasn’t recovered since, and everything that successive governments have tried to fix the problem hasn’t worked. (And some of the things they have done, Brexit most of all, have actively made the problem worse.)

Our lack of growth makes everything harder, politically speaking. (To make matters worse, despite being an ageing island nation with sluggish economic growth, we completely failed to learn or even show much interest in Japan, a country that managed those challenges rather better than we did.) Because of that, we have seen both main parties electing leaders from their outer flanks — Jeremy Corbyn in 2017 and Liz Truss in 2022. It is also why no UK prime minister since David Cameron has been re-elected to a second term and why no prime minister since Tony Blair has served two full terms.

The best and most exciting measure that Rachel Reeves outlined was the government’s revived backing for the Oxford-Cambridge arc, a strategic plan to build transport links and housing between the two science-rich hubs.

This was not strictly speaking “new” as Peter Kyle had announced it at the start of the week. The arc has a lot of cross-party support, but it was shelved by Boris Johnson. While his electoral coalition had relatively few voters who would benefit most from the arc, it had an awful lot of people who would have objected to the required extra building.

Labour’s backing for the arc, and the accompanying approval for much-needed infrastructure improvements such as reservoirs, is another signal that the government essentially regards the very rural seats it won for the first time in 2024 as “one-and-done” victories. That approach has some real negative consequences (the cocktail of changes to inheritance tax and other reliefs for agriculture will, I think, have some unwanted consequences and Labour will end up U-turning on them sooner or later). But it also has some great upsides, of which backing the Oxford-Cambridge arc is right at the top.

You can see the dividing line that Reeves wants here, politically: the Conservatives will be pushed into opposing the development and disruption that investing in the arc involves because of their imperative to compete with the Liberal Democrats in those seats where voters might be resistant to building. And then Labour, Reeves hopes, will be able to say “well, what you would do differently?”

The chancellor has also urged Heathrow to fast-track proposals to build a third runway: I am frankly unconvinced by this as, indeed, are much of the cabinet. (Do read this excellent piece on the legal and political hurdles that still remain to its construction here.) In the short term, it feels like a good way for the government to lose friends and alienate people among environmentally-inclined voters. It also sets up a fun game that interviewers will be able to play whenever speaking to anyone in the cabinet or front bench who voted against expansion in 2018, asking what, exactly, in their view has changed. (I really don’t think some overly optimistic wishful thinking about “sustainable aviation fuels” is going to cut it on this one.)

More importantly, given that the government is only going to be able to get away with antagonising its base on so many issues, in terms of its impact on growth and investment, watering down the government’s plans on employment rights gets you far more in terms of business investment and happiness than the third runway.

I saw The Brutalist last night. Personally, I would say: don’t bother. Danny Leigh’s review is exactly right, down to the most damning observation of all, that the film loses its brilliance with the arrival of “a large, dark plot point that, in common with the whole movie, I’ve liked less the more I’ve thought about it”. Marvellous soundtrack, though.



In the shadow of a decommissioned nuclear power plant, a former coal-handling port in North Ayrshire is set to become the site for a £2bn factory that will produce thousands of kilometres of subsea cable used for transmitting renewable energy.

The regeneration project in one of Scotland’s most deprived areas is a test case for the nation’s ability to foster supply chain manufacturing capacity in a sector that has attracted interest from overseas investors and is crucial to the UK’s ambitions to decarbonise power by 2030.

The UK and Scottish governments are seeking to harness the economic benefits of the transition to net zero to replace the well-paid jobs being lost in oil and gas, decades on from the pit closures.

“It’s widely felt that Scotland and the UK failed to build out local supply chain for fixed-bottom wind, instead relying on imports of equipment used in the sector,” said Laura Fidao, investment director at the Scottish National Investment Bank, which is partially funding the factory.

“We have a mandate to help build out the domestic supply chain to turn that around for floating offshore wind projects,” she added.

However, some industry executives have raised concerns over investing in untested technology.

The cables play a vital role in decarbonisation, as they are used to transmit power from offshore wind farms, reinforce grid infrastructure and build interconnectors to transfer ft between different countries.

Manufacturing start-up XLCC plans to start commercial-scale production from 2030 of high-voltage direct current cables — for which demand outstrips supply by two and a half times — removing one of the biggest bottlenecks in the way of the transition to net zero.

Japan’s Sumitomo last year started construction on the UK’s first high-voltage direct current factory in the Highland port of Nigg that is aiming for production by the second half of 2026, with an estimated £350mn of inward investment backed by £24.5mn of public money.

XLCC’s UK ownership made it stand out, said Fidao at the Scottish National Investment Bank. However, some industry executives have raised questions over the start-up nature of XLCC, which has never built HVDC cable before.

One developer also said a key risk would be a slower-than-expected rollout of offshore wind farms in the UK, reducing potential orders.

Craig Stevens, investment director at SNIB, said the bank had taken comfort from XLCC working with strategic technical partners such as China’s Orient Cable to produce and test the cable. XLCC said it had hired experts in HVDC manufacturing and was using tried-and-tested technology.

One potential XLCC customer is a subsea electricity interconnector from Morocco to the UK envisioned by Xlinks, a company founded by Simon Morrish, who is also behind XLCC. But the project is awaiting UK government approval.

XLCC this month received a £20mn investment from SNIB, building on the UK’s National Wealth Fund’s earlier initial investment of £20mn, with the option for an extra £67mn as development progresses.

SNIB, which was founded in 2020 as a development bank, had been established to take on more risk and fund start-ups and growth companies in sectors needed to revitalise the Scottish economy, Fidao said.

The XLCC facility would support about 900 long-term jobs, including more than 200 apprenticeships, with a further 300 project management roles expected to be based in Scotland.

Expanding Scottish ports, Fidao added, was a priority given the significant quaysides expansion needed to assemble the infrastructure for the rollout of more offshore wind farms.

One of SNIB’s largest investments to date is a co-investment with the UK into US-owned Ardersier port on the Moray Firth, an inlet of the North Sea.

Scotland has a pipeline of 40 gigawatts of offshore wind projects, all of which will require subsea cables to transfer the power ashore.

“Projects are getting delayed, prices are very high,” said Ian Douglas, XLCC’s chief executive. “Companies are fighting very hard to secure supply — you are typically seeing seven-year waits for HVDC cable.”

European cable manufacturers, such as Milan-listed Prysmian, Paris-listed Nexans and Copenhagen-listed NKT, already had full order books, he added.

Prysmian said: “Whilst we have large backlog visibility, to suggest that our order book is full is incorrect.” The company added that it was “working closely with its customers to deliver on time current, and future projects, and is receiving, and bidding for future orders”.

The first phase of the XLCC facility’s construction envisions 1,300km a year capacity with the potential to rise to 2,600km a year. Global demand in 2030 was forecast at 10,000km a year, XLCC said.

The Scottish National party government also hopes to incentivise uptake for supply chain companies, such as XLCC, by encouraging renewables developers that source equipment from domestic sources.

Seabed lease agreements for projects from the late 2020s include requirements for local supply chain involvement.

“That will propel manufacturing — it is going to be extremely important to demonstrate local supply chain,” said Gillian Martin, acting secretary for net zero and energy. “Companies will even now be looking at this place for their cables.”



Falling exports and the winding down of production of older car models saw UK vehicle manufacturing fall by almost 12 per cent last year, in the worst annual drop since the Covid-19 pandemic.

Car and van production at British plants fell back below 1mn vehicles, to 905,233 models, figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders released on Thursday showed.

The decline came on the back of weaker exports to Europe as carmakers wrestled with slowing sales of electric vehicles in key markets such as Germany and France.

Nissan and Jaguar Land Rover — the UK’s two largest carmakers — also halted production of several models such as the Leaf EV and the Jaguar XE as they prepared to launch a new range of EVs.

“Amid significant geopolitical and trade tensions, UK manufacturers are set on turning billions of pounds of investment into production reality,” Mike Hawes, chief executive of the SMMT said. “Growing pains are inevitable.”

The production of EVs and plug-in hybrids last year fell by 20.4 per cent, but still accounted for just over a third of all vehicles produced. The SMMT said this dip was temporary, pointing to £23.4bn of new investments announced over the past two years to retool the plants for the electric shift.

Some industry executives have described the UK market as “a safe haven”, with the EU and the US imposing higher tariffs against imports of Chinese electric vehicles.

Exports to the EU fell 24.3 per cent and China exports dropped 21.8 per cent while those to the US rose 38.5 per cent.

But the UK has faced its own challenges as carmakers have struggled to meet the country’s tough EV sales targets.

Stellantis last year said the costs of complying with the government’s “zero emission vehicle mandate” was partly behind its decision to close its Luton van factory, putting 1,100 jobs at risk.

Ford also blamed the mandate as it cut 800 UK roles last year in a wider European restructuring, while Nissan warned jobs at its Sunderland plant, the largest in Britain, could be at risk unless the government relaxed its rules.

The scheme requires a certain percentage of each carmakers’ annual sales to be zero emission vehicles, with the percentage annually rising from 28 per cent this year to 80 per cent in 2030. Companies face fines of £15,000 for each missed vehicle.

UK car production peaked at more than 1.6mn before the Brexit vote in 2016 and British plants are now capable of producing 1.1mn vehicles annually after the closure of Honda’s Swindon plant and JLR said it would cease producing vehicles in Castle Bromwich, Solihull.



Shoplifting in the UK hit a record £2.2bn last year, alongside surging crime levels and rising violence and abuse against staff, industry data showed.

Theft reached an all-time high with more than 20mn incidents registered in the year to August 24, according to the British Retail Consortium, which represents more than 200 large companies in the UK.

Crime in stores was “spiralling out of control”, chief executive Helen Dickinson said, despite significant investment from high-street brands to prevent thieves from stealing goods and attacking shop assistants.

Violence and abuse during the period climbed to more than 2,000 a day, up from 1,300 the year before. This is more than three times what it was in 2020, when there were just 455 incidents a day.

Meanwhile, losses from customer theft reached £2.2bn, up from £1.8bn the previous year, adding further pressure to the mounting costs retailers already face.

“Every day this continues, criminals are getting bolder and more aggressive,” Dickinson added.

Many of the incidents were linked to organised crime, with gangs systematically targeting stores across the country, often stealing tens of thousands of pounds’ worth of goods and moving around multiple stores, the BRC said.

John Lewis and Waitrose last year said “greed not need” was driving record levels of shoplifting as the retail group upped its security to combat it.

The group has been installing technology in larger supermarkets to automatically stop trolleys if items have not been paid for and installing more public display monitors that act like mirrors near the alcohol and meat aisles — sections attractive to thieves.

The amount spent on crime prevention was also at a record high, with retailers investing £1.8bn on measures such as CCTV, more security staff, anti-theft devices and body-worn cameras, up from £1.2bn the previous year.

Paddy Lillis, general secretary of the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, said: “Crime has a very direct impact on the viability of stores, as retailers go to increasing lengths and expense to make them secure and safe.”

The Labour government has pledged to address the rise in retail crime through stronger measures to tackle shoplifting and antisocial behaviour, including removing the £200 threshold for so-called low-level theft. It said it would introduce a standalone offence for assaulting a retail worker in England and Wales.

In 2023, police and the previous government launched measures to tackle the rise in retail crime, known as the Retail Crime Action Plan.



Household water bills in England and Wales are expected to rise by an average of 26 per cent to £603 this year, marking the biggest annual increase since privatisation 36 years ago.

Southern Water’s customers face the biggest rise of the 11 water and sewerage companies, with bills expected to surge by 47 per cent — or £224 — to £703 from April, according to figures released by lobby group Water UK on Thursday. Thames Water, the largest and most financially troubled company, has handed its customers a 31 per cent increase that will see bills rise on average by £151 to £639 this year.

Water UK said the extra cash was needed to deliver an annual record of £20bn of investment by utilities by March next year, the first wave in a £104bn programme up to 2030. This would include the upgrading of 1,700 wastewater treatment works as well as supporting the building of nine new reservoirs.

The reservoirs, some of which will require additional surcharges to bills, were endorsed on Wednesday by chancellor Rachel Reeves as part of her economic growth agenda.

The sector regulator, Ofwat, said in December that water companies could increase bills by an average of 36 per cent by 2030. It said at the time that it would allow the utilities to apply the majority of these increases in the first year of the five-year period.

Thursday’s average bill figures are different to those announced in December as they include CPHI inflation and are adjusted for population forecasts.

David Henderson, chief executive of Water UK, acknowledged the pressure on households, pledging to double the amount of support for cash-strapped customers.

“We understand increasing bills is never welcome and, while we urgently need investment in our water and sewage infrastructure, we know that for many this increase will be difficult,” he said.

Support varies between companies as social tariff schemes, which are designed to lower bills for struggling households, involve companies surveying wealthier customers to ask whether they agree to subsidise bills for the less well-off.

Ofwat said last week that almost half of households in England and Wales had struggled to pay for their water over the past 12 months. More than 8 per cent of households — or 2.5mn people — were in payment arrears, with the average amount owed at about £822, Ofwat said.

The Consumer Council for Water, which represents customers, said many households would be “unable to cope” with bill increases, which it said represented the “largest rise in water bills since privatisation of the water industry”. Its own research showed that many households had already cut spending on essentials such as food and heating to afford bills.

The increases come in the wake of warnings from Ofwat over the financial stability of 10 companies, which receive nearly all their revenues from customer bills.

Thames Water and Southern Water, which are under particular scrutiny, are understood to be weighing an appeal to the Competition and Markets Authority after receiving lower bill increases from Ofwat in December than they had hoped.

The chief executives of both utilities took large bonuses last year despite suffering credit downgrades. Thames Water has also warned that it will run out of cash by March unless it receives approval for an emergency £3bn loan in the High Court next month.

The three listed water companies — Pennon, Severn Trent and United Utilities — have all ruled out appeals to the CMA, as has non-profit Dŵr Cymru.

David Black, chief executive of Ofwat, said that the infrastructure investment programme was “ambitious”. He added: “Where companies underperform, or investment isn’t delivered, we will hold companies to account and protect customers.”



Donald Trump has said he will hit the EU with tariffs, adding the bloc to a list of targets including Canada and Mexico and bringing the US to the brink of new trade wars with its biggest trading partners.

The US president acknowledged that the new tariffs could cause some market “disruption”, but claimed they would help the country close its trade deficits.

“The tariffs are going to make us very rich, and very strong,” Trump told reporters in the Oval Office.

Hours before his plan for tariffs of 25 per cent on Canada and Mexico was due to take effect on February 1, Trump also widened his threat to include the EU, which he said had treated the US “very badly”.

“Am I going to impose tariffs on the European Union? . . . Absolutely,” Trump said. “They don’t take our cars, they don’t take our farm products, essentially, they don’t take almost anything,” he said. “And we have a tremendous deficit with the European Union. So we’ll be doing something very substantial with the European Union.”

The president’s comments, coming less than two weeks after his return to the White House, marked a sharp escalation in his rhetoric on trade and mean the world’s biggest economy is on the verge of imposing tariffs on its most significant trading partners.

US goods imports from the EU, Canada, Mexico and China were $1.9tn in 2023, about 60 per cent of the total, according to customs database Trade Data Monitor.

The European Commission said it was “not aware of any additional tariffs being imposed on EU products” and said tariffs “create unnecessary economic disruption”.

“Our trade and investment relationship with the US is the biggest in the world,” said chief spokesperson Paula Pinho. “Open markets and respect for international trade rules are essential for strong and sustainable economic growth.”

Trump said he would also “eventually” put tariffs on chips and “things associated with chips”, and would apply tariffs to oil, gas, steel, copper, aluminium and pharmaceuticals.

Tariffs on steel and aluminium could come as soon as “this month, next month”, he said, while oil and gas tariffs would happen around February 18.

The US dollar strengthened on Trump’s comments, leaving an index of the currency against six peers up about 0.6 per cent. West Texas Intermediate, the US oil benchmark, rose more than 1 per cent to $73.81 a barrel.

Trump said he would “probably” reduce the tariffs on Canadian oil to 10 per cent, although other imports from the country would be taxed at 25 per cent. Canada is by far the US’s biggest foreign oil supplier, accounting for about 60 per cent of its crude imports.

The president said there was “nothing” Canada and Mexico could do overnight to prevent him from applying tariffs against their imports.

“It’s not a negotiating tool,” Trump said. “It’s pure economic. We have big deficits with, as you know, with all three of them.”

Economists say sweeping tariffs would be inflationary and could prevent the Federal Reserve from reducing borrowing costs as much as anticipated this year. Some central bank officials had already started including Trump’s policies in their forecasts in December, before he took office.

Hitting the US’s biggest trading partners with steep tariffs sharply raises the risks of igniting full-blown trade wars just days into Trump’s second term as president.

Both Canada and Mexico have prepared packages of retaliatory tariffs and are ready to implement them. The EU has also said it would defend itself with retaliatory tariffs, as it did in Trump’s first term.“We’re ready with a response — a purposeful, forceful but reasonable, immediate response,” Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said on Friday. The Liberal premier warned Canadians that the nation “could be facing difficult times in the coming days and weeks”.

Canada’s former finance minister Chrystia Freeland, who is running to replace Trudeau, on Friday urged Ottawa to retaliate against any US tariffs by adding huge levies on Tesla vehicles to punish Elon Musk, one of Trump’s top allies.

Trump indicated he was unmoved by economists’ warnings that new tariffs would hurt the US economy or risk a leap in inflation as importers passed on the increased cost of their goods to consumers.

“Tariffs don’t cause inflation, they cause success,” he said.

But Democrats warned much of the burden would be passed on to American consumers. “Donald Trump is aiming his new tariffs at Mexico, Canada and China but they will likely hit Americans in their wallets,” said Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader.

“If these tariffs go into full effect, they will raise prices for everything from groceries, to cars, to gas, making it even harder for middle-class families to just get by.”

Trump first threatened to hit Canada, Mexico and China with steep tariffs in November, accusing them of allowing illegal migration and not doing enough to halt trade in fentanyl, an illegal and deadly opioid.

Business lobbyists in Washington, worried about the effects on US supply chains and the costs of goods, had hoped that the president would take a more moderate approach and not immediately apply a 25 per cent levy.

Other options included delaying the tariffs to allow the Canadian and Mexican governments more time to negotiate with the Trump team over border security, or introducing the tariffs gradually and increasing them over time.Additional reporting by Harriet Clarfelt



A former senior Federal Reserve official was arrested on Friday after US prosecutors accused him of passing on economic secrets to China.

John Rogers, a senior adviser in the Fed’s international finance division from 2010-21, used his position to access sensitive data on China-related tariffs, briefings to officials and policy debates and announcements, according to an indictment unsealed on Friday in federal court in Washington.

Rogers, 63, of Virginia, was accused of transferring sensitive information to his personal email account before printing it out and passing it on to Chinese officials disguised as graduate students. He also used encrypted messaging apps to communicate with Chinese officials, the indictment said.

The justice department on Friday said Rogers had “under the guise of teaching ‘classes’,” met his co-conspirators in Chinese hotel rooms where he gave them sensitive trade secret information that belonged to the Fed.

It added the economist had been paid about $450,000 as a part-time professor at Fudan University in China.

Rogers denies the allegations, his attorney said.

The indictment is the latest in a rising number of cases in which officials from across the US government — and particularly agencies such as the CIA and the military — have been charged with providing sensitive or secret information to the Chinese government.

In recent years, the justice department has also become more public about highlighting cases to underscore the threat from Chinese espionage. Washington has accused Chinese hackers of attacking US telecoms networks in a massive and widespread campaign that has allowed the perpetrators to access the conversations of American officials.

The Chinese embassy in Washington said it was “not familiar” with the specifics of the Rogers’s case, but said China “upholds the rule of law”.

“We oppose any smear and attack on China with so-called ‘spy risks’,” the embassy added.

The Chinese government is one of the biggest global holders of US government bonds. Fed interest rate decisions and signals on future monetary policy movements can also influence US Treasuries and are among the most closely watched reports across global financial markets.

US Treasury figures show that, as of November, China officially held $768.6bn of the debt, making it the second-largest foreign holder after Japan.

The indictment alleges the sensitive information was shared from “at least 2018” with alleged Chinese co-conspirators “who worked for the intelligence and security apparatus of China and who posed as graduate students at a [Chinese] university”.

The Fed declined to comment.

Rogers, who speaks limited Chinese, discussed teaching topics that would make the meetings seem “legitimate in the eyes of the Fed”, according to encrypted messages exchanged with his alleged co-conspirator that were cited in the indictment.

Rogers’s travel was covered by his Chinese counterparts. “[D]on’t worry about the cost of the trip . . . we don’t waste money, but we can bear all the necessary cost, you can choose a comfortable and convenient way for the trip,” an alleged co-conspirator said in a message included in the indictment.

The trade secrets at the heart of the case allegedly include the assessment of an European Central Bank announcement, briefing notes for a member of the Fed’s board and a document titled “Pre-FOMC Briefing” — all dated 2019.

Rogers in 2020 lied to the office of the Fed’s inspector general when asked about his accessing and sharing of sensitive material, prosecutors said.

Liza Tobin, a former National Security Council China director, said potential targets needed to be more vigilant about approaches from China.

“Here’s some career advice: if someone from a Chinese university offers you $450,000 for a part-time job, run away,” said Tobin, who is now a managing director at Garnaut Global, a geopolitical advisory firm. “You’re not getting that kind of offer because of your brilliance and charm.”



Growing numbers of migrants who had been seeking to reach the US are instead making plans to stay in Mexico for long periods after US President Donald Trump launched a crackdown at the border.

In the border city of Ciudad Juárez, the Jesuit Refugee Service, a non-profit offering legal and humanitarian assistance, has seen three times the number of people wanting its help to request asylum in Mexico this month as in all of 2024, said local branch director Alejandra Corona.

Mexican media showed long lines outside the offices of Mexico’s asylum agency Comar in recent days, with more people trying to lodge applications to avoid detention by immigration authorities and secure a work permit.

“Asylum applications to Comar have increased in Tapachula and Mexico City in the last few days,” said Giovanni Lepri, Mexico representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In his first week in office, Trump, who campaigned heavily on curbing migration, declared a national emergency at the southern border, sent 1,500 military personnel to help with enforcement, and cancelled his predecessor Joe Biden’s legal pathways for entry.

The US has also launched highly publicised deportation raids by Immigration and Customs Enforcement and begun regularly using military planes for deportation flights.

One factor sending migrants away from the border for the time being is Trump’s scrapping of an app, CBP One, that had assigned 1,450 appointments a day to request asylum at regular ports of entry.

At the El Buen Pastor shelter in Juárez, occupancy grew from just 14 people to 60 after the cancellation of CBP One, said its director Pastor Juan Fierro.

Among those who lost their appointments was Luis, 30, a Venezuelan who spent his savings on the journey from his home country, which has been hit by an economic collapse under Nicolás Maduro’s repressive regime.

Luis finally reached the US-Mexico border with his sister, girlfriend and other family members and secured an appointment to cross into the US and apply for asylum, but one day before his slot, Trump cancelled it.

“There was nothing we could do, and we’re stuck on this side, defeated,” he said in Juárez.

Many migrants are opting to stay in Mexico to try to get a job or request asylum. Mexico’s capital is seen as a safer option than border areas, with more work opportunities and public transport.

“We want to go to Mexico City to at least work, clear our minds as time passes,” Luis said.

For the past year, cities along the US-Mexico border had been much quieter than previously, with shelters below capacity and irregular crossings down. That resulted from a crackdown by Mexican authorities, tighter US restrictions, and more legal pathways to cross through the app.

But for many migrants, returning home — whether to Venezuela, other countries in the region or parts of Mexico plagued by violence linked to drug cartels — is not an option. Many said they still hoped to reach the US eventually.

“Going to the US is illogical, we can’t get there . . . but it’s also dangerous here in Juárez,” said Roxana, a 52-year-old from southern Mexico who said she had not yet decided where to go.

Gloria, a 54-year-old Guatemalan woman in Ciudad Juárez, said she believed Trump had not thought through the economic impact of his policies on industries such as agriculture, which rely on undocumented workers.

“Guatemala’s men are men of corn, working men, the sun nor the rain stops them,” she said. “Are the Americans going to dare to go out to the fields to work? . . . The president should have thought of that.”

Mexico’s government has been creating shelters fit for 2,500 people each to take back deportees from the US. Several organisations said the system was unusually efficient so far, but that there was no clear additional plan for the estimated 380,000 Mexicans displaced internally by violence or the hundreds of thousands of foreigners now stuck.



Canada’s former finance minister Chrystia Freeland has said Ottawa should retaliate to any US tariffs by adding huge levies on Tesla vehicles to punish Elon Musk, one of Donald Trump’s “billionaire buddies”.

Freeland, who is running to replace Justin Trudeau as prime minister, called for a swift, punitive reaction by Ottawa if the US president follows through on his threat to impose 25 per cent tariffs on Canada and Mexico starting this weekend.

“Canada must threaten to impose a 100 per cent tariff on all Tesla vehicles and a 100 per cent tariff on US wine, beer and spirits if unfair tariffs are imposed on Canadians,” Freeland said on Friday.

The comments from one of Canada’s most important politicians mark a sharp escalation in the trade dispute with Washington, which blew into the open after Trump said he would impose tariffs on the US’s two biggest trading partners from February 1.

The White House on Friday reiterated its plan to impose the tariffs starting on Saturday.

Trudeau also on Friday said Canada was ready to retaliate against the US: “We’re ready with a response — a purposeful, forceful but reasonable, immediate response,” he said, as he warned Canadians, “our nation could be facing difficult times in the coming days and weeks”.

Freeland, who was part of the Canadian team that negotiated the US-Mexico-Canada trade deal signed by Trump during his first presidency, said releasing a targeted list of potential retaliatory tariffs on $200bn worth of American imports would show where “we can hit Trump where it hurts”.

“By targeting products from Republican states that voted for Trump and products made by his billionaire buddies, Canada can exert unavoidable political pressure on the White House,” she said.

Canada previously imposed 100 per cent tariffs on Chinese electric vehicle imports, in a move that followed similar levies on Chinese EVs announced by Joe Biden’s administration.

Freeland’s comments also came as Mélanie Joly, Canada’s foreign minister, held last-gasp talks in Washington to try to avert Trump’s tariffs.

Joly used a Financial Times interview on Friday to warn the US that any disruption to energy flows between Canada and its southern neighbours triggered by a trade war would leave American oil refiners dependent on alternative heat oil supplies from Venezuela.

Joly also vowed Canada would never become a “colony”, in a reference to Trump’s claims that Canadians would like to join the US and his repeated goading of Trudeau, who he has called a “governor” of the “51st state”.

Canada and Mexico have drawn up lists of “tit for tat” tariffs to issue against the US as soon as Trump imposes tariffs.

Mexico’s left-wing president Claudia Sheinbaum said earlier this week that she did not think the 25 per cent tariffs would happen on Saturday, but on Friday said the government was planning for different scenarios.

“We have a plan A, plan B and a plan C, whatever the United States government decides,” she said on Friday morning.

Dan Kelly, president of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, said a tariff war would be a huge concern for small Canadian businesses as more than half their members import goods from the US.

“Trump’s new best friend is Elon and targeting these type of people close to the president might add pressure but, overall we are urging caution with retaliatory measures,” he said.

Tiff Macklem, governor of the Bank of Canada, on Wednesday said US tariffs would likely put Canada in a recession and also raise consumer prices in the US.

The Canadian dollar and Mexican peso rose against the US dollar on Friday after reports that Trump may push back the implementation of any new tariffs to March.

Additional reporting by Christine Murray in Mexico City



Nvidia chief executive Jensen Huang met US President Donald Trump for the first time at the White House on Friday, as Washington and Silicon Valley weigh their responses to Chinese start-up DeepSeek’s AI breakthrough.The meeting between Trump and Huang was to include discussion of AI policy, according to a person familiar with the discussion. On his first day in office, Trump revoked a Biden administration executive order focused on AI safety and has generally been seen by tech executives as accelerating America’s advances in the fast-moving technology.Two people familiar with the meeting said it had been planned before DeepSeek stunned Silicon Valley with AI advances apparently achieved using far less computing power than US tech groups. The news wiped almost $600bn from the value of Nvidia, one of the biggest winners from spending on AI chips, on Monday. Neither the White House nor Nvidia disclosed details of the conversation afterwards, or whether specific agreements were made as a result of it. Speaking with reporters on Friday afternoon in the Oval Office, Trump called Huang a “great gentleman” and added the US would eventually put tariffs on computer chips. It was not clear if the chip tariffs were part of the discussion with Huang. Tariffs on chips and “things associated with chips” were part of a sweeping plan announced by Trump on Friday for new restrictions on imports from the US’s biggest trading partners.“We appreciated the opportunity to meet with President Trump and discuss semiconductors and AI policy,” Nvidia said. “Jensen and the president discussed the importance of strengthening US technology and AI leadership.”

DeepSeek’s AI leap has sparked calls in Washington for the US government to tighten export controls further on AI-related technology to make it even harder for China to make advancements in the sector.

On Saturday, Singapore’s government hit back at suggestions that DeepSeek could have acquired its AI chips from Nvidia’s subsidiary in the city state, as a way of avoiding US export controls.

US authorities were reported to be investigating how DeepSeek accumulated the chips and were focusing on Singapore, which accounts for more than a fifth of Nvidia’s revenues.

“We expect US companies, like Nvidia, to comply with US export controls and our domestic legislation,” Singapore’s government said in a statement.

“Our customs and law enforcement agencies will continue to work closely with their US counterparts.”

Last Monday, the same day DeepSeek released its latest model, Trump issued an executive order telling the state department and commerce department to review the US export control system “in light of developments involving strategic adversaries”.

Nvidia has long protested the expansion of US export controls that limit sales to China of its most powerful processors for AI. The Silicon Valley-based chipmaker has argued that constraining Chinese companies’ access to American technology would only fuel China’s innovation and development of its own local semiconductor industry.

DeepSeek said its breakthrough AI model was created using a fraction of the computing resources of US rivals such as OpenAI or Elon Musk’s xAI, which are assembling clusters of hundreds of thousands of chips. The final training run for its V3 model cost $5.6mn using just over 2,000 Nvidia chips, DeepSeek said in a research paper, although that figure excluded prior development costs.

Analysts at SemiAnalysis, a chip consultancy, have estimated that DeepSeek and its sister company, hedge fund High-Flyer, have access to about 60,000 Nvidia graphics processing units and have spent more than $500mn on chips to date.

Nvidia, which was the most valuable US company until Monday’s stock market panic, was co-founded by Huang more than 30 years ago, turning the Taiwan-born businessman into one of America’s richest people. He is now one of Silicon Valley’s longest-serving CEOs.

In a letter to Mike Waltz, the new US national security adviser, the Republican chair and top Democrat on the House China committee, said the DeepSeek advance underscored the need for “frequently updating export controls”. Josh Hawley, a Republican senator, has also introduced legislation that would prohibit the export to China of AI technology.

As the Biden administration tightened controls on what US chipmakers could sell in China since October 2022, Nvidia has continued to sell adapted versions of its AI chips there, alongside GPUs for the country’s burgeoning PC gaming market. Customers with billing addresses in China, including Hong Kong, accounted for $11.6bn in revenues in the nine months ending in October, according to Nvidia’s latest results.



Donald Trump’s crisis negotiator returned from Venezuela with six freed American prisoners after securing a commitment from the South American country’s authoritarian leader Nicolás Maduro to accept deported migrants.

Richard Grenell, the US president’s envoy for special missions, travelled to Venezuela on Friday to press Maduro to accept thousands of Venezuelan deportees, according to US officials, and to secure the release of US nationals taken prisoner by Caracas.

Donald Trump posted on his Truth Social platform on Saturday: “It is so good to have the Venezuela Hostages back home and, very important to note, that Venezuela has agreed to receive, back into their Country, all Venezuela illegal aliens who were encamped in the U.S . . .”

The Venezuelan government said in a statement that the talks were “respectful” and touched on migration, sanctions and detained US citizens, and that a “fresh start” was needed in relations between Washington and Caracas. It did not mention the release of the prisoners.

Grenell’s visit came just before secretary of state Marco Rubio embarked on his own trip to Latin America in a bid to demonstrate renewed US interest in the western hemisphere.

Grenell, a close confidant of Trump, made the trip after Maduro signalled his willingness to talk with the US president’s team, people familiar with the situation said. Russia, one of Maduro’s backers, sent a government plane to Caracas that landed 15 minutes before Grenell’s arrival on Friday.

Maduro, a close ally of Russia and Iran, has been shunned by the west and much of Latin America after claiming victory in a presidential election last July whose result was widely regarded as fraudulent. The administration of former US President Joe Biden and the European parliament recognised the main opposition candidate Edmundo González as president-elect.

Responding to a reporter on Friday while signing an executive order at the White House, Trump said Grenell’s visit did not grant legitimacy to Maduro’s presidency.

“We want to do something with Venezuela. I’ve been a very big opponent of Venezuela and Maduro,” he said. “They’ve treated us not so good, but they’ve treated, more importantly, the Venezuelan people, very badly.”

Grenell said in a post on X on January 20 that “diplomacy is back”, saying he had held “multiple conversations with Venezuelan officials” and that “talking is a tactic”. He held a private meeting with Maduro’s top political operator Jorge Rodríguez in Mexico in 2020 in the final days of the first Trump administration.

González this week urged Trump not to cut a deal with Maduro, and the Venezuelan opposition has been alarmed by meetings it held with him before Grenell travelled to Caracas.

“Grenell’s nonchalance and lack of concern for democracy and human rights has left everyone very concerned,” said an opposition figure who did not want to be named. The opposition fears that business interests will lobby Trump to cut a deal giving the US more access to Venezuela’s oil reserves, the world’s biggest.

Trump’s own position on Venezuela is unclear. He has said little about the country during the election campaign or since taking office, beyond accusing Maduro of ruining the country and saying on January 20 that “we don’t have to buy their oil” — remarks interpreted by some as a negotiating tactic to put pressure on Maduro. Ahead of Maduro’s swearing-in, Trump referred to González as “president-elect” and the opposition as “freedom fighters”.

A former official who worked in Trump’s first administration said the US president was mainly concerned about migration. “He’s just revoked temporary protected status for 600,000 Venezuelan [migrants] in the US and there are easily twice that number there illegally,” the former official said. “Trump has got to get rid of them all from the US.”

During his first administration, Trump imposed “maximum pressure” sanctions on Maduro’s government and recognised then-opposition leader Juan Guaidó as Venezuela’s legitimate president. But the strategy failed to dislodge Maduro, who remained in power with the help of Russia, China and Iran, while Guaidó eventually fled to Florida.

“Trump regards the opposition as losers,” the former official said. “He gave them a lot and they failed. There is no way he is going back down that road again.”



On Sunday night in Chicago, Steve Quirk by habit checked the S&P 500 futures prices and noted a large fall. The following day, the markets veteran was looking at figures showing a surge in overnight trading on online broker Robinhood as investor darling Nvidia slumped amid worries about Chinese AI upstart DeepSeek.

Nvidia’s travails produced the second-biggest late-night trading session for Robinhood, best known for popularising smartphone-based trading. It has offered overnight dealing for the past 18 months and Monday ranked for volume behind only the night of the US presidential election in November.

“Our users don’t trade overnight once and go away,” says Quirk, Robinhood’s chief brokerage officer. “They look for an opportunity to do so again.”

Robinhood’s activity boom in the small hours is only the latest example of the growing interest in overnight trading — a trend fuelled by the availability of sophisticated trading apps on phones, and an increasingly knowledgeable base of small retail investors as comfortable trading Amazon from their sofas as they are shopping on it.

Many of these night owls developed a taste for trading during pandemic lockdowns, and a return to the office has pushed their investing habits outside of business hours. The overnight session — 8pm to 4am in New York — often sees them trading with Asia’s famously active household investors, who relish the chance to trade big US names in their daytime.

Although retail trading is big business in the US, where more than half of all households hold stocks directly, developments in mom-and-pop trading habits would normally mean little to the vastly bigger professional world of asset managers and Wall Street brokers.

But that is changing because of the growing interest in overnight trading from more established quarters. The New York Stock Exchange, the largest in the world, is one of a number of groups which are now looking to offer much longer trading windows.

This is pushing investment professionals to engage in surprisingly complex debates around the simplest-seeming questions.

When, for example, does a trading day begin and end if it runs around the clock? What would be the closing price of a stock — typically the reference point for trillions of dollars in funds — if the day were seamless?

Those are just a couple of the big questions about trading through the wee hours. Other worries include how portfolio managers deal with the risks of big moves in their holdings while they’re asleep, and the cost and difficulty of maintaining complex systems with little or no downtime.

“Talk 24-hour and the joke is, ‘I don’t know when our operations guy is going to sleep.’ That is an actual issue,” says Tyler Gellasch, chief executive of investor advocate Healthy Markets Association. “But I feel like that’s going to be the least of your worries when you wake up to a margin call on a big position.”

By some measures, stocks are already late to the overnight party.

The dollar trades 24 hours a day on various platforms around the world and dealing in S&P 500 index futures, which signal the likely market direction ahead of the New York opening, is brisk from the Tokyo morning onwards. Cryptocurrency investors, meanwhile, have never known anything but a 24-7 digital world.

From the earliest days of informal trading in lower Manhattan coffee houses, US stock markets have largely stuck to some form of a traditional business day, though precise hours have varied.

Even the rising power of west coast investors and companies has not altered the official New York 4pm close of business. The last major changes to the US day were made some two decades ago, when exchanges began offering pre- and after-market sessions that now run from 4am Eastern to the open, and from the close to 8pm Eastern, respectively.

Traders in Los Angeles and San Francisco, three hours behind New York, suck up 5am starts for the joy of beating the traffic as they head home soon after 1pm on days when there is little to generate activity after 4pm in New York.

Daytime trading for stocks is also practical because it involves so many parties: a million-plus people are employed directly in the US securities industry, and there are the executives of the companies whose shares are being traded and the regulators who oversee it all.

Adding to the complexity is the sheer scale of the $50tn market. Some 12bn shares are traded daily through millions of transactions. The counterparties include giant pension funds, high-speed traders dealing in milliseconds and individual investors trading a handful of shares. Every transaction must be agreed, with money and shares changing hands the next day. On top of all this is a web of intricate rules designed to ensure fair dealing.

Between 8pm and 4am in New York, overnight trading, including on Robinhood, is now mostly conducted through Blue Ocean, a so-called alternative trading system that launched in 2021 specifically to offer overnight access. Members of these alternative systems — also known as “dark pools” — trade among themselves at prices that are not made public.

While Blue Ocean’s volumes, about 40mn shares a night, are a tiny fraction of what the likes of the NYSE do on any regular day, it has steadily built a market linking American night owls with Asian day traders. Now two exchanges are eyeing its turf.

In November, the Securities and Exchange Commission tentatively approved 24 Exchange, or 24X, a Bermuda-based group backed by hedge fund billionaire Steve Cohen’s Point72 Ventures fund with plans to trade nearly all day long. Until recently, its main business had been currency trading. Once some key regulatory infrastructure is in place, it plans to open 23 hours a day with an hour for brokers to update their systems. Its approval makes it the first US exchange with an avowed goal of dealing overnight, although under industry pushback it shrank original plans that included weekend trading.

NYSE too, may soon join the sleepless fray. The SEC is yet to weigh in on its separate plan, put forward by the exchange a month earlier, that would see it extend its trading day from the current 4am-8pm to a much lengthier 1.30am-11.30pm.

The involvement of exchanges matters for the rest of the market because they are more tightly supervised than dark pools and are responsible for continuously publishing their best bid (buy) and offer (sell) prices through their trading day. These flow through a service known colloquially as the “tape”, against which any investor can compare the price they got from their broker, who has an obligation to execute trades at the best price.

“We’ve been hearing from multiple types of market participants for about two years now that they think there is demand and opportunity to extend hours further,” says Kevin Tyrrell, head of markets at NYSE.

“We’ve also had global investors looking to the US more and more — for trading and investing and also large companies transferring their listings from other regions into the US. So it seems very natural for us to be having these conversations.”

Big industry reservations remain, however, from managing risk to having to operate all night.

“It’s not a solo game. Traders are always asking an analyst or a fund manager, ‘Hey, does this new price point mean something?’” says one senior dealer at a large global investor. “I think that’s the biggest fear for folks, is that they end up on call 24 hours.”

In June 2024, Justin Schack, a partner at Wall Street broker Rosenblatt Securities, appeared before a House committee looking into the US market set-up.

“It’s fair to say that no one with a blank slate would design such a complex system to achieve such a simple task,” Schack, who heads Rosenblatt’s market structure team, told the politicians when describing the current system.

Other Wall Street brokers agree. Ask them about the issues that 24-hour advocates must address and they list thorny ones: clearing or guaranteeing trades, building out technology and staffing, running the “tape” to cover longer hours and ensuring all their systems can cope.

Traders have their concerns too, from how much stocks can move to whether regulators might factor overnight prices into how they apply daytime rules.

“What are the rules for overnight trading? If you did have a big price dislocation, where does the stock stop? Without clarity around specific items, I don’t think you’ll get institutional buy-in,” says Mehmet Kinak, global head of equity trading at T Rowe Price, in a reference to the so-called circuit breakers operating in daylight hours, which temporarily halt a stock that moves particularly sharply.

Kinak adds that thin liquidity during extended hours makes it an unattractive time for big players to trade US stocks. “What if a stock is indicated up 3 per cent and we happen to be a seller? By the time we are done executing an order for 200,000 shares, I’m not going to get a price anywhere near up 3 per cent, there’s just no depth or broad market participation.”

To guard against wild swings that can catch investors out, overnight trades currently operate under a limit order system, meaning investors cannot simply send buy or sell instructions, but must set the price at which they will trade. If no one takes that price, the order expires unfilled in the morning.

The global head of trading for a west coast asset manager agrees with Kinak that overnight offers limited trading opportunities for big investors, but cautions that not trading might not remove the dangers.

“The real questions, then, are about what we would have to consider in those hours for our oversight and technology,” he says. “Could a regulator come in and ask me about best execution, and point to prices overnight that I’m not capturing as part of my process? That could create an obligation to staff markets 24 hours. That’s a big burden to put on the entire industry.”

When the day starts and ends matters to investors everywhere too. Few in the industry want to change the official 4pm close — by far the busiest trading point in the current day because it is used to set the daily reference prices for traded securities, from which the $30tn-plus held in mutual and exchange traded funds take their value.

After the close, an entire system of clearing and settlement also kicks in, ensuring that sellers receive their payment and buyers have their new holdings re-registered under their name.

Additionally, it is when systems are adjusted for changes to shares, such as a company altering the number of shares trading or announcing a dividend payment date. These adjustments move share prices and brokers bear the cost if they miss one: in 2023 Robinhood took a $57mn hit when its systems failed to register a company that shrunk its share count.

24X plans a one-hour downtime at 7pm, while NYSE is suggesting two hours, not starting until 11.30pm. Those schedules raise some eyebrows.

“How are brokers going to test their systems? In the wee hours? We’d potentially be making thousands of market participants adjust to being able to work in the middle of the night and also work very quickly,” says Healthy Markets’ Gellasch.

Most of the questions industry insiders are asking do not yet have definitive answers.

They can seem outsized too, given that more than 80 per cent of trading today, despite the pre- and post-market sessions, is still done within the regular New York market hours of 9.30am to 4pm — and no one expects an imminent, sustained boom in back-of-the-clock dealing.

But the discussions keep growing. The merits, or otherwise, of 24-hour trading often produce the liveliest debates at industry conferences around the US. They veer between a sense of inevitability and questioning the need for an overnight session at all. Privately, many traders are worried about the knock-on effect on their personal lives if trading hours get longer.

Those already trading overnight are busy building ties with Asian brokers. Blue Ocean is opening a second Asia office in South Korea less than a year after its first in Tokyo. And on a trip this month to the region, 24X executives said they were overwhelmed with meeting requests.

“Asian retail investors have a very aggressive investing style and they want to trade Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla in their daytime and we’re going to be well positioned to capture that,” says Dmitri Galinov, chief executive of 24X. “As volumes rise, institutions will come in.”

Meanwhile, more big US names are being drawn to trading out of hours. In November, Charles Schwab, the largest US broker, boasting $10tn in client assets, began offering overnight trading in more than 500 stocks and ETFs to its most active trader clients, up from 24 ETFs previously.

“Overnight trading has developed to the point we felt we could expand our offer,” says James Kostulias, head of trading services at Charles Schwab. “It’s not a new discussion by any means but it is now a reality.”



When Jake Sullivan enters the private room at Rasika West End, I joke with the former US national security adviser that I would have dressed down had I known he would be casual. “Smart casual,” he corrects me with a smile.

Sullivan has picked a modern Indian restaurant just blocks from where he has lived in Washington for the past four years with his wife Maggie Goodlander, the newly elected congresswoman from New Hampshire. “This was kind of a date place,” he says, making me feel slightly like an imposter.

Judging by the lack of commotion, you would not realise my guest had just spent four years at the heart of the White House, dealing with a Chinese spy balloon, nuclear threats from Russian president Vladimir Putin and conflicts across the Middle East. The 48-year-old was also the lead architect of what he described as a “new Washington consensus” that fused economic and national security policies, driven by his view that America needed a “foreign policy for the middle class”.

Before we pivot to more serious issues, I have a sensitive question. Who is more Irish, Jake Sullivan or Joe Biden?

“If we’re going on number of times asserting Irishness in life, Joe Biden beats me,” he says playfully, before noting that Biden, who generally only touts his Irish background, also has French and English roots. “I am mostly, if not entirely, Irish,” he continues, before delivering the killer blow: “[The name] Biden, I think, is English.”

Our waitress is hovering. “I’m just gonna get the chicken tikka masala,” he says. I order tandoori duck makani.

The wallpaper in the room depicts monkeys smoking cigars and drinking vodka, which makes his pitch for sparkling water disappointing. I twist his arm — with minimal effort. “Day drinking,” he laughs, and orders an Italian Valpolicella Ripasso.

I want to ask about November 5, when Kamala Harris lost to Donald Trump but Sullivan’s wife was elected to Congress. How did he feel about losing the White House? “Honestly, that night, it didn’t fully sink in. I was so excited for Maggie,” he says. “It was a wonderful night, and then a harder morning.”

Months earlier, there was another difficult moment when Biden had a catastrophic debate against Trump. Was Sullivan, a former university champion debater, surprised, or had there been signs that Biden was slipping? “I had not seen that coming, flat out had not seen it,” he says. “I thought it was going to be a seismic event in the campaign.”

Critics argue that Biden’s closest aides must have realised that he was slowing mentally. But Sullivan insists that he was taken by complete surprise. “It was not at all consistent with my experience.”

As our wine arrives, I ask if he has started to think about why the Democrats lost the White House. “I’ve started to, but not nearly as much as I did in 2016. On November 9 2016, I was unemployed on my couch and could just sit and think about it indefinitely,” he says.

He thinks the outcome of the 2016 election was “deeply structural” and marked a “delayed reckoning of the 2008 financial crisis and a deep wellspring of anger among the American people that the system had failed them”. “[2024] may just be one of those elections where you have a Democrat running against a Republican at a time of high prices and anti-incumbent global sentiment and the Republican narrowly beat the Democrat and it’s not really about something existential,” he says. “Or maybe it will bear out that it’s something more existential.”

Switching to his time in the White House, I ask what he regards as his biggest accomplishment. He says he is proud to have helped create a situation where the “core engines of American power are humming”.

“Our alliances are stronger than they’ve been in a very long time. Our competitors and adversaries are weaker too in ways that have defied expectations, certainly with China. And we’ve produced that very strong American hand without getting entangled in war overseas,” he argues.

He continues by saying that the domestic investment in chips and export controls on AI-related chips, coupled with efforts to boost the defence industrial base and diversify supply chains, marked a new approach to policy. But he stresses that it is a “generational project” that he hopes the Trump administration will adopt and build on.

China policy, he adds, was another achievement. “America is in a demonstrably better position in the long-term competition with China than we were, and yet we did it while stabilising the relationship and finding areas to work together.”

He says the US and China are in a “decisive decade” that will determine which comes out ahead in key areas such as artificial intelligence and the transition to a clean energy economy. “Four out of those 10 years in the decisive decade . . . [have] turned in America’s favour in a really significant way,” says Sullivan, adding that the export controls the US imposed on high-end chips and manufacturing equipment have had a “demonstrable impact”.

Days after our lunch, a Chinese company called DeepSeek stunned Silicon Valley by unveiling an AI model that appears to rival US models. After the news broke, I emailed Sullivan to get his reaction. He says it shows that the US needs to “stay on our game” but he is “still confident in the American lead” in AI. He stresses that it “only reinforces” his view on the importance of export controls.

Another critical area in the decisive decade is US deterrence in the face of what Sullivan describes as the “largest peacetime military build-up in human history” being undertaken by China. The US boosted deterrence by bolstering its alliances and urging allies to work more closely with each other, Sullivan says. He adds that Aukus — the US-UK-Australia agreement to enable Canberra to procure nuclear-powered submarines — was a “huge deal”.

“It’s a strategic marriage between the United States and Australia for half a century,” he says.

As our dishes arrive, Sullivan says his biggest regret is how the US handled its withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, which led to the deaths of 13 members of the American military. He says the administration had decided that pulling out too rapidly could destroy morale in Kabul and lead to the collapse of the Afghan government — but it ended up falling anyway.

“A lesson learned from that is, if there are risks associated with an evacuation, just move out early, even if it comes with some friction with the host government,” says Sullivan.

Over four years, he dealt with multiple crises involving China, including its 2021 hypersonic missile test, its huge military exercises in response to then US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s trip to Taiwan in 2022, and the Chinese spy balloon that flew over the US in 2023. Which stands out in his mind?

He cites the spy balloon saga, which followed the “extreme tensions” sparked by Pelosi’s Taiwan visit. “It felt like we were in a very deep hole, but something more than that. It felt like, in living colour, the risk of a downward spiral in the US-China relationship was not merely abstract. This could go bad.”

I am still puzzled as to whether China intentionally flew the balloon over the US, or if it was blown off course by weather. He says it is hard to say without veering into classified areas, but drops a hint. “You can find Biden comments publicly . . . where his personal opinion was that this was not intentional,” he says. “That’s what I’ll say.”

A more recent espionage case is a months-long Chinese hacking attack against US telecoms networks called “Salt Typhoon”. “What makes Salt Typhoon unique is the sheer scale of access,” he says about the ongoing attack. “They weren’t just going into a senior government official’s phone. They were going into the major American telecommunications companies, Verizon, AT&T and T-Mobile, and picking any phone they wanted to listen to.”

Sullivan says a critical question is whether US telecoms companies remain “highly vulnerable” to hacking from China. “I would say right now, today, they are,” he warns.

I suddenly realise I have been attacking the plain naan that Sullivan ordered and not my garlic naan. But we are focused more on the conversation than our curries, so I hope he has not noticed.

I want to return to the critical issue of Taiwan. Was there ever a time when he worried that Washington and Beijing were heading towards some kind of military conflict?

“Beijing began to develop a perception that the direction of American policy on Taiwan was inexorably toward the end of the status quo,” he recalls. “If Beijing became convinced there’s only one way to stop Taiwan independence, and it’s grab Taiwan or bomb Taiwan, they would do it,” he warns.

As a result, it was critical to send a “very clear message of deterrence” while making clear at the same time that Washington was not trying to upend the status quo.

“The US and China have kept this delicate balance for decades,” he says. “We just need to practise a disciplined approach that sustains that out into the future. If we do . . . we can sustain it. I do not believe war is inevitable.”

Elsewhere in Asia, Biden made a big bet on India by deepening technology and security co-operation. As Sullivan touts their achievements — starting with how Biden elevated the Quad grouping of the US, India, Japan and Australia — our waitress removes his plate. “You haven’t done very much damage,” I quip. “I’m a light eater,” he says.

The goal of closer ties with India, I suggest, was not helped by the assassination of a Sikh separatist in Vancouver and a thwarted assassination plot in New York, both suspected of having links to Indian intelligence. Under pressure from the US, New Delhi launched an investigation that remains open after more than a year. Sullivan says it is important to get answers. “I hope the Trump administration will keep pressing.”

I ask how he evaluates the situation in Ukraine. “The question is, can the current administration display sufficient staying power that Putin sees we’re going to hang in there and the costs are going to continue to mount?” he says. “In which case, I do believe there’s a deal to be done.”

Just before our lunch, Trump had threatened to hit Russia with more tariffs and sanctions if there was no agreement to end the war, which Sullivan says was a “good” move.

Biden came under criticism for not providing certain weapons systems, including F-16 fighter jets, as quickly as requested by Kyiv. Sullivan pushes back. Biden approved F-16 transfers in May 2023, but the Ukrainian air force has only 18 jets because, Sullivan explains, it has only 16 pilots trained to fly the sophisticated fighters.

After he orders mint tea and I ask for a coffee, Sullivan presses home his point. “The conventional wisdom that we did too little too late, and if only we had given this weapons system at this time rather than that time something would be dramatically different in the war, is not borne out by any serious review of the evidence,” he says.

We move on to Iran. Sullivan thinks the regime in Tehran is weaker than at any time since the Iran-Iraq war, which ended in 1988. How does he expect Trump to handle the issue? “I predict a robust debate in this administration between an audacious diplomatic play and an audacious military play,” he responds, prompting me to ask whether he thinks Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu will be tempted to launch a military strike.

“Without personalising it to Netanyahu, I would say the senior leadership of Israel, both political and military as well as intelligence, will be sorely tempted to take advantage of this moment.”

I ask about Gaza and whether he believes the Biden administration had the right balance amid criticism that it did not put enough pressure on Netanyahu to stop the killing of civilians.

“There was immense human suffering in Gaza, and so for me to sit here and say, ‘No, no, it all went great,’ would display a total lack of human empathy. On the other hand, the idea of cutting weapons off from Israel when they were taking incoming from several fronts all at once . . . I’m not sure how I could have justified that. So, it’s hard.

“It’s probably the single biggest thing in the four years where only some level of perspective gained over time will allow me to fully judge what I thought we did right and what I thought we didn’t do right.”

We have been talking for well over two hours. Putting policy questions aside, I want to learn more about the man before our time is up.

After four intense years with less than two weeks of vacation, Sullivan’s immediate plans do not involve work. He is flying to Utah to go skiing with friends the next day and is planning a guys’ hiking trip to the Grand Canyon and Horseshoe Bend in Arizona.

He is also looking forward to reading books after having almost no time in the White House beyond a little “escapist” reading. He played soccer in high school and raves about The Club by Jonathan Clegg and Joshua Robinson, about the Premier League. His interest in English football stems from his time at Oxford university, when he started following Chelsea.

So, what is next, I ask? His response is refreshingly honest in a city where people are constantly posturing. “This is a heavy answer,” he starts. “Maggie and I have been over the course of these four years . . . trying to start a family and had some great difficulties,” he continues, referring to a traumatic miscarriage his wife suffered. “My full-time job is to figure out how we could do that,” Sullivan tells me. “Maybe adoption.”

They have a house in New Hampshire, which they believe would be a good state in which to raise kids. Sullivan is contemplating taking a position teaching at a university in Boston, which would only be a 45-minute commute.

The restaurant has almost emptied. As he is about to leave, he says half-jokingly about our lunch interview that he will read it with “great anxiety”.

I realise I didn’t notice if he finished his wine. “I believe I did,” he says to my relief. Earlier, I had told him that — as an Irish citizen — I would get in trouble with Ireland’s ambassador to Washington, Geraldine Byrne Nason, if I failed to convince the proud Irish-American to have a drink.

“I’m out of work now, so I’m entitled to a glass,” Sullivan quips before heading out into the bitter cold.

Demetri Sevastopulo is the FT’s US-China correspondent

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning



A curious thing is likely to happen next week: Donald Trump may well be handed positive headlines as a result of record-high immigration. Perhaps more curious still, a similar phenomenon in the UK is instead giving Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves a headache.

In both cases, the narrative is being shaped by how labour market statistics deal with the revelation that the population is larger than was previously realised. But this plays out in different ways on the two sides of the Atlantic.

Last quarter, Britain’s Office for National Statistics revised upward its estimates of net immigration during the two years ending in December 2023, calculating that around 300,000 more people than initially thought arrived and stayed in the UK, a 20 per cent bump. This increase, as well as some of the updated assumptions beneath the surface, fed into revised population projections published earlier this week.

If that sounds like a big adjustment, the US Census Bureau then increased its estimates of net immigration for 2022 and 2023 by almost 90 per cent, from 2.1mn to 4mn, adding another 2.8mn for 2024. As a result, US population growth last year is now thought to have been the fastest in decades.

To be clear: the fact that these revisions happen is a good thing. In both cases, the way immigration is counted is improving, aided in large part by the incorporation of administrative data, which is more accurate and timely than survey-based sources. At any rate, it’s far better to have revisions and more accurate numbers, than no revisions and still the wrong numbers.

But substantial shifts like these don’t just change what we thought we knew about population size and growth rates. They influence economic indicators too, not least labour market statistics.

Next Friday’s monthly US jobs report, the first of Trump’s second term, will incorporate a raft of revisions to the underlying survey data, among them the dramatic upward adjustment to the population size.

Analyses from the Brookings Institution and Jed Kolko, formerly a senior economist under Joe Biden, indicate that, contrary to reports last year, the new figures will probably show that native-born Americans are not losing out in the job market relative to immigrants. In fact, US-born employment is growing.

The old, erroneously low population figures artificially lowered estimated employment levels derived from America’s main household economic survey, causing US-born employment to appear to be falling. In reality, population growth was so high that even though the native-born share had fallen, the native-born number still rose.

Across the Atlantic, similar revisions have a very different impact. Well-publicised problems with Britain’s labour force survey mean the UK increasingly leans on administrative data to take the temperature of the labour market. And that shows that the number of working-age payrolled employees flatlined for most of last year, before dipping.

Crucially, because these figures are counts based on tax records, not proportions derived from surveys, unexpectedly high population numbers only grow the denominator in the employment rate, not both sides of the equation as in the US. As a result, stagnant UK job numbers translate into a marked deterioration in labour market conditions when viewed against the backdrop of robust immigration-driven population growth.

The number of working-age UK employees is down 0.2 percentage points year-on-year, but expressed as a proportion of the population the dip is almost a full percentage point — the deepest since 2008, pandemic aside. Where the rapid labour market loosening of 2008 was mainly driven by a shrinking numerator (job losses), this one comes primarily from an expanding denominator (possibly inflated by jobless arrivals).

The depth of this downturn is probably a lower bound, since some recent arrivals may be self-employed or in other types of employment that the UK’s tax-based job figures struggle to capture. But the general picture of population growth outpacing job growth is clear.

While statistics like the numbers of people and workers in the country might feel solid, the array of revisions and methodological differences highlight the flimsy nature of many narratives that form around them. The picture gets more accurate over time, but there will be blurry moments along the way.

john.burn-murdoch@ft.com, @jburnmurdoch



The writer is director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute

Wall Street’s confidence in US technological leadership was shaken this week with the unveiling of DeepSeek’s latest artificial intelligence model. The Chinese start-up seemed to come out of nowhere.

This episode should highlight the wisdom of President Donald Trump’s approach to AI. His executive order on the technology is admirably clear: “It is the policy of the United States to sustain and enhance America’s global AI dominance.” He revoked the policies of the Biden administration, which were “to advance and govern the development and use of AI” in accordance with several goals, including “advancing equity” and ensuring that AI does not “worsen job quality” or cause “harmful labour-force disruptions”.

I am glad to have a president who prioritises AI’s importance to economic prosperity and national security. And this is not the only good move by Trump among the blitz of activity since his inauguration.

His efforts to deregulate the energy sector and to expand geothermal and nuclear energy production are similarly laudable. They will increase the reliability of electricity supply and reduce energy costs for households and businesses. The new president has already reversed Biden’s foolish pause on new export permits for liquefied natural gas.

Meanwhile, ending Lina Khan’s reign as head of the nation’s antitrust enforcement agency has breathed new life into the business community.

All this is unleashing animal spirits — and not just among top bankers and chief executives. Sentiment is surging on Main Street as well. In December, the National Federation of Independent Businesses’ small business survey recorded the largest monthly increase since 1983 in the net percentage of companies expecting the economy to improve. This positive sentiment could translate into expansion, innovation and investment, quickening productivity growth and increasing wages.

Elsewhere, the new Department of Government Efficiency should be applauded for attempting to increase the efficiency of the federal government. Ronald Reagan remarked that “a government bureau is the nearest thing to eternal life we’ll ever see on this earth”. He made that observation in 1964. Since then, federal government spending as a share of annual GDP has grown by more than 30 per cent. If Doge is able to work with Congress to prove Reagan wrong, all the better.

Public sector employees hold positions of public trust, and some of Trump’s efforts to hold government workers to higher performance standards are to be welcomed. For example, the vast majority of them should be expected to go to work in their offices five days per week, where they will be most productive and able to generate the highest return on taxpayers’ dollars.

Trump has a different approach on tax, too. The Biden administration wanted to sign up to an international corporate tax cartel, known as Pillar Two, in order to keep other nations from reducing business taxes. Trump wants to further reduce corporate taxes in the US. I’m with him.

The president was also right to halt the disbursement of $300bn in green energy funding. It would be better to use those funds to finance business tax cuts like full expensing, which would increase investment, productivity and wages.

Trump has been president for less than two weeks, and the ultimate success or failure of all of these initiatives will depend on their specific design, implementation and execution. This is especially true of immigration. Deporting, say, 200,000 illegal immigrants this year who have committed serious crimes would be good for the nation. But attempting to deport, say, 2mn illegal immigrants in 2025 would hurt workers, businesses and communities.

Similarly, if done properly, efforts to roll back diversity, equity and inclusion schemes could increase focus on merit and reduce racial discrimination in the job market. But they could also exacerbate discrimination if handled poorly.

There’s plenty about the new administration to criticise, to be sure. For example, Trump’s decision to pardon violent January 6 insurrectionists was appalling. On economics, among other examples, his threats to increase tariffs on America’s allies could reduce business investment and weaken international alliances. And he is likely to continue to refuse to cut Medicare and social security spending, which is driving the nation’s unsustainable fiscal trajectory.

But the president’s critics won’t do themselves any favours by not being open to the good things his administration will do — and has already done.



Ten days into the Trump administration, it’s hard to say which is worse — the targeted spreading of fear by raids on immigrant workers and native Americans or the wanton destruction caused by the casual suspension of foreign aid. Earlier this week, secretary of state Marco Rubio had to rush to issue an emergency temporary reprieve to the 20mn people, including half a million children, currently being kept alive by antiretroviral drugs under the US Pepfar (President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief) programme, principally in Africa. The edict suspending foreign aid had reportedly already caused some Aids sufferers to be denied drugs, and Pepfar’s future remains uncertain.

Pepfar has helped turn a pandemic engulfing much of the continent into just another public health problem to be managed. It’s striking that its creator was George W Bush, like Trump a conservative president who otherwise diminished the US’s reputation abroad and trashed its fiscal probity at home.

The standard view of acts such as cutting aid is that they are foolish even on the basis of hard-headed self-interest because they diminish the US’s soft power abroad. That’s possibly true, but Pepfar and the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA), a separate aid programme set up around the same time by Bush, were not simply crude attempts to buy influence. They proved a genuine good-faith break with decades of cynical American aid that had kept foreign policy clients like Pakistan and Egypt in the US camp but did little to make lives there better off.

As a reporter then covering aid and development in Washington, it took me some time, amid the administration’s dissembling over the Iraq war and much else, to realise that the Bush aid initiatives were for real. After a while it became obvious and even occasionally amusing that the US was earnestly inventing aid programmes as it went along. The MCA was triumphantly announced ahead of a UN development summit in Mexico in 2002 and then had to be “clarified” a few days later to reveal that the budget was twice as big as first claimed. The rather endearing story at the time was that the White House had simply misunderstood its own numbers.

Bush announced Pepfar in a State of the Union speech in 2003, saying it would replicate in other African countries the successful Ugandan model of administering antiretrovirals (ARVs) through a network of medical centre hubs with satellite distribution units. Leaving aside the irony of the Bush administration encouraging a socialist model of centralised public healthcare, the plan again had to be somewhat changed — one of the main architects being the immunologist Anthony Fauci of Covid pandemic fame — after it turned out most recipient countries didn’t actually have Uganda’s institutional set-up.

But Pepfar not only worked, it also challenged development orthodoxy. Rather than painstakingly building systems of public finance and healthcare, it hurled money at a specific problem and got results. It was widely believed mass ARV therapy would not be possible. Pepfar showed it was. The US also overcame its intrinsic suspicion of multilateral initiatives and led the financing of a new “Global Fund” to combat Aids, tuberculosis and malaria set up in 2002. Credible estimates are that Pepfar has saved 26mn lives.

The lobbying that overcame the traditional visceral US resistance to foreign aid also managed to unearth hitherto unsuspected reserves of compassion on Capitol Hill, often linked to religiosity. At the time, I spoke to Republican lawmakers who seemed to have only the sketchiest idea about how development aid worked but had received visits from the rock star Bono, trusted him and were accordingly prepared to spend taxpayers’ money to help Africa.

Remarkably, Bono persuaded North Carolina senator Jesse Helms, the hardline conservative Republican who used to talk about aid going down foreign “ratholes”, to fund debt relief and HIV-Aids treatment in developing countries. Helms was won over in particular by the plight of babies born with HIV who were indisputably innocent victims. The general tactic of seeding every development campaign with an emoting celebrity has become tedious, but this was impressive work.

But the aid programmes weren’t part of a general internationalist mindset. The Republican isolationist tradition remained strong — and was exploited by Trump with regard to Bush’s Iraq war during campaigning for the presidential nomination in 2016. In fact, Bush himself allowed Iraq to slide into chaos after the disastrous invasion. He was fundamentally not a nation-builder.

The global Doha round of trade talks in effect collapsed during Bush’s administration, as the US (along with other countries) was not prepared to make the sacrifices necessary to get it to work. Despite Pepfar, US relative influence in Africa continued to diminish, as it had since the end of the cold war. The 2000s was the decade when the Chinese rather than the American footprint expanded over the continent.

Pepfar and the other aid programmes simply reflected a moment when campaigners managed to mine a vein of decency in a Republican administration and among lawmakers on Capitol Hill. The fact that it was threatened with casual destruction this week shows how far decency has leached from the White House. If it still exists among Republicans in Congress, it’s hiding very effectively. The world has become darker for it.

alan.beattie@ft.com



On Monday, the world watched as $1tn was wiped off the stock market in a single day, a huge bonfire kindled by the little-known Chinese artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek.

Its release of a new AI model, known as R1, upended assumptions about US supremacy in AI and raised the prospect that some in China are learning how to beat Silicon Valley at its own game.

The model can “reason” to solve complex scientific problems and performs at par with leading-edge software from US tech giants, but was apparently developed at a fraction of the price of those models.

It quickly dislodged OpenAI’s ChatGPT as the most-downloaded free app on the US iOS App store.

Alongside the geopolitical challenge, DeepSeek’s breakthrough has dual implications for the tech industry. Firstly, it is likely to accelerate the commercial development and uptake of AI, much as ChatGPT did in 2022.

At the same time, it threatens to demolish investment assumptions that have underpinned the entire US stock market, by seeming to show that developing advanced AI models does not require vast amounts of infrastructure and thus capital.

The question being asked with sudden urgency from California to Wall Street: Has China caught up in AI at just the moment that many working in the field claim they are on the brink of a historic breakthrough that will put machines on a par with human-level intelligence — a threshold known as artificial general intelligence?

“[DeepSeek’s] algorithmic innovations remind us that China and the US are neck and neck and that our technological edge isn’t guaranteed, pushing our industry to make AI more efficient,” says Eric Schmidt, the former chief executive and chair of Google.

“To get to AGI first, we’ll need to continue to invest in talent, support our vibrant open-source ecosystem, and ensure we out-innovate, not just outspend, our competitors.”

DeepSeek was founded on Silicon Valley-style levels of ambition. It started out in 2023 as a side project for the eccentric hedge fund billionaire Liang Wenfeng, just as the race to replicate ChatGPT was heating up. It has since turned into one of China’s leading AI labs.

“Why is Silicon Valley so innovative? Because they dare to do things,” Liang said in an interview last year. “When ChatGPT came out, the tech community in China lacked confidence in frontier innovation.”

He added: “From investors to [Chinese] big tech, they all thought that the gap was too big and opted to focus on applications instead. But innovation starts with confidence.”

As state-owned funds in China have taken on a larger role funding start-ups in the past few years, the entrepreneurial ecosystem has felt pressured to guarantee returns for fear of losing the country’s assets.

DeepSeek is distinctive among Chinese generative AI start-ups in that it has not raised any external financing and has therefore been free from these constraints.

A pure research lab, echoing the early days of DeepMind in the UK and OpenAI in the US, DeepSeek has focused all its effort on pushing the field of AI forward, rather than trying to make money. And even though it prides itself on being entirely founded on homegrown talent, it has adopted a culture often found in the US tech heartland.

“It’s unique among Chinese AI companies,” says an AI investor in China. “There is no politics or management friction like at the other big tech companies or larger start-ups. People don’t have specific titles or reporting lines.”

DeepSeek’s origins as a quantitative hedge fund meant it had engineering talent with a deep understanding of chips. Its breakthrough turned on its apparent success at training advanced AI models without spending the hundreds of millions of dollars its US rivals have.

It claimed that the final training step for R1 cost only $5.6mn. The figure, however, doesn’t include many other costs involved in developing its models, including computing infrastructure and previous training runs, making it hard to draw precise comparisons.

It may also have cut corners to save costs: OpenAI claims to have evidence that DeepSeek trained on the output from OpenAI’s own models — not something allowed under its terms of use, though an underhand practice thought to be widely used by US companies as well.

Ironically, Washington’s attempt to hamper China’s AI sector by imposing export controls on high-end US chips from 2022 onwards may have contributed to DeepSeek’s breakthrough.

Without access to leading-edge silicon, the company was forced to find innovative ways to squeeze higher performance out of the less sophisticated chips it was able to buy.

The company’s claims about the low cost and advanced capabilities of its models have touched off a heated debate about how disruptive the company will turn out to be. Silicon Valley’s leaders have paid tribute to its innovations, while also playing down their significance.

OpenAI CEO Sam Altman called the R1 model “impressive”, while Mark Zuckerberg, chief executive of Meta, credited the company with making “advances that we will hope to implement in our systems”.

Yet Zuckerberg also cast DeepSeek’s breakthrough as just one among many in a field that is moving at breakneck speed, making it hard to tell how deeply its low-cost approach would change the dynamics of the industry, he said.

According to some China tech watchers, DeepSeek’s advances aren’t significant enough to change the fact that the country’s AI companies have been fast followers, largely devoted to emulating their US counterparts rather than setting the direction themselves.

“DeepSeek’s work falls into that category. What would really turn the tables in US-China competition is if they built something that actually pushed the frontier. We’ll see if they get there,” says Helen Toner, an AI policy analyst at Georgetown’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology, and a former board member at OpenAI.

Yet others say that the fact that a Chinese tech start-up has been behind the latest head-turning advance represents a watershed moment, changing the dynamic in the AI race between the two countries.

“DeepSeek’s latest models may not mean that China is pulling ahead of the US in the AI race, but it does prove that Chinese companies are making remarkable strides in software innovation that mitigate the constraints imposed by US export controls,” wrote Tilly Zhang, a China tech analyst at Gavekal Dragonomics, a China-focused research firm, in a note published this week.

“The race for AI leadership is no longer just about who has access to the best chips, but about who puts them to best use.”

While the significance of DeepSeek’s technical breakthroughs is a matter of debate, there is no mistaking the shockwave that passed through the stock market as investors digested the implications of its main innovation: dramatically cutting the cost of training for the most advanced AI models.

DeepSeek’s models appear to undermine the argument that US AI companies have made vociferously over the past year: that AI advances require vast amounts of capital and infrastructure to develop and deploy their technology at scale.

Instead, they suggest that far more expensive, US-developed models would have little to differentiate them, raising fears among investors of a sharp deflationary shock.

“There was a sense of American exceptionalism — that only America had this technology, and only Americans had the money to do this,” says Jim Tierney, a US growth stock investor at AllianceBernstein. “The commoditisation of these models is happening much faster than we thought.”

Much of Silicon Valley fell back on the argument that others in the industry will quickly copy DeepSeek’s innovations, bringing down the cost of training AI models across the board. Executives like Microsoft’s Satya Nadella claimed it will make the technology more affordable for customers and boost its use — something that would benefit the entire industry.

In a sign of the company’s confidence in its status, DeepSeek has published its research and released its models in “open-weights” form, a more limited version of open-source software that allows anyone to download, use and modify the technology.

The move will attract a wide international following among software developers looking for “open” models to build applications on. Most models developed by Silicon Valley’s leading AI companies remain closed, though there are exceptions — notably Meta, whose open models have surged in popularity.

But Deepseek’s model is accessible at a far lower cost. The Chinese company says it charges only 1.4 cents for each 1mn tokens it generates — roughly equivalent to 700,000 words. By contrast, Meta charges $2.80 for the same output from its largest models.

“A whole number of developers are experimenting with what’s now a Chinese open source AI-based solution,” says Keegan McBride, a researcher at the Oxford Internet Institute who focuses on the geopolitics of AI. “It really shows that in the AI space, the US isn’t the only option on the table.”

While Yann LeCun, chief AI scientist at Meta, described DeepSeek in glowing terms as proof that “open-source models are surpassing proprietary ones”, the start-up nonetheless poses a direct challenge to Meta.

The company’s “claim to fame has been creating open-weight models that aren’t too far behind the bleeding edge, and DeepSeek just beat them at their own game,” says Toner.

Beyond Deepseek’s impact on the market for AI products, its breakthrough also promises to have geopolitical repercussions, coming at what many believe is a pivotal moment in the competition between the US and China for AI supremacy.

If R1 and its successors become the global standard for “open” AI models, it would handicap the US, warned Meta’s Zuckerberg. “For our national advantage, it’s important that it’s an American standard,” he said. “We want to build the AI system that people around the world are using.”

DeepSeek has “accelerated the urgency for people in every country to assess . . . the technological balance of power emerging between various countries,” says Craig Mundie, a Microsoft veteran and former White House adviser, who counsels OpenAI’s Sam Altman on tech policy and strategy.

If China has managed to get on to an equal footing with the US on AI, it has implications for everything that the technology could eventually be used for, warned Dario Amodei, CEO of US AI start-up Anthropic.

“It seems likely that China could direct more talent, capital and focus to military applications of the technology,” Amodei wrote of DeepSeek’s advances. “Combined with its large industrial base and military-strategic advantages, this could help China take a commanding lead on the global stage, not just for AI but for everything.”

Mundie, who also chairs the US-China AI Dialogue diplomatic forum established by the late US secretary of state Henry Kissinger, pointed out that AI was the “ultimate dual use technology”, meaning it has both positive and dangerous purposes.

The emergence of DeepSeek is likely to hang over discussions when the diplomatic group convenes within the next 90 days to discuss a multilateral but common safety structure for AI software, which Mundie writes about in his latest book Genesis, co-authored with Kissinger and Schmidt.

“It doesn’t mean everyone will have the same laws or rules, but [building] the architecture by which these machines grow up understanding human values and comport with societal choices everywhere in the world, I think is an urgent task,” Mundie says.

Meanwhile, aspiring young entrepreneurs in China are looking towards DeepSeek and its founder as inspiration to build a new generation of powerful technology.

A teenager who came to pay respects at Liang’s house in the village of Mililing this week says: “He is a pragmatic technologist. He put together a team that . . . surpassed those of companies like OpenAI that we couldn’t compete with before. He is a great person who has made contributions to China.”

Additional reporting by Melissa Heikkila in London



Donald Trump this week ordered work on the most ambitious missile shield in US history, one designed to destroy hypersonic missiles and prevent nuclear annihilation.

The US president dubbed it the “Iron Dome for America” — a nod to Israel’s renowned air defence system.

But the vision for Trump’s next-generation system, including space-based lasers, is actually much closer to Ronald Reagan’s so-called Star Wars programme, launched in 1983 at the height of the cold war.

Developing a kind of Star Wars 2.0 would cost hundreds of billions of dollars. The technological challenges it faces are immense. Nuclear experts also warned the initiative could provoke China and Russia to take countermeasures that would nullify its effects. It is partly why the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists moved its “Doomsday clock” one second closer to midnight this week.

The US president’s executive order, signed on Monday, gives defence secretary Pete Hegseth 60 days to flesh out a plan to defend the US against ballistic, hypersonic and advanced cruise missile attack.

Trump’s proposed system, outlined in the memo, is comprehensive, extraordinarily expensive and a different order of technical sophistication from Israel’s Iron Dome.

That system defends only small areas from short-range, low-flying and non-nuclear missiles. Trump’s initiative seeks to intercept intercontinental ballistic missiles that travel 100 times further and seven times faster. The US is also almost 450 times bigger than Israel.

Instead, Trump’s order demands the deployment of “space-based interceptors” — a web of satellites, some equipped with lasers. It then calls for the development of another layer of lower-altitude interceptors if the lasers fail.

In addition, it demands “capabilities to defeat missile attacks prior to launch” — in other words, a system that destroys the archer, not just the arrow.

Analysts say that a leakproof, space-based missile shield is all but impossible. “There is no magical security blanket,” said Tom Karako, a leading missile expert at the CSIS think-tank in Washington.

To detect, intercept and destroy ballistic nuclear missiles during their so- called boost phase, the three- to five-minute period before they enter orbit, would require laser beams effective over hundreds of kilometres. No such technology currently exists.

In part that is due to “thermal blooming”, whereby the energy from a laser heats up the atmosphere surrounding it and reduces the beam’s potency. While the effect is small in the near vacuum of outer space, it is much greater once the beam hits the earth’s atmosphere.

Powering the satellites that fire the lasers would also require them to have mini nuclear reactors, or perhaps an advanced system of solar panels. “That’s not impossible but . . . would require a major research and investment effort that couldn’t be completed in the short term,” said Fabian Hoffmann, a missile expert at the Oslo Nuclear Project.

Then there are costs, which Trump would need to convince Congress to fund.

A 2012 report by the National Academy of Science found that “even an austere and limited-capability” space-based defence system would require 650 satellites at a cost of $300bn. It also warned that it would be vulnerable to anti-satellite weapons — such as the space-based nuclear weapons that Russia has developed recently, according to US intelligence.

“Space-based missile defences have repeatedly been abandoned because they are expensive, very technically challenging and readily defeated,” said Laura Grego, research director for the Global Security Program at the Union of Concerned Scientists.

Effective technologies already exist. Ukraine has successfully used western-supplied systems — such as US-made Patriots and the German-manufactured IRIS-T — to destroy incoming Russian ballistic and hypersonic missiles.

The problem, again, is cost. The US already has a $60bn ground-based midcourse missile defence programme. This consists of 44 interceptors, deployed in Alaska and California, which are designed to knock out rogue long-range missiles from foes such as North Korea.

But as each one costs upwards of $50mn, expanding that system to cover all the US would be vastly expensive.

“One cannot put active defences everywhere that would be needed to defend cities, critical infrastructure and military sites,” said Stacie Pettyjohn of the Center for a New American Security think-tank.

Moreover, a 2000 technical analysis found that even a less-developed country such as North Korea could use long-understood countermeasures, such as decoys or a “cooled shroud” that covers the nuclear warhead to confound heat-seeking interceptor missiles.

“Current homeland missile defence systems, despite decades of development, may not even reliably counter rogue state threats,” said Zhao Tong, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

“Achieving comprehensive defence against Russia and China’s vastly larger missile arsenals would require astronomical spending without unprecedented technological breakthroughs,” he added.

Even a moderately successful Star Wars 2.0 would strip Russia and China of their retaliatory capability and could prompt them to embark on an accelerated arms race in order to retain nuclear parity.

“If one [nuclear power] can show it can defend itself while also having first- strike capability [for its nuclear weapons], that is destabilising,” said Manpreet Sethi, head of the nuclear programme at the Centre for Air Power Studies in New Delhi.

“It is an offensive threat that major power rivals cannot and will not ignore,” said Eric Heginbotham, an expert on Chinese nuclear issues at MIT. “Our intent may be defensive . . . but whatever the intent, if the capabilities are real, this will be regarded as a critical offensive threat.”

Adversaries could then take easily available countermeasures. Russia, for example, could load more nuclear warheads on existing ballistic missiles, or target areas with weaker defences.

“Adversaries could simply redirect attacks to numerous unprotected population centres — rendering the defence of select locations strategically meaningless,” Zhao said.

Analysts argued that a more sober approach would involve the US working to limit countries’ strategic nuclear arsenals — something Trump backed in a recent speech at Davos.

Conventional missile threats could meanwhile be addressed by beefing up lower-altitude systems, based on the ground or US naval ships. The cost would still be huge, but such an approach would be technically feasible and potentially avoid another arms race.

“The US should focus on strengthening lower-layer missile defences while striving to maintain the current balance of power in the nuclear domain,” Hoffmann said.

The space-based part of the programme would require hundreds of carrier satellites to be launched — a market currently dominated by Elon Musk’s SpaceX.

Although the US government has other contractors capable of sending carrier satellites into space, Musk’s rockets have a higher payload capacity, higher payload volume and are substantially cheaper than most competitors. They are also being launched at much greater frequency, with one launch on average every three days last year.

“A lot of people stand to make money,” said Grego of the Union of Concerned Scientists.

There would be trade-offs, however. SpaceX already has $20bn worth of government contracts and would probably have to sacrifice capacity reserved for populating its Starlink constellation — the company’s biggest revenue driver.

All this assumes the space-based programme, which Grego described as a “fantasy”, will be approved by Congress and goes ahead.

Cartography by Steven Bernard



Triumphalist glee lit up the Chinese internet this week. Just as Google DeepMind’s victory over China’s strongest Go player in 2017 showcased western brilliance in artificial intelligence, so DeepSeek’s release of a world-beating AI reasoning model has this month been celebrated as a stunning success in China.

DeepSeek’s smarter and cheaper AI model was a “scientific and technological achievement that shapes our national destiny”, said one Chinese tech executive. The start-up had become a key player in the “Chinese Large-Model Technology Avengers Team” that would counter US AI dominance, said another.

China’s delight, however, spelled pain for several giant US technology companies as investors questioned whether DeepSeek’s breakthrough undermined the case for their colossal spending on AI infrastructure. US tech and energy stocks lost $1tn of their market value on Monday, although they regained some ground later in the week.

The stereotypical image of China abroad may still be that of a state-subsidised, capital-intensive manufacturing economy that excels at churning out impressive low-cost hardware, such as smartphones, solar panels and electric vehicles. But, in truth, China long ago emerged as a global software superpower, outstripping the west in ecommerce and digital financial services, and it has invested massively in AI, too.

DeepSeek’s emergence confounds many of the outworn prejudices about Chinese innovation, although it is far from a typical Chinese company. It certainly invalidates the old saw that while the US innovates, China imitates and Europe regulates. In several ways, DeepSeek resembles a bootstrapped Silicon Valley start-up, even if it was not founded in a garage. Launched in 2023, the company has the same high-flown ambition as OpenAI and Google DeepMind to attain human-level AI, or artificial general intelligence (AGI). But its founder Liang Wenfeng runs one of China’s leading hedge funds, meaning the company has not had to raise external financing.

In an interview republished in the China Talk newsletter, Liang explained that DeepSeek operated more as a research lab than a commercial enterprise. When recruiting, it prioritised capabilities over credentials, hiring young Chinese-educated researchers. Liang said these people were given the space to explore and the freedom to make mistakes. “Innovation often arises naturally — it’s not something that can be deliberately planned or taught,” he said.

DeepSeek relies on open-source AI models, such as Meta’s Llama, in contrast to the proprietary models favoured by OpenAI and Google. It also focuses narrowly on language in its quest to reach AGI rather than attempting to go multimodal and incorporating images, audio and video. “What you think of as ‘thinking’ might actually be your brain weaving language. This suggests that humanlike AGI could potentially emerge from language models,” he said.

DeepSeek’s focused approach has enabled it to develop a compelling reasoning model without the need for extraordinary computing power and seemingly at a fraction of the cost of its US competitors. As with other Chinese apps, US politicians have been quick to raise security and privacy concerns about DeepSeek. And OpenAI has even accused the Chinese company of possible breaches of intellectual property rights. Given the cases against OpenAI for infringing others’ copyright, though, that might strike some as rich.

While some big US tech companies responded to DeepSeek’s model with disguised alarm, many developers were quick to pounce on the opportunities the technology might generate. The capabilities and cheapness of DeepSeek’s reasoning model may allow them to deploy it for an ever-expanding number of uses. On Monday, DeepSeek was the most downloaded free app on the US Apple App Store.

Ironically, that may yet enable the US to benefit more from DeepSeek’s breakthrough than China. Over the past few years, China has been throttling its own private sector as the state has exerted tighter control. The number of start-ups launched in China has plummeted since 2018. According to PitchBook, venture capital funding in China fell 37 per cent to $40.2bn last year while rising strongly in the US.

DeepSeek has punctured the hubris of the US tech oligarchs. It has intensified global competition and will accelerate the adoption of AI tools. Temporarily this could be a case of China innovating and the US imitating. But is it just a spectacular blip or the start of a long-term trend?

john.thornhill@ft.com



Latin American presidents will hold an emergency summit on Thursday to respond to President Donald Trump’s mass deportations of migrants as they reel from his aggressive tactics towards two of Washington’s traditional regional allies.

Trump clamped 25 per cent tariffs on trade with Colombia and imposed visa and other sanctions on Sunday after leftwing President Gustavo Petro turned back US military flights deporting migrants. The confrontation ended within hours after Bogotá caved in to Washington’s demands.

The dramatic clash, much of it conducted over social media, unsettled Latin American nations already scared by Trump’s threats of military force to re-establish US control over the Panama Canal and of steep tariffs on Mexico, the US’s biggest trading partner.

“There is a lot of alarm among the Latin American embassies in Washington,” said a senior regional diplomat in Washington. “We seem to have gone back to 1897 and the era of President [William] McKinley, who invaded Cuba and the Philippines.”

Emerging market currencies were rattled by Sunday’s dispute, with the Mexican peso and South African rand both falling about two per cent against the US dollar. Colombia’s peso fell 1.5 per cent against the dollar on Monday morning before recovering a little ground.

Panama, a nation of just 4.5mn people with no army and a heavy dependence on US trade and investment, is seen as particularly vulnerable to Trump’s demands for Washington to take back control of the canal it built more than a century ago. The US president has claimed China now operates the canal and US shipping is being “ripped off” by the charges to use the waterway.

Honduran President Xiomara Castro called an emergency summit of the region’s leaders in her capacity as head of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (Celac), after a request by Petro. The meeting will discuss migration, the environment and regional unity, she said on X.

Michael Shifter, a senior fellow at the Inter-American Dialogue think-tank in Washington, said Latin American leaders were unlikely to defer to Trump.

“They’re going to try to strike a balance,” he said, “recognising that on the one hand, they have to be pragmatic because Trump is actually capable of imposing sanctions, which would be very painful for these countries. On the other side, they really have to save face as well and show they have national pride and protect sovereignty.”

Russian allies Cuba and Venezuela gave swift backing to Petro, a former guerrilla with a long record of rants against US policy on social media on issues ranging from Gaza to the war on drugs. But the region’s biggest powers, Brazil and Mexico, did not comment publicly.

Diplomats said they wanted to co-ordinate positions discreetly and let the dust settle before taking a public stance.

“Petro has given a lesson in how not to deal with Trump,” said a second regional diplomat. “He went into battle on social media without having a way to sustain his fight.”

Several commentators pointed out the Colombian leader had undermined his own position by previously agreeing to take US military flights deporting migrants, which date back years under Democrat and Republican administrations.

Colombia, traditionally the closest US ally in South America, is heavily reliant on the US market for its exports of oil, coffee and cut flowers, and has little leverage with Washington.

The timing was also awkward, with Colombia’s foreign minister Luis Gilberto Murillo — a pragmatic English speaker and ex-ambassador to Washington — due to be replaced on February 1 by Laura Sarabia, Petro’s 30-year-old chief of staff, who has no diplomatic experience.

With Petro’s whereabouts on Sunday unclear, a crisis team made up of Sarabia, Murillo and other officials met in the presidential palace and the foreign ministry headquarters. The main interlocutor on the US side, diplomats said, was Mauricio Claver-Carone, Trump’s special envoy for Latin America in the state department. “Petro was in constant communication, always listening and responding,” said a person with direct knowledge of the talks.

Bruce Mac Master, president of Colombia’s main business association, spent the day lobbying Petro’s diplomatic team, and spoke with Sarabia several times.

“I think Petro had no idea of the dimensions and impact of US relations,” Mac Master said. “He soon realised that the effects would be felt everywhere, starting with the exchange rate. I think he learned more about economics from that than he had in the rest of his life.”

By contrast, Mexico’s President Claudia Sheinbaum is seen in the region as having handled Trump better. She has made her disagreements with US policy clear in measured public comments, while privately agreeing to many of Trump’s demands on taking back migrants and cracking down on fentanyl trafficking.

China has hugely expanded its trade and investment in Latin America this century, and Beijing is likely to view Trump’s unpredictable moves as an ideal opportunity to present itself as a more reliable partner, diplomats and analysts said.

Shifter, of Inter-American Dialogue, said: “Celac is the platform for China in Latin America, so Thursday’s summit is a kind of proxy for showing [Washington] that if [it is] really going to punish us, then China’s willing to fill the gap and come in even more than it has already.”

Additional reporting by Tommy Stubbington in London



All revolutions face a backlash. A few years ago, Elon Musk and other supporters of Donald Trump started denouncing the “woke mind virus”. In 2023, the US Supreme Court ruled that affirmative action in university admissions was illegal. Rightwing activists began preparing legal warfare against companies with high-profile diversity initiatives.

Since becoming president, Trump has ordered an end to federal government diversity efforts, including some dating back to Lyndon Johnson, and may expel trans people from the US military. Walmart and Amazon are among the companies closing down their own diversity schemes. Mark Zuckerberg, who had once celebrated Facebook’s role in making #MeToo and #BlackLivesMatter viral, now said its parent company needed more “masculine energy” and would end its targets for hiring women and minorities. Corporate America had gone from taking the knee to bending it.

But perhaps equally telling has been the loss of faith among the revolution’s natural supporters. Kamala Harris, who once criticised Joe Biden’s record on desegregation, backed away from wokeness. (Trump ads still said: “Kamala is for they/them. President Trump is for you.”) In the UK Keir Starmer changed his view on trans rights. Between 2021 and 2024, the proportion of British people who said efforts to ensure equal opportunities for trans people hadn’t gone far enough fell from 32 per cent to 22 per cent.

Progressive activists could once insist that criticisms of their causes were confected. This has become harder. The critics included people, such as philosophers Sam Harris and Susan Neiman, who define themselves as on the left.

The achievement of Black Lives Matter was to make support almost the default option. Shortly after George Floyd was murdered by a police officer in Minneapolis in 2020, protesters’ signs read simply: “White silence is violence.” The movement was not hoping to persuade people. It was expecting them to participate.

In this, Black Lives Matter was initially hugely successful. Within weeks of Floyd’s murder, perhaps 20mn Americans, an unprecedented number, went on marches. Government policies were examined for implicit bias. Bosses looked around their offices and asked why they were so white. Workshops were organised, donations promised, senior appointments made. Statues were felled; company logos based on Black stereotypes were replaced.

In the years before, other movements had similar success. #MeToo called out male sexual abuse. LGBT+ campaigners highlighted the difficulties faced by trans people. After the celebrated expansion of gay rights, lots of people wanted to be on the right side of history. They added rainbows to their online profiles and pronouns to their email signatures. Trans celebrities became sought-after brand ambassadors.

Today, however, many progressives have decided that speaking up is no longer so urgent. Silence has resumed. If these movements are to rise again, they need to overcome not just their opponents, but their own limitations.

The term “woke” emerged from the American Black community to describe awareness of the injustices faced by Black people, later gaining currency among the wider left. Critics on the right took the word and made it pejorative, just as they weaponised “political correctness” in the 1990s. Today they often deploy it disingenuously.

Wokeness — there is still no better term — now describes attempts to address systemic inequalities faced by disadvantaged groups, including women, people of colour, LGBT+ people and those with disabilities. It assumes that people can discriminate unconsciously by upholding inequitable norms.

To many supporters, these attempts continued campaigns such as the US civil rights movement. Those past revolutions had been only partly successful. The killing of Floyd, and others such as teenager Trayvon Martin in 2012, showed that the law was still not equally applied to Black people in the US. Old inequalities persisted. New ones emerged: tech companies apologised after their algorithms generated racist results.

If wokeness faced resistance, supporters could point to those who had opposed civil rights in the 1960s, or who had moaned about the suppression of sexist and racist jokes in the 1990s.

The problem, as writer Yascha Mounk argues in his book The Identity Trap, is that the new activism was built on a rejection of the civil rights movement’s optimistic pursuit of equality and racial integration. Its foundations lay in the post-structuralism of Michel Foucault, in postcolonial studies and in critical race theory. Derrick Bell, founder of critical race theory, argued in 1991 that Black people in the US had in effect seen no progress since slavery, and that yearning for racial equality was a “fantasy”.

Bell’s precise words may not have spread widely, but examples of woke over-reach did. In 2020-21, Black Lives Matter activists occupied the city of Portland for months, causing millions of dollars of damage. Calls to “defund the police” complicated law enforcement in many US cities, allowing critics to question if it was inadvertently making life more dangerous, not less.

Less grave, but equally eye-catching, was some counterintuitive theorising. Some descriptions of racial equity suggested that punctuality was a trait of “whiteness”. Some trans rights activists adopted the terms “Latinx” and “people who menstruate” — terms that most of the people they were referring to would reject.

In the 1990s, political correctness meant saying “chair” instead of “chairman”, and “sex worker” instead of “prostitute” (the idea of calling short people “vertically challenged” came from critics). Recent conceptual and linguistic shifts were arguably much sharper. “White privilege”, “toxic masculinity” and “cisgender” entered the lexicon.

Even away from these extremes, “wokeness” clashed with some tenets of liberal society. It defined people as being part of a group, not as individuals. It encouraged people to identify as Black, queer or whatever else. For Robin DiAngelo, the white author of the bestselling book White Fragility, white people were inherently racist.

All this ran counter to the civil rights era’s focus on equality and to how many citizens wished to see themselves. As early as 2015, veteran civil rights activist Barbara Reynolds argued that Black Lives Matter was mistaken in not claiming the slogan “all lives matter” for its own (and for not adopting the church-inspired respectability of 1960s protesters).

Inside companies, group awareness was initially welcomed: staff networks for Black, Asian, LGBT+, disabled people and others sprung up. But bosses now admit to second thoughts. “Were we beginning to focus too much on all these areas of difference, versus saying this is fundamentally about inclusion and respecting difference, rather than necessarily needing to call it out?” says Peter Cheese, chief executive of CIPD, the UK’s body for HR professionals. “We can’t deal with every aspect of people’s difference at work.”

Companies invested in anti-bias training, including from DiAngelo. But some evidence suggested that it had little effect. While diversity programmes focused on race and gender, conversations on class were often lacking. “[Employees would say,] what do you mean ‘white privilege’? I came from a working-class background and I’ve worked my way up,” says Kamal Munir, a professor at Cambridge’s Judge Business School. “It was also seen as a zero-sum game.”

Class wasn’t the only blind spot. The epithet “Karen” emerged to refer to entitled white women: it went from light-hearted meme to blatant sexism. In May 2023, Uber’s head of diversity left after employees complained that her “Don’t Call Me Karen” training sessions were too focused on white people’s hardships.

A key demand for campaigners was the representation of disadvantaged groups. This had liberating effects. After #OscarsSoWhite went viral in 2015, when all 20 acting nominations went to white people, more actors of colour started to be recognised. Representation was long overdue. But it is not the whole ballgame. Does Emilia Pérez, a Netflix film about Mexican cartel violence, not deserve its Oscar nominations because it was made by mostly non-Mexican cast and crew? As the director pointed out in his defence, Shakespeare never went to Verona. In 2021, an award-winning, non-binary Dutch novelist, chosen to translate the work of the Black American poet Amanda Gorman, stepped down after criticism that a Black translator should do the job.

In less high-profile contexts, who was speaking came to overshadow what they said. It can be powerful, and funny, to question an opinion on the basis that it comes from a white man. Deployed repetitively, it short-circuits debate. Listening to speakers preface their comments with their identity became exhausting.

Activists also set about changing what it was acceptable to say, or be associated with. Ibram X Kendi, author of the bestselling book How to Be an Antiracist, apologised for using “ableist” terms such as “crazy”, “stupid” and “dumb”. Robin DiAngelo listed things white people should not say, including: “I can’t say anything right.”

In 2020, the football team LA Galaxy released a player after his wife posted racist messages on Instagram, even though he disavowed them (he became the Serbian Super League’s top scorer). A British children’s author was dropped by her publisher for expressing support for JK Rowling’s views on trans issues (she became a truck driver).

This strictness was politically inadvisable. In 2018 and again in 2021, a majority of Americans said they didn’t want political correctness to go further. Barack Obama rightly judged that voters didn’t want to feel as though they were “walking on eggshells”; they wanted acknowledgment that “life is messy”.

In its purer forms, wokeness offered not tolerance and debate, but punishment and re-education. This was intellectually wrong. Many people could accept that racial discrimination existed, and that Floyd’s murder was horrific. But they disagreed with the weight that activists put on discrimination. A US survey found that white progressives were more likely than Black and Hispanic people to say that racism is built into US society — and less likely to say that most people can get ahead if they work hard.

Radical societal changes deserved debate. This was most notable on trans issues. Did giving puberty blockers to children raise questions of informed consent and long-term health risks? Even asking such questions was frowned upon, right up to 2024, when a review of NHS England’s gender identity service concluded the use of puberty blockers rested on “weak evidence”.

LGBT+ campaigners had reasons for not wishing to be drawn into such debates. As Shon Faye argued in her book The Transgender Issue, media framing could itself be oppressive. Trans people felt their existence mocked. Many also distrusted the medical establishment, which they felt had neglected their needs. There was a view that questioning trans campaigners’ outlook made trans people less safe — both psychologically, but also physically, because it could lead to policy changes where trans healthcare was further restricted.

But the result was unsatisfactory. Trans activists often labelled their critics as “transphobic”. The public had signed up to colourful LGBT+ Pride rainbows; they now often saw toxic social media debates. (Critics also bore much responsibility for the toxicity.) For many who were gently supportive of the cause, it marked trans issues as worth steering clear of.

Eventually the law defended free speech. In 2021, a British employment tribunal ruled that a woman called Maya Forstater had been unlawfully discriminated against, when her contract was not renewed because of her gender-critical views.

Similarly, racial diversity efforts clashed with basic employment rules. Previously employers could talk about hiring a candidate from a more diverse background if two candidates were equal. This was always dubious: two candidates are never equal, and a thumb could always be placed on the scales in one direction or another.

Around 2020, some organisations wanted to go faster in hiring diverse candidates. (Being a woman, or Jewish, was probably not sufficient.) At least in some cases, they clearly discriminated against white employees. In 2022 Britain’s Thames Valley Police promoted an Asian officer without a competitive process; three white officers who weren’t given the chance to apply later won a discrimination claim. Perhaps the law should give employers greater leeway to address society’s inequalities. But it did not. Again, the managers who wanted to drive change from the inside, and the activists on the outside, were moving faster than liberal society, and most people’s sense of fairness, could handle.

The intense social activism of mid-2020 — heightened by outrage at the Trump presidency, and perhaps the emotional strain of Covid — was never sustainable. By April 2024, 52 per cent of Americans thought the US had done enough to make up for past discrimination against Black people. 2020 showed how permeable companies were to prevailing political winds. Those winds became the economy and immigration.

Indeed, it’s hard to disentangle the rise and fall of “woke” from US politics. This month, when Zuckerberg rolled back Meta’s diversity initiatives, and changed its moderation policies so that users could post things such as “Gays are freaks”, the company explained: “It’s not right that things can be said on TV or the floor of Congress, but not on our platforms.” For less spineless bosses too, the changing political moment was useful cover to push back at activists’ and diversity managers’ strictures.

The woke revolution might have lasted longer had progressives not been so sceptical of universal ideas and free debate. Voters are not part of an anti-woke crusade. Trans issues don’t register in British voters’ priorities. A majority of Britons support supposedly woke ideas, like returning the Parthenon marbles to Greece. Two-thirds of Americans support DEI programmes. But many of them did become disengaged from the movements that they had once supported.

This might have been more manageable if activists were as well-organised as their most cynical opponents. Instead, Black Lives Matter lacked established leaders and structures. (In both the US and the UK, activists were jailed for fraudulent use of donations.) Soon progressives had also lost arguably their most influential social network, Twitter: it soured with abuse, then was corrupted by Musk.

Were he alive, Derrick Bell might argue that the backlash is proof that racism always reasserts itself. But for believers in progress, the woke revolution can claim plenty of victories. It aimed higher than the move to political correctness, and it propelled forward awareness of race, gender and sexual identity. Within corporations, “a lot of progress was made”, says Munir at the University of Cambridge. “People did make a lot of effort to tap more diverse talent pools. [But] progress is never linear.”

The fate of diversity initiatives dovetails with that of climate policies. Just because climate action is less politically fashionable does not mean it is less urgent. And just because Black Lives Matter and trans rights are no longer the zeitgeist does not mean economic and social disparities have been closed. “Silence is violence” is one of many things that progressive activists were wrong about. But silence is not the best strategy either.

Henry Mance is the FT’s chief features writer

Comments on this story will open at 9am GMT on Sunday

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning



Well, is it the Gulf of America or the Gulf of Mexico? Is it Mount McKinley or Mount Denali? For Google Maps users, the answer will depend on whether you live in Donald Trump’s America or the rest of the world.

In complying with Trump’s insistence on renaming the gulf and America’s highest mountain, Google said this week it had “a longstanding practice of applying name changes when they have been updated in official government sources”.

Users of the app outside America will continue to see existing names, but this is unlikely to satisfy Mexican president Claudia Sheinbaum. Before Trump’s inauguration, she took a swipe at his plans to retitle the gulf. Vast tracts of the US that once formed part of the Spanish empire and later Mexico might be renamed “América Mexicana”, she suggested.

Google isn’t the first and will assuredly not be the last mapmaker to fall in line with a government’s wishes. Down the centuries, maps have served ideological, imperialistic, religious and cultural purposes more often than impartial scholarship — as Mark Monmonier, a US geographer, sets out in his book, How to Lie with Maps.

Great powers have a penchant for maps that express territorial claims or national grandeur. In recent years, China has held a “national mapping awareness publicity week”, encouraging citizens to think of Taiwan and parts of the maritime zones of nearby Asian countries as Chinese.

In Vladimir Putin’s Russia, the government has used anti-extremism laws to clamp down on maps that question whether Crimea, annexed from Ukraine in 2014, or the Kuril Islands, seized from Japan in 1945, belong to Russia.

Smaller countries are just as likely to get in on the act. Since the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia gained independence in 1991, a long-running sore in relations with Greece and Bulgaria has been the use of nationalist maps that include parts of both countries as “Greater Macedonia”.

Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s prime minister, promotes maps that show his country with pre-first world war borders, including areas of modern Croatia, Romania, Serbia and Slovakia. Ludovic Orban, Romania’s former premier, once brushed these efforts off with a Romanian proverb — “the sparrow dreams of the dough” — implying Hungary’s leader was indulging in fantasy.

During the cold war, even weather forecasts contained political messages. West Germany’s ARD network displayed Germany with pre-second world war frontiers, challenging the communist East German state’s legitimacy.

Before our times, physical maps published with explanatory texts often betrayed their creators’ assumptions. An 18th-century Japanese map of the world observed of Brazil: “The inhabitants of this country do not build houses . . . They like to eat human flesh; however, they only eat men and not women. Their clothes are made from birds’ feathers.”

In western countries, our mental picture of the globe remains profoundly influenced by a 1569 map produced by Gerardus Mercator, a Flemish cartographer. In his effort to depict the three-dimensional Earth on a two-dimensional map, Mercator made places far from the equator look relatively larger. This is why Greenland appears about the same size as Africa, though it is not even a tenth as big.

Come to think of it, could Denmark avoid ceding Greenland to the US, as Trump wants, by using maps to flatter his ego? A US-friendly government in Warsaw once proposed naming a Polish military base after the president. That brainwave came to nothing — meaning the name is free for use. Perhaps Greenland’s capital, Nuuk, known until 1979 as Godthåb, could be renamed Fort Trump.

tony.barber@ft.com



Donald Trump hit Canada, Mexico and China with steep tariffs on Saturday in a move that threatens to launch a new era of trade wars between the US and three of its largest trading partners.

Trump issued an executive order applying additional tariffs of 25 per cent to all imports from Canada and Mexico, with the exception of Canadian oil and energy products, which will face a 10 per cent levy. Canada is by far the biggest foreign oil supplier to the US, accounting for about 60 per cent of its crude imports.

Imports from China will face a 10 per cent tariff over and above existing US tariffs.

Posting on Truth Social, Trump said he used emergency powers to issue the tariffs “because of the major threat of illegal aliens and deadly drugs killing our Citizens, including fentanyl.”

A White House official said lower tariffs for Canadian energy aimed to minimise the “disruptive effects” on US petrol and home heating costs, but confirmed there would be no further exclusions.

The tariffs would apply from Tuesday, the White House said.

“This is a beautiful, beautiful example of promises made, promises kept by President Trump,” a White House official said.

The official said each order contained “a retaliation clause . . . so that if any country chooses to retaliate in any way, the signal will be to take further action with respect to likely increased tariffs.”

There was no immediate response from America’s trading partners, although Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was expected to announce retaliatory tariffs later tonight. The Chinese embassy did not respond to a request for comment.

The president used the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, an executive authority that allows him to respond to emergencies through economic means, to apply the levies without congressional approval. The law has not previously been used to enact tariffs, although Trump threatened to use it against Mexico in 2019.

Trump’s abrupt opening move will dash the hopes of countries that expected a slower and more cautious approach to trade policy after the Trump administration ordered a raft of reviews into US commercial relationships on inauguration day.

It also signals the president’s willingness to use tariffs to apply pressure to allies on issues ranging from immigration to drug trafficking. Trump has justified the tariffs by complaining about what he says is lax security at the borders with Mexico and Canada, and arguing that both — along with China — have failed to do enough to stem the flow of deadly opioids into the US.

On Saturday, a White House official said the tariffs would be lifted as soon as “Americans stop dying from Made in China, distributed by Mexico and Canada fentanyl”.

The official added: “This is not just about fentanyl . . . this is really a border security issue.”

Trump has also cited America’s trade deficit with Canada, Mexico and China as justification for the tariffs. On Friday, he acknowledged that they may cause some “disruption”, but added: “The tariffs are going to make us very rich, and very strong.”

On Friday, Trump said he planned to levy tariffs on EU imports too, but Saturday’s announcement did not include any measures relating to the EU.

Trump held back from imposing the 60 per cent tariff on Chinese imports from China that he had threatened during the presidential campaign. The 10 per cent levy was designed to punish Beijing over the flow of ingredients to make fentanyl, a deadly opiate that has been the leading cause of death for Americans aged 18 to 45 over the past three years.

Beijing cracked down on the export of fentanyl several years ago, but groups in China switched to exporting precursor chemicals to cartels in Mexico to produce the final product.

Dimitry Anastakis, a professor of business at the University of Toronto, said the US tariffs could be a shock to the system as painful as the Covid pandemic.

“It is unnecessary and quite stupid,” he said. “This is taking a sledge hammer to a non-existent problem with the North American economy that was working pretty well.”

Anastakis said there will be immediate pain in the auto trade, job losses and a likely recession in Canada.

Additional reporting by Ilya Gridneff in Toronto and Demetri Sevastopulo in Washington



Donald Trump has long declared himself a “tariff man” willing to impose sweeping levies on imports from countries that have hurt America.

But on Saturday, the 78-year old US president took the first dramatic step of his second term towards putting that vision into practice — placing trade wars and economic nationalism at the top of his agenda.

From his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida, Trump unleashed aggressive new tariffs on imports from Canada, Mexico and China, a day after threatening the EU with high levies.

Trump is gambling that he can pressure US trading partners to comply with Washington’s wishes without triggering another damaging acceleration of inflation, at a time when the cost of living remains the top concern of many Americans.

For the world, Trump’s opening gambit on trade means a series of countries will be forced into bruising negotiations over everything from trade deficits and currency policy to immigration and even America’s new desire for territorial expansion. Financial markets could be shaken and the global economy may suffer.

“These tariffs herald a new era of US trade protectionism that will affect all American trading partners, whether rivals or allies, and will significantly disrupt international commerce,” says Eswar Prasad, a professor at Cornell University.

The hardest-hit economies will be Mexico and Canada given their heavy reliance on the US economy, with both facing outright recessions if Trump maintains the 25 per cent tariffs, economists said. The damage will be compounded by the fact that less than six years ago, those countries signed a new trade agreement with Trump in the hope that it would stabilise relations with the US.

“There are no safe havens,” says Brad Setser, a former US Treasury official now at the Council on Foreign Relations. “Two countries that struck the biggest trade deal with Donald Trump in his first term are the first two to get hit with tariffs.”

Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics, said the macroeconomic effects would depend on how comprehensive the US tariff package was, and how quickly it gets imposed.Some of the impact could be mitigated by appreciation of the dollar and substitution of domestically produced US goods, while corporations may choose to absorb some of the increase in costs via lower profit margins, economists said. But the magnitude of Trump’s first steps — if fully implemented — appeared far greater than the more limited trade wars against China and G7 allies during his last time in office.

“This could be a trade war on steroids,” said Ryan Sweet, chief US economist at Oxford Economics. “The first round was more targeted. Now they seem to be going across the board — and faster than I expected,” he added.

Everett Eissenstat, a former Trump economic adviser now at Squire Patton Boggs, said: “I expected the tariffs to go in in a more measured manner. But we can say there is one direction here, and that is that it seems to be escalating.”

The first tariffs on Mexico, Canada and China may only be the beginning. Trump officials have been considering imposing universal tariffs on all imports, and adding to the levies he imposed on Saturday.

Trump now wants to use tariffs to generate revenue to pay for the extension of trillions of dollars of tax cuts, which can only be achieved through carefully calibrated but hefty levies that could be hard to reverse.

“When it comes to raising revenue, if the tariff is too low it won’t raise enough money, if it’s too high it will stop trade and then you won’t make any money. They will need to find the sweet spot”, says Bill Reinsch of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

As Trump doubles down on tariffs, he faces little resistance from business groups and free-market Republicans who have traditionally balked at his populist policies and sought to rein him in. Jim Risch, the Idaho senator who chairs the Senate foreign relations committee, cheered his latest moves.

“President Trump has always been very clear that if he sees Americans being taken advantage of, he won’t put up with it,” he said. Referring to Canada, Mexico, and China, he added: “These governments know very well that they need to stem the flow of drugs and illegal immigrants into our country. The sooner they do that, the better.”

But there are two big dangers for Trump. One would be a sell-off that sends equity markets and the value of Americans’ retirement plans plunging. The other would be that inflation picks up again after gradually falling towards its 2 per cent target over the past two and a half years.

Shearing said that Trump’s proposed measures could push headline PCE inflation above 3 per cent, compared with 2.6 per cent now. Hefty levies on the EU and China would push US price growth even higher, he warned.“That is a big hit, especially for working families including people who voted for Trump on the rationale that he would reduce prices,” said James Knightley, chief international economist in the US at ING.“The risks are we see some real pain for the household sector coming through later this year, especially if he expands tariffs on Europe.”

Democrats, who have been looking for ways to attack Trump early in his second term, have already pounced on the potential for higher inflation.

“Slapping huge tariffs on gas, groceries, phones, TVs and cars means working American families are going to pay more for the things they need,” said Ron Wyden, the Oregon senator, on Friday.

“These tariffs only make sense as class warfare, forcing typical Americans to foot the bill for another round of tax breaks for Trump and his rich buddies.”

Trump has found comfort in the fact that inflation remained subdued during the trade wars of his first term.

But Jay Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, noted last week that conditions had changed compared with the structurally low-inflation environment before the pandemic. “You’re coming through a situation where we’re not quite back to 2 per cent and that’s just different,” he said. For the global economy, one potentially bleak scenario would be that of “massive supply shock”, said Knightley, similar to the shocks economies weathered during the Covid-19 pandemic. “The risk is that this is going to be quite damaging, especially if we see a significant response. And I don’t see how politicians don’t respond.”











Panama traded on a reputation as a solid US ally and thriving hub for global business — until US President Donald Trump took office demanding the return of the shipping canal built by the Americans more than a century ago.

Now the Central American nation, whose cultural links with the US include a passion for baseball, is reeling at its portrayal in Washington as a corrupt rogue state in cahoots with Iran and China that seeks to rip off the US at every turn.

Caught in a fierce geopolitical battle, Panama’s predicament offers a taste of what could happen to other nations that have profited from globalisation and hoped to stay neutral, if they fall foul of Washington’s anti-China mood.

US secretary of state Marco Rubio claimed to a US radio station this week that China could potentially “shut down the Panama Canal” in any conflict. Ahead of a trip to Panama this weekend, he added: “And in fact, I have zero doubt that they have contingency planning to do so. That is a direct threat.”

Trump claimed in a social media post on Christmas Day that the “wonderful soldiers of China” were “lovingly but illegally operating the Panama Canal” and has pledged to take back the waterway, using force if necessary. He has since repeated that threat, including in a post-inauguration speech.

Panama’s conservative pro-business president, José Raúl Mulino, has described the claims of Chinese military control as “nonsense”, insisted the waterway “is and always will be Panama’s” and signalled a willingness to engage in dialogue — but nobody in Washington appears to be listening.

“Even as it takes advantage of the global maritime system, Panama has emerged as a bad actor,” Republican senator Ted Cruz said as he opened a committee hearing on the Panama Canal this week. “Panama has for years flagged dozens of vessels in the Iranian ‘ghost fleet’, which brought Iran tens of billions of dollars in oil profits to fund terror across the world.”

Panama’s government and business elite are beginning to panic, diplomats said, as they realise that although Trump’s rhetoric may be flamboyant, the US president and his allies are serious about pressing their tiny country to make concessions and reduce China’s presence — even if it means tearing up legally binding agreements.

“They just don’t know what to do,” one envoy said of Mulino’s government. “They have been holding nonstop meetings trying to work out what Trump really wants.”

Complicating Panama’s efforts to counter Trump’s accusations is the country’s poor record on corruption and its growing embrace of China after it broke off diplomatic relations with Taiwan in 2017 in order to establish relations with Beijing. It also joined the Belt and Road infrastructure initiative.

When attacking Chinese influence, US critics of Panama have focused on two ports at either end of the canal which are run by Hutchison Ports, an arm of Hong Kong-listed conglomerate CK Hutchison Holdings, under long concessions. They were renewed without a bidding process in 2021 for 25 years.

The broader group rose to prominence before the UK handed Hong Kong back to China in 1997; it operates 53 ports in 24 countries including the UK and Germany. The ports in Panama have a nearly 40 per cent market share, and the country launched an audit of the licences after Trump’s inauguration.

Also in Panama, Chinese state-controlled companies have built a huge convention centre close to the mouth of the canal and are constructing a new bridge over the waterway and a cruise ship port, contracts that were secured through bidding processes. Beijing was seeking to build a big new embassy on land near the canal until US objections killed the scheme.

Panama also planned to negotiate a free trade deal with China this year, though its status is now unclear.

“If there’s one thing a divided Washington agrees on, it’s that we’re anti-China,” said a former Trump administration official. “What Trump is really saying is that China exerts an undue influence on the canal through operating ports at both ends, and that’s real.”

China has insisted Panama’s independence is “not negotiable” and the canal “is not under direct or indirect control by any power”. “We respect Panama’s sovereignty over the canal and recognise it as a permanently neutral international waterway,” foreign ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said this month.

As for Cruz’s Iran accusations, Panama’s maritime authority in 2023 cancelled the registration of 136 Panamanian-flagged vessels after finding they had a “direct link” to Iran’s national oil company.

Transparency International ranks Panama 108th in the world in its most recent Corruption Perceptions Index, equal with Sierra Leone, and its score has deteriorated recently.

Panamanian officials insist their country has cleaned up its act in recent years, but it spent many years on international blacklists for money laundering and was the centre of the 2016 “Panama Papers” scandal, when a huge data leak from a Panamanian law firm exposed billions of dollars of offshore assets hidden from tax and law enforcement.

“What we’re dealing with is really systematic historic corruption that nobody’s really called out,” Louis Sola, the Trump-appointed chair of the US Federal Maritime Commission, told the Financial Times.

Referring to Tuesday’s senate hearing on Panama, he said: “We identified very clearly that there’s some sweetheart deals going on . . . As a competition regulator, we have to look at that.”

Mulino was the protégé of former president Ricardo Martinelli, a billionaire who tapped him as a candidate after he was barred from running again in last year’s election following a money-laundering conviction. Martinelli is sheltering under diplomatic protection in the Nicaraguan embassy in Panama.

Trump’s business has had its own vexed encounter with Panama: the Trump Organization managed a hotel in the country but the arrangement acrimoniously collapsed in 2018, amid a legal dispute, when the owners evicted his company from the building.

Uncomfortable in the spotlight and unaccustomed to running campaigns to win hearts and minds in Washington, Panama is not trying to fight a media battle with the US president.

Government ministers have been instructed to stay tight-lipped and Mulino’s comments have been limited to saying there will be no negotiation about the ownership of the canal.

Instead, myriad small Panamanian flags have been fixed to posts on major roads in the capital and on some pavements and buildings ahead of Rubio’s visit, in a quiet but determined show of nationalism.

“I think we have made a mistake in thinking that it doesn’t matter what [the Americans] say,” said Tony Fletcher, an executive and former head of Panama’s business lobby Conep who formerly worked at US group Gillette.*

“Now it’s time to start to set the record straight. We have to do it in writing, with publications, and above all because in this war of disinformation what needs to prevail is well-sourced information.”

He added: “Why would I be looking at Iran and other countries? My vision has always been completely influenced by America. And my daughter studies in the United States.”

*This story has been amended to correct a name



The artificial intelligence-powered rally in US stocks has further to run, say equity investors, although the “wake-up call” from Chinese start-up DeepSeek is likely to reorder the winners and losers from the rapidly evolving technology.

DeepSeek last week unveiled a cutting-edge reasoning model capable of competing with those designed in the US — but apparently for a fraction of the cost — sending shockwaves through equities markets and reigniting fears among some investors of a repeat of the dotcom crash at the start of this century.

By the end of Monday, chipmaker and stock market darling Nvidia had shed almost $600bn — the biggest one-day loss in US history. A ferocious US tech sell-off spread to energy stocks and utilities that had been expected to benefit from demand for power to fuel AI data centres.

But since then, the sell-off has run out of steam. US indices ended the week lower, with Nvidia close to its Monday lows. The S&P 500 and tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite lost 1 per cent and 1.6 per cent over the past five sessions.

“DeepSeek isn’t devastating for the overall market. The impact will be far more subtle,” said Alicia Levine, head of investment strategy and equities at BNY Wealth.

She expects healthcare stocks and other companies with access to massive amounts of data to reap the rewards as investors move into less richly priced areas of the market.

“If AI becomes cheaper and faster, it makes sense that those companies would see a boost in value,” Levine said. “The picks and shovels” companies in the energy and infrastructure sectors, which have been among the main beneficiaries of Big Tech’s huge capital expenditure on AI, may suffer most, she added.

Megacap tech stocks, and excitement around the potential of AI, have been the main driver of the US stock market’s strong performance in recent years. Last year the so-called Magnificent Seven tech stocks were responsible for more than half of the S&P 500’s gain.

However, bears fear that DeepSeek’s breakthrough could have huge implications for the spending plans and valuations of some of the Silicon Valley giants that have driven that rally, and for the wider, top-heavy US market, where the largest 10 stocks now account for almost two-fifths of the S&P 500.

DeepSeek “tells us there is growing competition and AI may be harder to monetise than assumed”, said Robert Almeida, global investment strategist at MFS Investment Management.

He thinks the Chinese firm represents the start of a new capital cycle, creating “growing supply, growing competition, and lower returns” that may threaten the high valuations of the big AI incumbents.

Billionaire investor Ray Dalio told the Financial Times this week that AI hype had fuelled a “bubble” in US equities.

Beyond Nvidia, big losers this week have been chipmaker Broadcom and energy groups GE Vernova and Constellation Energy.

But many investors and analysts think the sell-off was a blip rather than the start of a fundamental market shift.

“I don’t think [we’re in] a bubble and I don’t think we are about to see a bubble burst,” said Peter Oppenheimer, Goldman Sachs’ chief global equity strategist. Instead, DeepSeek was simply a reminder that the “dominant tech companies are not immune from disruption and competition”.

Investor appetite for US tech companies appeared undimmed on Thursday, when shares in Tesla and Meta rose after the two companies pledged to pour billions more dollars into building out their AI infrastructure.

Some think DeepSeek’s cheap alternative to OpenAI’s popular ChatGPT app could in fact spur even higher AI spending in the US. Bank analysts’ notes last week talked of the so-called Jevons paradox — the theory that demand for technology such as AI will surge as it becomes cheaper and more energy efficient, leading to an overall increase in energy use.

“Everybody is [too] negative. [DeepSeek] is not going to change the underlying demand for computing capacity,” said Christopher Rossbach, chief investment officer at Nvidia shareholder J Stern & Co, citing massive spending commitments made by groups such as Meta.

He does not believe Nvidia is overvalued, and thinks that rising profits will support the stock price of some Big Tech firms. “You may not have an increase in the valuation but you will benefit from the growth in earnings, in revenues and in cash flows.”

Venture capitalist Reid Hoffman, billionaire co-founder of LinkedIn and ManasAI, sees DeepSeek’s breakthrough as bullish for the wider AI sector.

“DeepSeek isn’t a game-changer for global AI hegemony, but it is a welcome wake-up call that China’s competitive talent is very capable,” he told the FT.

“Many small AI companies in the US use large models to train their smaller models more efficiently. So a quality model like DeepSeek trained using that tactic is a positive signal for what small AI companies in the US can build,” he added.

Some even think this week’s market turmoil could spark a healthy rebalancing for the wider market.

Marko Kolanovic, JPMorgan’s former chief global markets strategist — who has long warned of the risks to market stability from investors piling into the same handful of stocks and trades — said Nvidia’s 17 per cent decline on Monday should provide the market with a “shot in the arm”.The past week’s sell-off may trigger a rotation within the tech sector into relative “laggards” like Apple, he said. “Maybe [Nvidia] isn’t such a sure bet after all.”

Additional reporting by Mari Novik and Harriet Agnew in London



Meta is in discussions to reincorporate outside of Delaware, becoming the latest tech group to study exiting the state that has long been considered an American corporate haven.

The social media group is weighing moving its legal residence to another state, such as Texas, but has not decided on a destination, said a person familiar with the matter.

The talks come after Meta chief executive Mark Zuckerberg earlier this month announced the company would move its US-based trust and safety staff from California to Texas as part of a broad ‘free speech’ overhaul of its approach to content moderation.

Zuckerberg said at the time the shift would help the company “build trust to do this work in places where there is less concern about the bias of our teams”.

Meta has faced allegations from President Donald Trump and his allies that it censors conservatives and is staffed by liberal-leaning employees, but has recently been attempting to court the new administration.

Meta declined to comment on a possible relocation. However, the group said there was no plan to move its corporate headquarters out of California. The Wall Street Journal first reported on its potential reincorporation.

Last year, Elon Musk won shareholder backing to reincorporate electric-vehicle maker Tesla to Texas, leaving Delaware after a dispute over a lawsuit seeking to block his huge pay package, which has been twice repudiated by the state’s corporate law court.

Musk, the world’s richest man, also reincorporated his social platform X from Delaware to Texas.

Delaware has struggled adjudicating disputes with companies with dominant shareholders or dual-class shares. The state’s corporate law imposes higher legal review standards on these so-called controlled companies.

Meta had faced several fiduciary breach lawsuits in Delaware from minority shareholders including against a share reclassification that would have handed more voting power to Zuckerberg, a move the company abandoned in 2017 prior to a trial.

Roughly two-thirds of the S&P 500 is incorporated in Delaware and many venture capital investors demand start-ups make their legal domicile there.

Corporate law observers believed investor protections in the state would force management teams to remain in Delaware. But a large company such as Meta leaving could become a bellwether for further migration.

Separately on Friday, Dropbox, a cloud storage provider, said its shareholders approved a reincorporation to Nevada from Delaware. The change was made in part because of an “increasingly litigious environment in Delaware”, Dropbox said in a regulatory filing.

In November, The Trade Desk, an online marketing company, said its shareholders approved a reincorporation to Nevada from Delaware.

A landmark investor lawsuit is proceeding through the Delaware court brought by minority shareholders of TripAdvisor, who are seeking damages from what they say are losses resulting from company management getting more power from a recent Nevada reincorporation.



International companies are overhauling their supply chains and boosting their presence in the US to align themselves with Donald Trump’s nationalist economic agenda and minimise the impact of his planned tariffs.

As the US president prepares to levy duties on imports as soon as this weekend, top executives from Europe and beyond, including LVMH’s Bernard Arnault and Shell’s Wael Sawan, say they expect to invest more in the US.

“We are being strongly encouraged by US authorities to keep setting up [workshops],” Arnault said this week. “In the current environment, it’s something that we’re looking at seriously.”

LVMH, Europe’s second most-valuable listed company, makes most of its products in France and Italy, but has opened three Louis Vuitton workshops in the US and invested billions in its American jeweller Tiffany.

Arnault, who attended Trump’s inauguration in Washington last week, said he felt a “wind of optimism” in the US and returning to France was a “bit of a cold shower”.

He and other executives spoke favourably of lower US taxes, cheaper energy costs and higher growth, especially compared with Europe.

Shell’s Sawan said his energy group, the UK’s second most-valuable listed company, planned to expand its US business. “I expect we will only continue to grow [in the US] because of the good momentum we are seeing around supportive tax structures and enabling regulations . . . all of which will give us a nice tailwind and more confidence to invest,” he told the Financial Times.

In his inauguration speech this month, Trump vowed to “drill, baby, drill” to exploit US oil resources.

While the president seeks to use tariffs to push companies to relocate to the US and pursue other goals, beginning with measures against Canada, Mexico and China, the EU has acknowledged groups are being deterred by its own red tape.

In an FT article, Christine Lagarde and Ursula von der Leyen, presidents of the European Central Bank and European Commission, warned regulation was an obstacle to investment, adding “we need to make doing business in Europe cheaper, especially in terms of energy costs”.

The threat of US tariffs is also spurring a rebalancing of investments, according to executives and bankers, in an effort that spans sectors.

Sweden’s Hennes & Mauritz is looking to buy more of its products from suppliers near its key markets, including the US, said chief executive Daniel Ervér, adding the retail group was studying various “scenarios” to deal with tariffs.

“[We want] flexibility in our supply chain to be able to mitigate potential tariffs,” he told the FT. “The world is less globalised.”

Zayong Koo, executive vice-president of South Korean carmaker Hyundai, last week said: “It may take a bit of time, but . . . we are definitely trying to localise the production, which will minimise the potential impact from the tariffs.”

John Elkann, chair of carmaker Stellantis, also flew to Washington ahead of Trump’s inauguration, spending four days with the president and senior government officials. Days later, the Fiat and Jeep owner announced $5bn investment in the US; in December, after Trump’s election, the group had reversed a decision to cut 1,100 jobs at a Jeep plant in Ohio.

One European banker said: “Anyone under-represented in the US or over-represented in Europe . . . would want to make sure they are building the next plant there versus here.”

A rush by companies to expand in the US to defend against tariffs and benefit from potentially less onerous regulation and a strong economy under Trump would follow an earlier surge in investment under his predecessor Joe Biden.

The Biden administration handed $370bn in loans, subsidies and other support to companies under his flagship Inflation Reduction Act, though Trump has moved to scrap some of the handouts.

Additional reporting by Ian Johnston in Paris and Ivan Levingston in London



Chevron is seeking to protect a special US licence allowing it to operate in Venezuela, saying China and Russia will gain influence in the oil-producing nation — and the western hemisphere — if it is forced out by Donald Trump’s administration.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Chevron’s chief executive Mike Wirth said the company would engage with the White House after Marco Rubio, US secretary of state, said the licence should be reconsidered.

Wirth said Chevron would operate in compliance with US law and “stayed out of the politics” but added that if the US oil major exited it would allow rival nations’ state oil companies to expand in the Latin American country.

“In Venezuela, in particular, what you have seen when countries from the west leave, you’ve seen companies from China, from Russia, increase their presence as a result,” he said.

Wirth said third-party studies suggested Venezuela’s economy would suffer if Chevron exited and could drive migration flows into the US. He made his comments shortly before Trump sent his envoy for special missions, Richard Grenell, to Venezuela on Friday to discuss a deal for the repatriation of the country’s deportees from the US.

Chevron has operated in Venezuela for nearly a century, and its licenses to do so have been extended several times — including by the first Trump administration — even as the US has grown increasingly impatient with successive authoritarian regimes in Caracas and imposed economic sanctions to punish its leadership.

In 2022 Joe Biden’s administration granted a licence authorising Chevron to expand its Venezuelan business, in a show of good faith and hope of improving democratic conditions under authoritarian President Nicolás Maduro. Broad sanctions on the country’s oil sector were lifted in October 2023, allowing companies to do business with PDVSA, Venezuela’s state-owned oil producer.

But Maduro backtracked on a promise to allow the opposition to pick its own candidate in the presidential election last July, and the outcome, in which Maduro was declared the winner in a result widely regarded as fraudulent, have prompted critics on both sides of the political aisle to question whether western companies should still continue doing business there.

The sanctions were reimposed last April, though individual exemption licences, including Chevron’s, were kept in place.

That licence has enabled Chevron to boost its Venezuelan production to about 200,000 barrels a day.

Chevron, the second-biggest western oil company, had net income of $3.2bn in the fourth quarter compared with $2.2bn a year earlier, but adjusted earnings of $2.06 a share were below Wall Street estimates of $2.11. Its shares fell 4.6 per cent on Friday in New York.

The group, which was a significant donor to Republican candidates in the recent election cycle, according to Open Secrets, used the phrase “Gulf of America” in its earnings material instead of Gulf of Mexico, just days after Trump called for the renaming of the body of water.

Venezuela’s opposition, led by María Corina Machado, has increased calls to cancel Chevron’s licence.

Speaking to the FT this month, Machado — who was banned from running in the election — warned Chevron and other foreign companies against “helping to prop up” Maduro’s government.

Rubio has signalled a tougher approach to the country. At his confirmation hearing this month, he told senators the Biden administration “got played” by Maduro.

Rubio said: “Now they have these general licenses where companies like Chevron are actually providing billions of dollars of money into the regime’s coffers, and the regime kept none of the promises that they made. So all that needs to be re-explored.”

When Maduro was sworn in for a third six-year term this month, the outgoing Biden administration, alongside the EU and the UK, announced co-ordinated sanctions on Venezuelan officials, though it stopped short of cancelling the exemption licences.

Some experts play down concerns that Chinese and Russian rivals could fill any gap left by Chevron.

Francisco Monaldi, a Latin America energy expert at Rice University in Houston, said Chinese and Russian oil companies are unlikely to make a move in Venezuela should Chevron leave.

“They haven’t done it during the past few years, and particularly since US sanctions have been in place, they have been very cautious,” Monaldi said.

Wirth said Chevron was owed a significant amount of money in Venezuela. “Look, we’re running a business. We don’t engage in foreign policy,” he said.



Here we go again. In recent years, the entrepreneur Elon Musk has become (in)famous for being so maniacally focused on overhauling entities such as Tesla and X that he has slept in offices and fired employees he considered uncommitted.

Now he wants to do the same at Donald Trump’s White House. This week, 2mn federal employees were asked to resign if they did not want to come into the office (and, by implication, embrace the reforms Musk is hatching at the new Department of Government Efficiency he leads).

The White House apparently expects 5-10 per cent of staff to take the offer, saving $100bn annually. And to reinforce the message, Musk even dispatched the same “Fork-in-the-road” meme used when he fired staff at X. He is reportedly sleeping in the Executive Office of the President, too.

Unions will undoubtedly howl. So will progressives. And Musk’s plans will probably face legal challenges. But even as many observers recoil, quite understandably, from Musk’s brutal style, there is one point that no one should ignore: if Doge can actually unleash digital reform in the US government, and in a non-corrupt manner, that would be an unambiguously good thing.

Indeed, if I had a Musk-focused magic wand, I would wish him to make digital reform, not trolling his critics, Doge’s main priority. Digitising government is not just the key to creating greater efficiency and effectiveness; it could also restore some of the public’s shattered trust in the state.

The reason for this is that America is bedevilled by a paradox. On the one hand, its private sector is extraordinarily dynamic, and driving much of the 21st-century tech revolution, with its laser-like focus on consumers. But on the other, its government bureaucracy is sclerotic and inefficient, with an antediluvian approach to technology.

So much so, in fact, that the US does not even feature in the UN’s 2024 list of the 18 most tech-savvy e-governments, ranking well behind countries such as Estonia, Singapore and Denmark, and even Saudi Arabia. That is shocking.

Previous administrations have tried to change this. In 2014, Barack Obama created the United States Digital Service, in a bid to improve government tech after the botched rollout of his HealthCare.gov initiative. This has had some success. As Deloitte notes, the Inland Revenue Service introduced an automated paper returns-scanning process during the Covid pandemic which enabled it to scan “80 times more returns in the first quarter of 2023 than the whole of 2022”. And during Trump’s first administration, his son-in-law Jared Kushner tried to overhaul electronic record-keeping at the Department of Veterans Affairs (a laudable move that, sadly, had patchy results).

But reformers have faced big obstacles. One is a government culture of risk aversion, says Brett Goldstein of Vanderbilt University, who previously oversaw the Defense Digital Service at the Pentagon. Another is that federal structures are fragmented and plagued by outdated tech.

“There are 101 civilian agencies . . . and back in 2017 we were spending $60bn a year on [those] and half was on legacy systems,” laments Chris Krebs, director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency in the first Trump administration. “Now it is certainly more.”

Another challenge, outlined in a recent book by Jennifer Pahlka, a Democrat who has fought for tech reform, is that the government typically plans projects in a slow-moving, top-down manner — unlike the private sector, which uses an iterative, bottom-up, user-focused approach. The consequence is “concrete boat[s]”, she notes. In other words, projects so heavy they sink.

Can Musk change this? Many techies hope so. “I think Elon is the right person for the job since he has a bottom-up approach and the energy and tenacity to go into the details,” says Goldstein. Or, as Krebs, puts it: “What is happening now is much bigger and more intentional than [what we did before].”

And there is widespread consensus on what should be done: install a “software as a service” mentality into government that focuses on user needs, with a centralised “share services” model. That could create a co-ordinated procurement process that would slash costs, create a better experience for citizens and improve cyber defence.

Moreover, case studies show how to do this. Canada adopted a shared service approach more than a decade ago, notes Krebs. Estonia, Denmark and Singapore are also good models. And Ukraine offers a particularly inspirational example of how to build apps that provide government services to citizens.

So will Musk ever succeed in inculcating these non-American lessons? Does he have the tenacity, force and staff for a lengthy cultural fight? We don’t know.

But one thing, at least, is clear: if Musk does manage to import approaches from places such as Estonia or Singapore — and in the process create a functioning e-government in the US — he will deserve praise from Republicans and Democrats alike. So, please, Elon: focus on that, not political posturing. Future generations of Americans will thank you.

gillian.tett@ft.com



London-listed fintech Wise has been ordered to pay nearly $2.5mn by US regulators for “a series of illegal actions” including misleading advertising of its fees.

The US Consumer Financial Protection Bureau on Thursday demanded Wise pay a $2mn civil penalty and $450,000 in customer compensation for advertising inaccurate fees and failing to properly disclose exchange rates and other costs.

Wise prides itself on offering cheap and quick cross-border payments, without hidden costs. However, regulators found that it had “misled” US customers into believing they would receive lower ATM fees and failed to properly disclose its exchange rate.

The watchdog also found that Wise had failed to refund remittance fees in the timeframe required by law when customers’ payments did not arrive on time.

“By deceiving customers, Wise gave itself an unfair advantage over other competitors in the remittances market,” said CFPB director Rohit Chopra. “New technology can help make money transfers cheaper and more convenient, but companies must be truthful and live up to long-standing law.”

Shares in the fintech were broadly flat in early trading in London on Friday.

Wise said it had “inadvertently been operating in ways the Bureau deemed necessary to address”, adding that the problems were mainly “technical issues”, but in limited cases some US customers saw “slightly incorrect fees”, which it “proactively and voluntarily compensated in full”.

It added: “While Wise strongly disagrees with the CFPB’s characterisation of Wise’s conduct, we worked with the CFPB in good faith to conclude the matter”.

The company said the probe had been conducted in 2020 and 2021 and that it had paid $450,000 in compensation to affected customers.

Wise, which was founded in 2011, was hailed as a London success story when it listed on the London Stock Exchange 10 years later.

But its international expansion has been rocky. The company received a $360,000 fine from the United Arab Emirates’ financial regulator over failures in its anti-money laundering controls in 2021.

The Financial Times also previously reported that in 2022, European regulators forced the start-up into a formal remediation plan after they found that it lacked proof of address for hundreds of thousands of customers.

In 2023, Wise ended its US partnership with Evolve Bank, which has since been hit by enforcement action from the Federal Reserve Board due to risk management, anti-money laundering and compliance failures. A data breach at Evolve also affected Wise customers, the UK fintech said last year.

Wise announced its launch in Mexico earlier this week as it seeks to increase its share of the American remittance market.



Doing what you love is normally a solid foundation for excelling in what you do. For siblings James Boulter, a talent agent at United Talent Agency (UTA), and Katie Boulter, Britain’s No 1 female tennis player, passion and perseverance are essential. “It’s important that I love what I do as I know I’m going to put so much more energy into my everyday life,” says Katie, 28, who at time of writing is ranked 23 in the world (a career high) and has three career titles; she first represented Great Britain aged eight, becoming the No 1 ranked junior in 2008.

“Both of us are cognisant that the work we do is a privilege,” says 31-year-old James. “It’s something that we get out of bed for, that we are excited and want to do, and I think that’s a healthy obsession.”

Today, the siblings are relishing a rare afternoon together in the Chelsea Barracks residential complex, chosen as a location for its spectacular subterranean tennis court adjoined by a plush lounge-style viewing platform. Katie, dressed in an ivory white Stella McCartney suit, and James, in Paul Smith, are two peas in a pod: thoughtful, big-picture thinkers, nimble with quips. As James weighs up the highs and lows of 2024, Katie chips in: “Not spending enough time with me!”

Indeed, each spends an average of 40 weeks a year away from the UK, with Katie competing on the global WTA circuit, and James in LA for awards season from January to April, and then on the road to work with clients across the globe – his roster includes Priyanka Chopra Jonas, Nick Jonas, Joe Jonas, Jessica Alba, Cardi B, Paris Hilton, Patrick Dempsey, Catherine Zeta Jones, Cynthia Erivo and Karlie Kloss. Over his career, James has been responsible for securing over $200mn of commercial and endorsement opportunities for his clients, and expanding their commercial ventures by securing brand partnerships, negotiating equity deals, licensing and launching new ventures.

“Katie and I are both the products of the people that are around us and the support that we have. The support that I provide to my clients is very much the same. I’m a part of their mechanism,” says James. While his sister is in front of the camera, he works discreetly behind the scenes. “My highs are attached to my clients’, such as landing a major film role or releasing a new album that performs incredibly well,” he says. It often means “advising and supporting them on crafting strategy and carefully preparing for the next step”.

Last year was a standout for Katie, who won a prestigious title at the San Diego Open and another one in Nottingham (she also won her first title there in 2023). “2024 has been a lot of what I dreamt about when I wanted to become a tennis player. I wanted to achieve multiple things. One of them was to get my ranking inside the top 50 and then see how far I could go with my potential. I always felt I had it, but I never managed to fully capitalise on it. A lot of people spend their whole career trying to get one title so, for me, two titles [in one year] was a massive achievement.” Her next priority is to do well at the Slams – so far her best performances have been third rounds at Wimbledon and the US Open in 2023.

She puts part of her success down to life-work balance, the support of her team, her fiancé Alex de Minaur (the Australian-born world No 18 player), family and her new fitness trainer, Matt Little. “My team pushes me through the tough moments and the good moments. They keep me motivated. It’s never-ending tennis,” she says.  The player is appreciated by fans for her generous, smiley demeanour on and off the court. She and de Minaur are often seen at each other’s games, cheering each other on. Most days, though, are intense: the training involves two to three hours of practice, plus two gym sessions and recovery time in physio and cryo bath. Downtime is spent exploring the cities they land in. For James, the most important thing is a rest from phone calls and emails. He restores his vintage cars and regularly plays tennis. “It is great for clearing the mind,” he asserts. “What a terrible idea!” jokes Katie.

The siblings’ discipline and focus was instilled as children growing up in Leicestershire, in a family that rewarded both play and work. Tennis is in the blood. Their mother Susan, a teacher and tennis coach, played the game at county level, as did their maternal grandmother Gill Gartshore, while the siblings’ businessman father David encouraged the duo to go for it and persevere. James was Katie’s main tennis partner and they played regularly at the local court. “How many times did James get into a bad mood and storm off the court? I can tell you a few times!” laughs Katie, who was driven by the simple challenge of beating her older brother. “That’s pretty much how I landed in tennis.” James also followed the family tradition for a time, making it to county level for Leicestershire. “My mum or grandpa would often take us both to tournaments at the weekends around the country… however, as Katie would come back with trophy after trophy, it became clear she had something special, and by the age of eight she was already representing Great Britain,” he says.

James’s journey into the entertainment field was circuitous. “I don’t think anybody, especially in the UK, tells you that you could be a Hollywood agent. It doesn’t come up in career counselling,” he says. He left school at 18 and first started a packaged-goods health-food business, before moving into management consultancy, overseeing brands and interacting with talent. He then took that knowledge into the entertainment world, setting up his own agency in London in 2019. Indian actress and producer Priyanka Chopra Jonas was one of his first signings, entrusted to him by her manager Anjula Acharia.

“I was representing a small set of talent and building their businesses across anything that’s commercial –endorsements, joint ventures, equity deals – the full scope of anything that is outside of their role as either an actor or musician,” he explains. It led to James joining UTA, one of the largest talent agencies in the world, spearheaded by his mentors, co-head of talent Chris Hart and CEO Jeremy Zimmer.

James and Katie’s professional worlds are aligned and intertwined. Tennis is ever more popular, particularly women’s tennis, while sport and fashion are increasingly converging. Katie benefits from hefty sponsorship deals with brands including Nike, Pragnell fine jewellery, Wilson and Lexus, while James masterminds such deals for his clients. He does not represent Katie, with both preferring to preserve their sister-brother relationship over business. “There is a greater convergence between each of those worlds,” he agrees. “The responsibility is often greater now too: talent is global by nature and has to operate and resonate in different territories and still be authentic. We live in an attention economy driven by new platforms.”

He cites a single post by Chopra Jonas for HSBC about the challenges of moving abroad as a southern Asian. “That one post was watched by around 668 million people, which is over five times the Super Bowl audience, so the responsibility to navigate one’s smaller actions, which then inform everything else, is quite huge,” says James. “Your reach across all platforms must be reaching half a million,” he nods at Katie.

The close dynamic between talent and the social media audience has its own drawbacks. For Katie, keeping grounded is fundamental, reminding herself of athletes like Jessica Ennis-Hill that she looked up to as a young girl. “I see myself as someone that kids want to look up to. I think every action that I make and the way that I hold myself on the court and off it is vital, because they always pick up on those little things. When I’m having a tough day and I want to crack a racket or scream at something, I always hold back. Being able to control myself and stay classy on court, it’s so important.”

Their mode of communication is, week to week, through a family WhatsApp group. “We are good at sharing each other’s little wins as well as the big ones – but the big wins are pretty evident,” says James. “For Katie, that’s her performance at a Grand Slam or winning a title and, for me, it’s a campaign that gets seen by billions of people worldwide. We know what each of us are doing, so our family chat is used for smaller wins and everything in between – the good, the bad, the ugly,” he smiles.



The US would be forced to buy oil from geopolitical rivals such as Venezuela if it disrupted trade with Canada, Ottawa’s foreign minister has warned.

Mélanie Joly told the Financial Times the US president’s threat to impose levies of 25 per cent on Canadian imports would hit “real people” if relations between the two countries descended into a trade war.

“We ship oil at a discount which is, ultimately, refined in Texas. If it’s not us, it is Venezuela,” Joly said, referring to the heavy grades of oil produced in Venezuela and Canada on which many American refineries depend.

“There’s no other option on the table, and this administration doesn’t want to work with Venezuela,” Joly said.

US President Donald Trump imposed sweeping sanctions on Caracas during his first term in the White House.

Joly was in the US capital spearheading Canada’s last-minute effort to avert the first full-blown trade war of Trump’s new administration, with the president threatening again on Thursday to apply tariffs of 25 per cent on Canada and Mexico starting on February 1.

The president said he was considering excluding oil imports from the tariffs — reflecting the US’s dependence on its neighbour for huge supplies of energy.

Despite soaring shale oil production in states such as Texas, Canada accounts for about one in every five barrels of oil consumed in the US and about 60 per cent of its imported crude.

Many US refineries depend on the kind of heavy oil produced in Canada or Venezuela — not on the lighter grades produced by America’s prolific shale industry.

Joly, who had travelled to Washington to meet US secretary of state Marco Rubio and other senior US officials, said she had also warned lawmakers on Capitol Hill that trade tensions would hit “real people”, particularly in Republican states.

“We don’t want that,” Joly said. “We want us to be in a win-win position, and we think we can offer that.”

Ottawa and Mexico City have both drawn up lists of retaliatory tariffs to issue against the US in the event that Trump pulls the trigger on tariffs against them, people with knowledge of the matter previously told the FT.

Canada’s energy minister, Jonathan Wilkinson, has vowed “tit-for-tat” levies on American goods such as steel and orange juice if Trump follows through on his threats.

Trump has launched repeated broadsides against Canada in recent weeks, describing Prime Minister Justin Trudeau as a “governor” and claiming the country should become the US’s 51st state.

Trump said in a speech earlier this month that a US annexation of Canada “would really be something” and he could use “economic force” to do so.

Joly said the idea had not come up in any of her meetings with US officials. “Absolutely not,” she replied, when asked.

“We can be really good friends, best friends, but we will never be a state, nor a colony, period,” she said.

Canada and Mexico have also tried to demonstrate to Trump that they are securing their extensive land borders with the US in response to his claims that drugs and migrants are crossing illegally into his country.

“On the border, I think we’re getting good traction,” Joly said, adding that she would meet with Trump’s border tsar Tom Homan on Friday.

Canada has pledged to spend $1bn on border security, and has recently deployed newly leased Black Hawk patrol helicopters, extra dogs and 60 drones at the border partly in response to Trump’s demands — as well as concerns about weapons and undocumented migrants arriving from the US.

Joly said: “We wanted to reinforce the border as well on our side, because we are concerned with the flow of illegal guns coming from the US and the potential flow of illegal migrants coming from the US.”

Trump has threatened to deport millions of people without permanent legal status from the US, prompting concerns that some migrants will travel to Canada to seek refuge.

Joly said that while the US president had clearly linked his early threat of 25 per cent tariffs with border security, the US and Canada would review their broader trade relationship, including the North American trade deal signed by Trump during his last administration, as part of a separate process.



The writer is the chief economist at German bank LBBW and former chief sovereign ratings officer at S&P

The US last year reached a critical point: the federal government had to spend more on interest payments than it did on defence. According to an economic pattern identified by the historian Niall Ferguson, hegemonic powers that spent more on interest than on the military in the past entered a period of geopolitical decline. Is this now the fate of the US?

The current disarray of American public finances makes us imagine the previously unimaginable: the issuer of the world’s foremost reserve currency being overburdened by public debt. This debt is on track to surpass 160 per cent of GDP by mid-century, according to estimates from the Congressional Budget Office. In the next 10 years, State Street says $2tn annually of net issuance of Treasury debt is expected. Unlike in the 2010s, the Federal Reserve and other price-insensitive buyers, such as foreign central banks, may not be net buyers. Some European sovereigns look similarly exposed. Governments seem to perennially believe that their economies are in a bad spot and need propping up through fiscal stimulus.

As the era of close-to-zero interest rates is fading into history, the debt service burden will inexorably rise. This will come on top of a secular deceleration of the world economy and thus tax receipts; higher public spending on ageing populations; and rising defence outlays. At the same time, political dysfunction is on the rise, rendering fiscal consolidation a remoter prospect.

Thankfully, there are institutions that warn investors of rising sovereign risk: the rating agencies. Or are there? It is fair to question whether the big three agencies — S&P Global, Moody’s and Fitch — have become more coy about the risks of rich countries. In contrast, the agencies seem more willing to dish out downgrades to emerging and developing economies.

This ratings bifurcation became glaringly obvious during the Covid-19 pandemic: the agencies downgraded poor countries left, right and centre, but left advanced economies’ ratings unscathed. Fitch has cut credit ratings on the US, France and the UK in recent years. Moody’s and S&P also downgraded France last year. But the trend is more about a divide.

Between 2000 and 2014, the Big Three rating changes for rich sovereigns were more negative than for emerging markets. The net change — upgrades minus downgrades — of advanced sovereign ratings was about 1 per cent of the rated portfolio per year, compared with an even higher net-upgrade ratio of 8 per cent for emerging markets.

But between 2015 and 2024, there have been even more upgrades for rich countries (a net balance of about 3 per cent of the portfolio per year), despite what appear to be weakening fundamentals. In sharp contrast, emerging markets saw a net balance of about 4 per cent of their sovereign portfolio downgraded, a huge swing from the buoyant earlier period.

In the face of deteriorating public finances in Washington during the pandemic and 10 weeks after a violent mob stormed the Capitol. S&P raised its assessment score of the institutional strength of the US on its 1 to 5 range to its top level of 1. This step in effect averted a downgrade as its assessment of the US fiscal performance had deteriorated.

There is no question that many emerging sovereigns’ creditworthiness has taken a hit during the past decade. The net downgrade pattern seems appropriate. But has the forward-looking creditworthiness of the rich world really improved over the same period? That appears far-fetched. What seems more likely is that the agencies have taken fright after lawsuits and regulatory backlashes following the financial and Eurozone debt crisis.

For example, the S&P — the first agency to downgrade the US in 2011 — had been the subject of particular ire from policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic, from a costly Department of Justice lawsuit to criminal prosecution in Italy. Disclosure: I was part of the committee that downgraded the US and I was a defendant in the Italian case in which the agency and my colleagues were acquitted. My time at the S&P ended in 2018.

The prime role of credit agencies on sovereign debt is to call out credit risk without fear or favour. If not, some investors may be lulled into a false sense of security, which may allow governments to procrastinate and dig themselves into ever-deeper holes. One test might be looming. If US finances deteriorate further, are they prepared to stand up to President Donald Trump and cut ratings?



One thing to start: McKinsey is considering spinning off its in-house asset manager MIO Partners, which invests the private wealth of the consulting firm’s senior staff and alumni. The unit has been dogged by years of controversy over potential conflicts of interest with the firm’s consulting work.

And a scoop: The Trump administration’s embrace of cryptocurrencies is helping fuel a speculative mania that could cause “havoc” when prices collapse, hedge fund Elliott has warned, according to an investor letter seen by the FT.

In today’s newsletter:

Masayoshi Son has been laying low in recent years, rebuilding the strength of his tech conglomerate SoftBank. DD has missed his often adventurous financial forays.

Masa has been circling the AI craze with relative quiet, but finally he’s within grasp of securing a seat at the table of Silicon Valley’s great investment craze.

SoftBank is in talks to invest as much as $25bn in OpenAI, the darling at the heart of the AI frenzy. The deal would make the Japanese group OpenAI’s biggest financial backer.

The investment would be part of a bigger funding round of about $40bn at Sam Altman’s company, which would push the ChatGPT-maker’s valuation to $300bn, the FT reported late on Thursday.

Masa’s known for majorly leveraging up his investments (one banker in 2019 said there were “layers of leverage upon leverage”). This cuts two ways: when things turn sideways, they implode. But a good call can lead to massive payouts.

When it comes to AI, is Masa buying in at the end of the cycle?

SoftBank’s famous for a few spectacular blow-ups. WeWork’s valuation plummeted after it had to scrap its IPO plan (and then later, filed for bankruptcy). SoftBank’s ties and backing of Greensill Capital also ended in disaster.

So, for a few years, Masa has kept under the radar, licking his wounds while building up a strong conviction that AI would be the centrepiece of his next great set of investments.

And the spigot of massive tech investments has once again opened up, coaxing him to make a big dice roll.

SoftBank’s one of just four investors who have pledged a total of $100bn to fund Stargate, a major new data centre project unveiled last week. (Others backing the project touted by President Donald Trump include Oracle, Abu Dhabi state fund MGX and OpenAI.)

The ties between OpenAI and SoftBank are multiplying quickly. The new potential $25bn investment would cover the latter’s commitment to the US infrastructure project, according to several people familiar with the plans.

When it comes to bets on AI, Masa has had some good luck so far. His investment in Arm — of which SoftBank’s still the majority shareholder — has made him a fortune, with the stock trebling since going public.

This has given him a new stockpile of assets to leverage in every which way to seed his bets. Such firepower has historically become a fount of entertainment for Wall Street, or just good drama.

Please join DD in pulling up a seat with some popcorn and a stiff drink in hand, because our boy’s officially back.

Just before Donald Trump’s inauguration, the scion of Italy’s billionaire Agnelli family John Elkann joined a swelling list of high-powered executives to visit the returning US president.

As ever with Trump, a deal was on the cards. Days later, the Dodge and Jeep maker Stellantis, which Elkann chairs, committed to invest $5bn across its US car factories.

The move is part of Elkann’s plan to turn around the struggling carmaker, after the company parted ways with charismatic but uncompromising chief executive Carlos Tavares last month.

Stellantis’s share price has cratered in the past year as it has struggled with a shortfall in demand for its cars. Tavares’s unrelenting style also damaged relations, not least with US dealers saddled with high-priced vehicles they were unable to shift.

Since Tavares’s departure, Elkann has jetted across Europe to improve relations with the leaders of Italy, France and the EU, cancelled lay-offs in the US and refreshed Stellantis’s management teams.

His visit to Trump may prove the most important step yet in his strategic reset.

Beyond the $5bn investment, Elkann is betting that he can use Trump’s EV scepticism and deregulation push to Stellantis’s advantage.

He told Trump he would back the new administration’s shift away from Joe Biden’s EV targets. The carmaker will launch a number of new models in 2025, across hybrid, electric and petrol formats.

While Elkann may have won Trump’s favour, there are challenges ahead. The company continues to supply the US from Canada and Mexico, who are both threatened with tariffs.

And whoever Elkann chooses as Stellantis’s next chief executive will face the same challenges as the rest of the car industry: increasing competition from China and a long-term slowdown in new car sales.

Blackstone, the world’s largest alternative manager, is flexing its muscles again after enduring a test when interest rates soared in 2022, causing many investors to sell their investments in its massive property fund, Breit.

It’s on the offensive again after raising $171bn and investing $134bn in 2024, not far off the New York-based group’s activity in 2021 when chief executive Stephen Schwarzman professed an “out of body experience” as cash sloshed around freely.

In its fourth-quarter results, Blackstone’s relatively nascent infrastructure business emerged as a driver of better than expected returns.

Its $43bn perpetual infrastructure fund soared about 20 per cent for the year, lifting its fee-related performance revenues by $1.2bn, or 728 per cent, from the same time in 2023.

At the helm of Blackstone’s infrastructure unit is a rising star inside the group who was name-checked by Schwarzman in front of shareholders on Thursday.

In 2017, Sean Klimczak was tasked with getting Blackstone on the map in infrastructure, an area where non-US groups such as Brookfield, Macquarie and EQT dominate. The efforts didn’t start off swimmingly — a Saudi Arabia-backed effort initially stalled.

Meanwhile, independent infrastructure investment outfits including Global Infrastructure Partners and Stonepeak, which had been spun out of Blackstone, had their assets soar.

But Blackstone’s now collected $55bn in infrastructure assets and believes it has positioned itself to be a major player. It has been bolstered by winning investments such as gas export pioneer Cheniere Energy Partners and data centre operator QTS.

Schwarzman said the toils of building businesses internally carry “significant economic benefits as compared to a strategy of bolt-on acquisitions”, an apparent reference to a wave of infrastructure-related deals such as BlackRock’s $12.5bn takeover of GIP last year.

Space lasers Donald Trump has ordered work on a defence shield that goes beyond Ronald Reagan’s famed “Star Wars” programme, the FT reports.

Deutsche’s woes For much of the past 15 years, the only thing consistent about Deutsche Bank was its ability to step on every rake it encountered, Lex writes. But disappointing annual results suggest anxiety over hidden garden implements remains.

Bonus value As bonus season kicks off, Bloomberg analyses the bonus currencies for a dozen of the world’s biggest banks to help demystify the awards.

Deutsche Bank chief says ‘nothing is off limits’ as profits plunge (FT)

Staley discussed Madoff with Epstein, FCA alleges (FT)

Microsoft sheds $200bn in market value after cloud sales disappoint (FT)

Court rules Sanjeev Gupta owes $53mn to rival steelmakers (FT)

Intel sales slide as chipmaker pursues turnaround strategy (FT)

Meta sticks with big bet on AI even after DeepSeek shook markets (FT)

UK regulator proposes easing obligations on Royal Mail (FT)

Shell boss vows to take Jackdaw gasfield battle to UK’s highest court (FT)

Thales Alenia Space wins €862mn deal for Europe’s first lunar cargo vehicle (FT)



Donald Trump has said he is considering excluding oil imports from the 25 per cent tariffs he has threatened to impose on Mexico and Canada, in a sign the US president might offer exemptions for crucial industries.

Trump said tariffs on imports from the US’s closest trading partners would be imposed this weekend, adding that he would decide on the details, including the potential exemptions, on Thursday evening.

“They send us oil — we’ll see,” said Trump, speaking to reporters at the White House. “It depends on what the price is. If the oil is properly priced, if they treat us properly — which they don’t.”

Despite the US being the world’s biggest oil producer, many of the country’s ageing refineries were built to handle heavier grades of crude, such as the type produced in Canada, rather than the lighter grades found in Texas oilfields. Restricting imports would risk pushing up US fuel prices.

In the first 10 months of 2024, Canada shipped more than 4mn barrels of crude a day to the US — more than 60 per cent of total American imports. Mexico, the second-biggest supplier, sent more than 400,000 b/d.

Trump said the tariff “may or may not rise with time”.

“We’ll be announcing the tariffs on Canada and Mexico for a number of reasons,” Trump told reporters.

“Number one is the people that have poured into our country so horribly and so much. Number two are the drugs fentanyl and everything else that have come into the country. Number three are the massive subsidies that we’re giving to Canada and to Mexico in the form of deficits,” he said.

Reducing prices at the pump was a central part of Trump’s campaign pledge to bring down inflation for Americans. Canadian producers have warned in recent months that tariffs risked pushing up US fuel prices.

A report released this month by the US Congressional Research Service found that “consumer prices for gasoline, diesel fuel, and other petroleum products throughout the country could be affected by crude oil import tariffs, especially in regions most reliant on imports from Canada”.

Trump first threatened to impose tariffs of 25 per cent on all imports from Canada and Mexico shortly after winning the election in November, accusing the countries of permitting illegal migration and drug trafficking.

He also threatened to levy an extra 10 per cent tariff on Chinese goods, as he criticised Beijing for failing to follow through on promises to impose the death penalty for people dealing fentanyl, a deadly synthetic opioid.



Donald Trump blamed Democrats and diversity, equity and inclusion policies for a collision between a commercial jet and military helicopter that killed 67 people just outside Washington.

Without citing evidence, the president said his “common sense” assessment was the accident on Wednesday night was caused by lax safety standards as a result of DEI policies introduced by his predecessors.

Federal crash investigators said it was too early to say what caused the collision.

“There are no survivors,” Trump said on Thursday as he took to the podium in the White House press briefing room for the first time in his second presidency.

The regional American Airlines flight, which was operated by the airline’s subsidiary PSA Airlines, had started in Wichita, Kansas. The Bombardier CRJ700 jet was making its approach into Washington Reagan National Airport when it collided with a US army Sikorsky H-60 Black Hawk helicopter, plunging into the Potomac River.

The fuselage of the commercial jet was found in three pieces in the water. The American flight had 60 passengers and four crew members on board, while three soldiers were in the Black Hawk.

The National Transportation Safety Board said it would have a preliminary report in 30 days. The agency late on Thursday said it had recovered the voice and data recorders from the jet, though the helicopter’s were still in the water.

When asked about Trump’s speculation regarding the cause of the crash, Jennifer Homendy, the agency’s chair, earlier on Thursday said: “We do not know enough facts to be able to rule in or out human factor, mechanical factors.”

Trump, who was flanked by his vice-president and newly sworn-in secretaries of defence and transportation, began his remarks with an appeal for unity in “a moment of anguish”, when “the differences between Americans fade to nothing”.

But he quickly launched into a political attack against Democrats, saying that ex-presidents Barack Obama and Joe Biden had lowered standards for who was allowed to qualify to be an air traffic controller.

“I put safety first, Obama, Biden and the Democrats put policy first . . . and their politics was even worse.”

He said that “for an air traffic controller, we want the brightest, the smartest, the sharpest. We want somebody that’s psychologically superior,” adding that “I don’t think” people with “severe disabilities” should be air traffic controllers.

After appearing to blame air traffic controllers for the accident, he then turned his attention to the crew of the Black Hawk.

“You had a pilot problem from the standpoint of the helicopter, because it was visual. It was very clear night . . . the American Airlines plane had lights blazing,” Trump said.

“I have helicopters. You can stop a helicopter very quickly. It had the ability to go up or down, had the ability to turn, and the turn it made was not the correct one,” he added.

US defence officials said the Black Hawk was being flown by an experienced crew on routine training.

Trump said investigators were trying to determine whether the troops were using night vision equipment, which “may change your view” from the cockpit. A defence official said the army could not confirm whether the crew was wearing the night vision goggles.

Defence secretary Pete Hegseth said the three soldiers in the helicopter “were on a routine annual night flight retraining on a standard corridor for a continuity of government mission”.

“Tragically, last night, a mistake was made . . . there was some sort of an elevation issue that we have immediately begun investigating at the DoD and army level,” he said, adding that what happened was “absolutely unacceptable”.

US Army aviation expert John Koziol said that given the flight crew’s experience, “this should not have been a problem knowing exactly where they were at”.

He called the corridor “relatively easy to fly” and said the helicopter’s route was flown on a near daily basis by army and other government aircraft.

Earlier on Thursday, officials said 28 bodies had been recovered from the American flight and one body from the Black Hawk.

Trump said Russian citizens were aboard the flight and the US would facilitate the repatriation of their bodies. There has been no direct air travel between the US and Russia since Moscow’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

Serious aviation accidents are rare in the US. The last major crash involving a US commercial aircraft was in 2009, when 49 people were killed on board a Colgan Air flight that crashed into a house near Buffalo, New York.

Trump urged people to keep flying.



Tulsi Gabbard was grilled over her past support for leaker Edward Snowden, her dealings with Syria’s ousted president and sympathies for Russia as she tried to convince sceptical senators to confirm her as Donald Trump’s director of national intelligence.

Gabbard pledged to be no one’s “puppet” and pushed back against the suggestion that she sympathised with dictators including Russia’s Vladimir Putin or Syria’s Bashar al-Assad.

“The fact is, what truly unsettles my political opponents is I refuse to be their puppet,” she said during her testimony.

Senators in both parties tried to pin her down on a series of sensitive issues, including whether she thought Snowden was a traitor — a question she continually refused to answer.

“My heart is with my commitment to our constitution and our nation’s security,” she said.

If confirmed, she pledged to ensure such a leak would not happen again. But she alarmed many members of the Senate intelligence committee when she noted that while Snowden broke the law, he “released information that exposed egregious, illegal and unconstitutional programmes . . . that led to serious reforms”.

Several senators expressed concerns about what signal her confirmation might send, given her support for someone who violated the trust of the intelligence community.

“A lot of the folks in the intelligence community that you’d have the responsibility to oversight . . . they want to hear that you also believe . . . not just he broke the law, but that he’s a traitor — because they don’t want that to ever happen again,” said Republican Senator James Lankford.

Gabbard refused to budge.

The former Democratic congresswoman from Hawaii and US Army Reserve officer, who is now a Republican, will struggle to get confirmed by the full Senate if she does not win approval first from the full committee, which could be a challenge.

She received the backing of several members of the committee, including chair Republican Senator Tom Cotton. Others, including Lankford, who asked tough questions, have already indicated they would support her.

On Thursday, Gabbard was also asked about her 2017 meeting with Assad, and whether she pressed him on his use of chemical weapons and other atrocities.

“I asked him tough questions about his own regime’s actions, the use of chemical weapons and the brutal tactics that were being used against his own people,” she said, adding that she did not get any concessions from him — and “didn’t expect to”.

Gabbard has been haunted throughout the process by many of her past statements and actions. She has been accused of spreading Russian disinformation and echoing Moscow’s propaganda used to justify its full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

When asked by Republican Senator Jerry Moran of Kansas whether Russia would “get a pass” in her assessments or policy recommendations, she responded: “I’m offended by the question.”

She added: “If confirmed, no country, group or individual will get a pass in my fulfilling that responsibility of providing that full intelligence picture so that you all can make the best informed policy decisions for the safety, security and freedom of the American people.”

Another senator, Susan Collins, asked whether she had ever knowingly met with Hizbollah officials, an accusation Gabbard dismissed as “absurd”.

At the beginning of the hearing she said the US spy community must undergo significant change to rectify years of failures, with politicised intelligence in the past leading to wars, foreign policy failures and abuses of power. She promised she would offer Trump “completely objective, unbiased and apolitical” counsel.

Senators also pressed her on her efforts as a congresswoman to repeal a surveillance programme known as Section 702, which allows the US government to collect the communications of terror suspects abroad.

She said in Thursday’s hearing she supported the programme after new safeguards added earlier this year.



Gold hit a record high on Thursday as investors fretted over potential US tariffs and as a growing bullion stockpile in New York created a shortage in London.

The benchmark price rose to $2,798 per troy ounce, surpassing its October record and taking its gains to 7 per cent this year, as traders hedge against a potential shift in US trade policy.

US President Donald Trump has threatened to impose 25 per cent tariffs on all the country’s imports from Canada and Mexico from Saturday, triggering fear in the market that sweeping tariffs could apply to gold, which has historically been exempt from import duties.

Traders have been amassing a bullion stockpile on Comex, the New York commodity exchange, where inventories have shot up 75 per cent since the US election. The value of the stockpile rose to $85bn on Thursday, representing more than 30.4mn troy ounces, according to Comex data.

The surge into New York has depleted stocks of readily available gold in London, where there is currently a queue of four to eight weeks to withdraw it from the Bank of England.

A weakening US dollar also helped to fuel the gold rally, as it makes bullion cheaper to buy using other currencies.

Underscoring the market’s bullishness, short positions for gold futures have fallen to their lowest level since April 2020, according to data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the US derivatives regulator.

“There is a lot of concern over tariffs,” said Suki Cooper, analyst at Standard Chartered. “Gold’s safe haven appeal really kicks in, when there is a broad-based asset risk.”

Typically gold benefits from lower interest rates, because bullion is a non-yielding asset, however that correlation has broken down in recent months.

Gold’s rise on Thursday came a day after the US Federal Reserve held interest rates steady and chair Jay Powell signalled caution over further rate cuts.

Cooper said that, while gold was likely to hit fresh highs in coming weeks, the rally could slow later in the year. “If we see further rate cuts in the first half of the year, that would support gold, then that tailwind will subside in the second half of the year,” she said.

Analysts at MUFG also told clients that gold had “the impetus to go much further in the short term”, as the market turned to gold as a geopolitical hedge against the uncertainties of the Trump administration.

“Also, emerging market central banks continue to be purchase bullion,” they added.



The Trump administration’s embrace of cryptocurrencies is helping fuel a speculative mania that could cause “havoc” when prices collapse, the hedge fund Elliott Management has warned.

The $70bn-in-assets firm took aim at the US government’s apparent enthusiasm for assets that have soared in price but have “no substance”, and also at politicians who are supportive of cryptocurrencies that could eventually become a rival to the US dollar, according to an investor letter seen by the Financial Times.

The fund “has never seen a market like this”, wrote Elliott, referring to the speculative investor frenzy it believes is gripping financial markets. It pointed to the artificial intelligence boom and high equity market valuations as signs of investors “acting like a crowd of sports bettors”.

“Crypto is ground zero” for the speculative surge across markets, not only because of the size it has grown to but also because of its “perceived proximity to the White House”, it added.

The “inevitable collapse” of the crypto bubble “could wreak havoc in ways we cannot yet anticipate”, it said.

Elliott’s criticism of the White House’s stance on crypto comes despite the fact that the firm’s founder, Paul Singer, is a longtime Republican donor who donated $56mn to conservative candidates in the 2024 election cycle, according to website OpenSecrets.

Singer, who has long warned of the dangers of crypto, has in the past been critical of Donald Trump’s economic policies. However, he donated $5mn to the “Make America Great Again” political action committee in the last election, whose goal was to support the president.

Cryptocurrency prices have rallied hard since Trump’s election in November, after he promised he would make the US “the bitcoin superpower of the world”. Bitcoin surged from about $70,000 before the election to a record high of more than $100,000.

After his inauguration Trump signed an executive order to promote US “leadership in digital assets and financial technology while protecting economic liberty” and tasked a working group with evaluating the creation of a national digital asset stockpile.

Elliott’s letter also points to the “immense advantage” the dollar enjoys as the world’s reserve currency, and questioned why the US government would encourage the take-up of alternatives at a time when other countries are trying to wean themselves off the greenback.

For any elected official to support “marginalising the dollar” was “profoundly dangerous”, wrote Elliott, highlighting the hundreds of millions of dollars spent helping politicians who were sympathetic to crypto get elected.

For instance, the Fairshake political action committee, which works to get pro-crypto candidates elected on both sides of the political aisle, spent $173mn in the 2023-2024 election cycle, according to OpenSecrets.

Trump’s own businesses have extended their links with the cryptocurrency markets. Alongside his sons and longtime business partners, Trump backed a crypto platform called World Liberty Financial last year, and earlier this month he and first lady Melania Trump both launched memecoins — a type of cryptocurrency with no underlying business model or cash flow.

Trump Media, in which the president owns a majority stake, said on Wednesday it would expand beyond social media and launch a financial services business that would invest up to $250mn into cryptocurrency and other assets.

Elliott, founded by Singer in 1977, is known as a fearsome activist investor, which takes on companies and even countries in heated boardroom or legal battles.

Elliott declined to comment.



The US economy grew at an annualised rate of 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter, a weaker than expected end to a year dominated by the resilience of American consumers.

Thursday’s GDP figure from the Bureau of Economic Analysis compared with the 2.6 per cent expected by economists polled by Bloomberg and 3.1 per cent in the third quarter.

The report comes a day after the Federal Reserve held interest rates, with chair Jay Powell saying the strength of the economy meant the central bank did not need to be “in a hurry” to cut borrowing costs.

Consumer spending powered a large portion of the growth in the world’s largest economy in the fourth quarter, with government expenditures also boosting the figures, the BEA said. A decline in investment partially offset the rise.

“It’s really important to see the acceleration in consumer spending, notably on big-ticket items — vehicle sales went to their highest level since May 2021,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at KPMG US, who added that “a banner travel season” had contributed to services spending.

The US economy expanded 2.8 per cent for the whole of 2024, on a par with the 2.9 per cent recorded in 2023.

Bernard Yaros, lead US economist at research firm Oxford Economics, said the slowdown in growth in the fourth quarter was unlikely to last. “The weakness on the investment side was attributable in large part to payback from an unsustainable boom in aircraft investment earlier [in 2024],” Yaros said.

The IMF expects the US economy to continue to outpace peers in Europe, Canada and Japan this year. President Donald Trump’s pledge to cut taxes has raised expectations that US growth will remain robust.

But some economists are concerned that if Trump sparks a trade war with tariffs on trading partners, it could wipe out some of those expected gains.

“The biggest risk to our 2025 forecast is an immediate imposition of across-the-board tariffs on key trading partners,” said Yaros, adding that a 25 per cent levy on Canada and Mexico, plus additional tariffs on China, would dent growth by 1.2 percentage points.

US government bonds were broadly steady following the data, with the two-year yield 0.02 percentage points lower at 4.21 per cent, while the benchmark 10-year yield was down 0.04 percentage points at 4.52 per cent.

US stocks rose in early New York trading, with the S&P 500 gaining 0.5 per cent and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite also advancing 0.6 per cent.



Rescuers have found no survivors among the 67 passengers and crew aboard a commercial jet and military helicopter that collided on Wednesday night near Reagan National Airport outside Washington before plunging into the Potomac River.

The flight, operated by PSA Airlines for American Airlines, had originated in Wichita, Kansas. The Bombardier CRJ700 collided with a US army Sikorsky H-60 Black Hawk helicopter, which had three crew members, as it approached the airport at about 9pm on Wednesday.

“We do not believe there are any survivors,” DC Fire and EMS chief John Donnelly told a media briefing on Thursday morning, adding that authorities were shifting their mission from “rescue” to “recovery”.

The American flight was carrying 60 passengers and four crew members, while three soldiers were on the army helicopter. Defence officials said the Black Hawk was being flown by an experienced crew on a routine training mission.

Responders have so far recovered 28 bodies from the American flight and one body from the Black Hawk, officials said on Thursday. The fuselage of the commercial jet was found in three pieces in the water.

US transportation secretary Sean Duffy said the American flight and the helicopter were each in “a standard flight pattern” and that it was not unusual for them to be following those flight paths before the collision occurred.

“Everything was standard in the lead-up to the crash,” Duffy said. Military aircraft are accustomed to the presence of nearby planes landing at Reagan National Airport and there is generally a procedure in place, he added. “Something went wrong here.”

“We don’t know why the military aircraft came into the path of the PSA aircraft,” American Airlines chief executive Robert Isom told a media briefing on Thursday morning. The jet pilots were “experienced”, Isom added.

The shift from search and rescue to a recovery operation to pull out remaining bodies came after an all-night effort by divers in the shallow but near-freezing waters of the Potomac, officials said. About 300 federal, District of Columbia and state responders, including multiple teams of divers, were at the scene.

US Figure Skating, the sport’s governing body, said several of its athletes, coaches and family members were on the American Airlines flight and returning from a development camp in Wichita.

“We are devastated by this unspeakable tragedy,” it said in a statement.

The airport, located near the Pentagon and across from the National Mall, said all take-offs and landings had been stopped, but would reopen at 11am on Thursday, officials said.

Sirens blared across the US capital as dozens of police cars swarmed both sides of the river near the scene of the crash on Wednesday night, closing off roads to traffic, while helicopters with searchlights circled above and boats circled the wreckage.

The Black Hawk was on a training flight, according to Heather Chairez, spokesperson for the army’s Joint Task Force-National Capital Region. The helicopter was operating out of Fort Belvoir, Virginia, about 20 miles from the Pentagon, the army said.

Defence secretary Pete Hegseth wrote on X that the army and defence department had opened an investigation into the crash.

US President Donald Trump said he had been “fully briefed on the terrible accident”. He later posted about the crash on Truth Social, saying it could have been prevented.

“The aeroplane was on a perfect and routine line of approach to the airport. The helicopter was going straight at the aeroplane for an extended period of time. It is a CLEAR NIGHT, the lights on the plane were blazing, why didn’t the helicopter go up or down, or turn,” he asked.

“Why didn’t the control tower tell the helicopter what to do instead of asking if they saw the plane. This is a bad situation that looks like it should have been prevented. NOT GOOD!!!” Trump added.

Serious aviation accidents are rare in the US. The last major crash involving a US commercial aircraft was in 2009, when 49 people were killed on board a Colgan Air flight which crashed into a house near Buffalo, New York.

Sikorsky, which makes the Black Hawk helicopter and is owned by defence contractor Lockheed Martin, said: “We have offered our support to the investigation and our customer.”

MHI RJ Aviation, which acquired the CRJ series of aircraft and supporting operations from Bombardier in 2020, said it “stands ready to assist as needed,” and offered its condolences to those involved in the accident.

Jerry Moran, a senator from Kansas, told reporters he had lobbied for American to introduce a nonstop flight from Wichita to Reagan National Airport.

“That flight has been in existence about a year, and it is certainly true that Kansas and in Wichita in particular, we’re going to know people who are on this flight,” he said.

Additional reporting by Philip Georgiadis



The CIA’s claim that the Covid-19 virus probably emerged from a Chinese laboratory leak has revived a fierce five-year battle over the pandemic’s origins.

Several US agencies and some scientists have proposed the lab leak theory over the past few years. But other experts insist there are good reasons to think the devastating pathogen emerged from a market where animals are traded.

Beijing has never fully co-operated with international investigators, impeding the search for a definitive answer. But scientists continue their quest to establish the causes of a global health crisis that killed millions of people, caused trillions of dollars of economic damage and increased fears over the risks of virus research.

The CIA said on Saturday that the Sars-Cov-2 coronavirus was “more likely” to have a “research-related” origin than a natural one.

But the CIA said it had “low confidence” in its conclusion, which came after its new director John Ratcliffe took office and urged the agency to “get off the sidelines” in its analysis of the pathogen’s origins. Its assessment gave no indications of having drawn on new intelligence and was the product of a review ordered by the Biden administration near the end of its time in office.

The CIA’s statement is the latest from US politicians and agencies that lean towards the lab leak theory. Some Republican lawmakers have used the hypothesis as part of a broader critique of China’s handling of the outbreak. Beijing has denied that either the Wuhan Institute of Virology, a leading centre for coronavirus research, or the Wuhan Center for Disease Prevention and Control were the initial virus source.

Asked about the CIA statement this week, China’s foreign ministry said the US should “stop politicising and weaponising origins-tracing”.

Many authorities internationally have yet to take a strong position on Covid’s origins, while stressing that they back World Health Organization efforts to establish it. The UK’s health ministry said a “robust, transparent and science-led review” would “better prevent” future pandemics.

The WHO’s relations with Beijing deteriorated when Chinese officials did not allow the health body to probe Covid’s origins thoroughly. This month the organisation said it was a “moral and scientific imperative” for China to offer the necessary data and access.

Its advocates believe that if a potent new coronavirus appears in a city that was a centre for research into such pathogens, then a lab was probably the origin.

The Wuhan institute’s work reflected a growing focus on the threat posed by diseases of animal origin. Such zoonotic coronaviruses are thought to have caused the Sars and Mers outbreaks in 2002 and 2012. The institute sometimes worked with US partners on US government-funded projects, such as 2015 “gain-of-function” experiments that made coronaviruses deadlier for research purposes.

The lab leak idea has spawned various sub-theories. One is that Sars-Cov-2 was being investigated by researchers having been gathered from a bat or other wild animal. Another is that the pathogen was created by modifying a natural coronavirus. This could have been done either by a process of artificially accelerated evolution known as serial passaging, or by genetic engineering.

Proponents of the lab leak hypothesis acknowledge the lack of supporting proof but argue this is impossible to gather without Chinese co-operation.

“There is not a smoking gun, but there’s a gun laying on the table and it’s warm to the touch,” said Jamie Metzl, a former member of a WHO advisory committee on genome editing. “There is all of this circumstantial evidence.”

Many scientists still favour a scenario that Covid, like other coronaviruses, emerged in animals and then passed to humans. According to this model, the likely starting point was contact between wild creatures and humans in a Wuhan wet market where early Covid cases were identified.

The theory found support in research published last year on environmental samples taken from Huanan Seafood Market in the central Chinese city in January 2020. It pinpointed a stall where all the Sars-Cov-2 positive swabs contained traces of wildlife DNA too, showing both animals and virus were present at the same location. The samples included genetic material from species such as raccoon dogs, civets and bamboo rats. All these creatures had been identified as possible sources of virus transmission to humans.

“Multiple plausible intermediate hosts of Sars-Cov-2 were present at the exact site within Wuhan to which Covid-19 was first epidemiologically linked,” the researchers wrote.

Critics allege the market origin theory is flawed. They say it gives too little weight to reports of human Covid cases as early as November 2019. The market hypothesis also includes the contested suggestion that there were at least two separate spillover events there from animals to humans, helping seed an epidemic.

The scientists behind last year’s study say neither of these points undermines the idea that the market was the source of Covid. They contend that Sars-Cov-2 genetic material in the January 2020 samples could have been deposited weeks before, consistent with the reports of Covid cases in November 2019. Professor Florence Débarre, an evolutionary biologist and co-author of the research, said a market origin was “likely whether or not there were multiple spillovers”.

The CIA had not provided corroborating information for its lab leak assessment, Débarre noted, adding: “I hope that the data and logic leading to the conclusion of the various elements of the US intelligence community will one day be made public.”

Gain of function research involves manipulating pathogens to probe their behaviour by enhancing properties such as transmissibility and ability to cause disease. The work may be done for valid reasons such as development of vaccines or other ways to combat emerging pathogens.

But the rules governing its research remain patchy, with no international governance regime in place.

Last year the US government tightened rules on gain of function research. Some experts argue the revised rules, which were weakened from an initial plan that some scientists warned could hobble work on less hazardous pathogens, have troubling gaps.

The focus on federally funded research pays insufficient attention to non-federally financed work and experiments on novel pathogens, said Alina Chan, a viral vector engineer at MIT and Harvard’s Broad Institute.

“The prediction of pandemic risk arising from novel experiments is difficult even for multidisciplinary teams of experts, and a self-reporting system is inadequate as evidenced by past incidents,” Chan wrote in a paper published last month.

US politicians such as Senator Rand Paul have long called for closer scrutiny of gain of function research. The debate, like that over Covid’s origins, will remain hotly contested for years to come.



China’s military is building a massive complex in western Beijing that US intelligence believes will serve as a wartime command centre far larger than the Pentagon, according to current and former American officials.

Satellite images obtained by the Financial Times that are being examined by US intelligence show a roughly 1,500-acre construction site 30km south-west of Beijing with deep holes that military experts assess will house large, hardened bunkers to protect Chinese military leaders during any conflict — including potentially a nuclear war.

Several current and former US officials said the intelligence community was closely monitoring the site, which would be the world’s largest military command centre — and at least 10 times the size of the Pentagon.

Based on an assessment of satellite images obtained by the FT, major construction started in mid-2024. Three people familiar with the situation said some intelligence analysts had dubbed the project “Beijing Military City”.

The construction comes as the People’s Liberation Army develops new weapons and projects ahead of the force’s centenary in 2027. US intelligence said President Xi Jinping had also ordered the PLA to have developed the capability to attack Taiwan by then.

The PLA is also rapidly expanding its nuclear weapons arsenal and working to better integrate its different branches. Military experts believe the PLA’s lack of integration is among its biggest weaknesses compared with the US armed forces.

“If confirmed, this new advanced underground command bunker for the military leadership, including President Xi as the chairman of the Central Military Commission, signals Beijing’s intent to build not only a world-class conventional force but also an advanced nuclear warfighting capability,” said Dennis Wilder, the former head of China analysis for the CIA.

The Director of National Intelligence, which oversees the US intelligence community, did not comment on the project. The Chinese embassy in Washington said it was “not aware of the details” but stressed that China was “committed to the path of peaceful development and a defence policy that is defensive in nature”.

Renny Babiarz, a former imagery analyst at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency who has analysed imagery of the area, said there were at least 100 cranes working over a 5 sq km area developing underground infrastructure.

“Imagery analysis suggests the construction of several possible underground facilities linked via possible underground passageways, although additional data and information is needed to more fully assess this construction,” said Babiarz, now vice-president of analysis and operations at AllSource Analysis, a geospatial analysis service group.

The site was busy with construction activity earlier this month, in contrast to a dearth of development in most big real estate projects in China, which has been gripped by a property sector crisis. There were no showrooms typically associated with a commercial real estate project. Unusually for a commercial project, there are no official mentions of the construction site on the internet in Chinese.

While there was no visible military presence at the site, there were signs warning against flying drones or taking photographs. Guards at one gate abruptly said that entry was prohibited and refused to talk about the project. One supervisor leaving the construction site refused to comment on the project.

Access to the back of the project has been blocked by a checkpoint. A guard said the public could not access popular hiking and tourist areas near the site, which a local shopkeeper described as a “military area”.

One former senior US intelligence official said that while the PLA’s current headquarters in central Beijing was fairly new it was not designed to be a secure combat command centre.

“China’s main secure command centre is in the Western Hills, north-east of the new facility, and was built decades ago at the height of the cold war,” said the former official. “The size, scale and partially buried characteristics of the new facility suggest it will replace the Western Hills complex as the primary wartime command facility.

“Chinese leaders may judge that the new facility will enable greater security against US ‘bunker buster’ munitions, and even against nuclear weapons,” the former intelligence official added. “It can also incorporate more advanced and secure communications and have room for expanding PLA capabilities and missions.”

One China researcher familiar with the images said the site had “all the hallmarks of a sensitive military facility”, including heavily reinforced concrete and deep underground tunnelling.

“Nearly 10 times bigger than the Pentagon, it’s fitting for Xi Jinping’s ambitions to surpass the US,” said the researcher. “This fortress only serves one purpose, which is to act as a doomsday bunker for China’s increasingly sophisticated and capable military.”

The construction of the site comes amid a multi-year redevelopment of Beijing’s western outskirts. But there has been speculation online in China about why houses in the Qinglonghu area were being razed.

In one post on Baidu Zhidao, the Chinese search engine’s equivalent of Quora, one user said: “Are they going to build the Chinese Pentagon in Qinglonghu?”

Two people close to Taiwan’s defence ministry also said the PLA appeared to be building a new command centre, though some experts questioned if the area was suitable for underground bunkers.

“The land area is much larger than a normal military camp and military school, so it can only be assumed that it is a site for an administrative organisation or a large training base,” said Hsu Yen-chi, a researcher at the Council on Strategic and Wargaming Studies think-tank in Taipei.



OpenAI says it has found evidence that Chinese artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek used the US company’s proprietary models to train its own open-source competitor, as concerns grow over a potential breach of intellectual property.

The San Francisco-based ChatGPT maker told the Financial Times it had seen some evidence of “distillation”, which it suspects to be from DeepSeek.

The technique is used by developers to obtain better performance on smaller models by using outputs from larger, more capable ones, allowing them to achieve similar results on specific tasks at a much lower cost.

Distillation is a common practice in the industry but the concern was that DeepSeek may be doing it to build its own rival model, which is a breach of OpenAI’s terms of service.

“The issue is when you [take it out of the platform and] are doing it to create your own model for your own purposes,” said one person close to OpenAI.

OpenAI declined to comment further or provide details of its evidence. Its terms of service state users cannot “copy” any of its services or “use output to develop models that compete with OpenAI”.

DeepSeek’s release of its R1 reasoning model has surprised markets, as well as investors and technology companies in Silicon Valley. Its built-on-a-shoestring models have attained high rankings and comparable results to leading US models.

Shares in Nvidia fell 17 per cent on Monday, wiping $589bn off its market value, on fears that big investments in its expensive AI hardware might not be needed. They recovered by 9 per cent on Tuesday, along with other tech stocks.

OpenAI and its partner Microsoft investigated accounts believed to be DeepSeek’s last year that were using OpenAI’s application programming interface (API) and blocked their access on suspicion of distillation that violated the terms of service, another person with direct knowledge said. These investigations were first reported by Bloomberg.

Microsoft declined to comment and OpenAI did not immediately respond to a request for comment on this detail. DeepSeek did not respond to a request for comment made during the lunar new year holiday.

Earlier, President Donald Trump’s AI and crypto tsar David Sacks said “it is possible” that IP theft had occurred.

“There’s a technique in AI called distillation . . . when one model learns from another model [and] kind of sucks the knowledge out of the parent model,” Sacks told Fox News on Tuesday.

“And there’s substantial evidence that what DeepSeek did here is they distilled the knowledge out of OpenAI models, and I don’t think OpenAI is very happy about this,” Sacks added, although he did not provide evidence.

DeepSeek said it used just 2,048 Nvidia H800 graphics cards and spent $5.6mn to train its V3 model with 671bn parameters, a fraction of what OpenAI and Google spent to train comparably sized models. Some experts said the model generated responses that indicated it had been trained on outputs from OpenAI’s GPT-4, which would violate its terms of service.

Industry insiders say that it is common practice for AI labs in China and the US to use outputs from companies such as OpenAI, which have invested in hiring people to teach their models how to produce responses that sound more human. This is expensive and labour-intensive, and smaller players often piggyback off this work, say the insiders.

“It is a very common practice for start-ups and academics to use outputs from human-aligned commercial LLMs, like ChatGPT, to train another model,” said Ritwik Gupta, a PhD candidate in AI at the University of California, Berkeley.

“That means you get this human feedback step for free. It is not surprising to me that DeepSeek supposedly would be doing the same. If they were, stopping this practice precisely may be difficult,” he added.

The practice highlights the difficulty for companies keen to protect their technical edge. “We know [China]-based companies — and others — are constantly trying to distil the models of leading US AI companies,” OpenAI said in its latest statement.

It added: “We engage in countermeasures to protect our IP, including a careful process for which frontier capabilities to include in released models, and believe . . . it is critically important that we are working closely with the US government to best protect the most capable models from efforts by adversaries and competitors to take US technology.”

OpenAI is battling allegations of its own copyright infringement from newspapers and content creators, including lawsuits from The New York Times and prominent authors, who accuse the company of training its models on their articles and books without permission.



China has built up control of critical minerals across the developing world over the course of two decades through a network of at least 26 state-backed financial institutions, according to a new report that traces the country’s financing strategy.

Research published on Wednesday found that Chinese policy and commercial banks — working alongside private Chinese entities and some non-Chinese groups — issued loans worth nearly $57bn from 2000 to 2021 in 19 low- and middle-income countries for mining and processing copper, cobalt, nickel, lithium and rare earths, components critical to clean energy technologies such as electric vehicle batteries and solar panels.

The study by AidData at the College of William & Mary in the US, which was reviewed by the Financial Times, attempts to capture the extent of China’s financing of extractive projects in the developing world. The research highlights the scale of the challenge faced by the west in countering China’s control of the global supply chain for emerging green-tech industries.

“Given that China’s financing model enables its companies to outmanoeuvre competitors in capital-intensive mineral sectors, its rivals need to develop more compelling and competitive financing arrangements that are responsive to the preferences of host countries,” said Brooke Escobar, who leads AidData’s Chinese development finance programme.

The research shows that more than three-quarters of China’s state-backed transition mineral financing — via both debt and equity — in the developing world was channelled to projects where Chinese entities held ownership stakes in joint ventures and special purpose vehicles.

These entities have long-term control over the extraction and processing of strategic mineral deposits, including copper from the Democratic Republic of Congo and Peru as well as Indonesia’s nickel and Argentina’s lithium reserves.

The data was compiled from the loan recipients and is rarely disclosed by Chinese financial institutions.

China’s transition minerals financing differs from Beijing’s traditional lending practices in the infrastructure-focused Belt and Road Initiative, one of President Xi Jinping’s hallmark foreign development policies, the AidData researchers argued.

Unlike most loans made for BRI projects, which are dominated by a handful of Chinese development banks, the network of lenders to the mineral sector was much broader.

Beijing’s state-owned commercial banks, including the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Bank of China and Citic, play the largest role.

However, a much larger network of 86 entities, including 26 Chinese official sector entities as well as scores of private Chinese companies and some non-Chinese financiers, also provided financing alongside Chinese state-backed participants in syndicated loans. This represents a much more diversified creditor base than traditional BRI lending.

ICBC, BoC and Citic did not respond to requests for comment on the data, nor did seven other large Chinese banks contacted by the FT.

The minerals lending also mostly involved serial lending, rather than one-off loans, in contrast to the BRI. State lenders initially provided an acquisition loan to help a Chinese company gain an ownership stake in a mine, before further credit facilities were extended for development and to provide working capital.

The BRI has also been marred by the issue of low-income countries struggling to repay hundreds of billions of dollars and allegations of “debt trap diplomacy” after a spate of sovereign debt defaults.

But AidData showed that about one-quarter of China’s mineral lending was backed by a Chinese guarantor, compared with an estimated 4 per cent in Beijing’s broader overseas lending portfolio, reflecting an increased emphasis on risk mitigation and safeguarding investment returns.

The lending was mostly targeted at upstream resource extraction, AidData said. This helped secure China’s access to raw materials, creating a vertically integrated Chinese-controlled supply chain, while avoiding competing with its own domestic mineral processing industry.

The data showed that two-thirds of the financing went into JVs or SPVs where the host government held no significant level of ownership. Bypassing local governments reduced those countries’ financial liabilities but also potentially limited their access to future financial returns, the researchers noted.

China’s dominance in many cleantech sectors is expected to expand over the next 10 years, forecasts suggested, despite the US and Europe handing out hundreds of billions of dollars in industrial subsidies as well as rising protectionism via tariffs and bans on Chinese-made products.



Chinese artificial intelligence groups have been rushing out model updates before the lunar new year holiday, as the world wakes up to the sector’s major advances led by start-up DeepSeek in the face of US chip restrictions.

On Monday, the eve of China’s most important annual holiday, the Hangzhou-based company released a new open-source model for image generation, cementing its reputation as the disrupter-in-chief in a field previously dominated by US giants. It came hot on the heels of model releases from tech giant Alibaba and start-ups Moonshot and Zhipu.

“This is the equivalent of dropping a massive release on Christmas Eve. We’ve all been working overtime to get stuff out before the holiday,” said one product manager at a large language model start-up.

While DeepSeek’s achievement has prompted panic in the US about the advances Chinese labs are making on bootstrapped budgets, industry insiders say it is feeding into a newfound “confidence” in China that will spur investment.

“DeepSeek has made faster progress than the other Chinese model companies. But this is giving them confidence that they can catch up,” said one AI investor in China.

DeepSeek has captured the world’s attention with a series of model releases that show similar performance to those of US rivals such as OpenAI and Meta, even though it claims to have a fraction of the computing resources and is blocked from acquiring the latest Nvidia processors by US export restrictions. Last week, it released its R1 reasoning model, an advanced model that rivals OpenAI’s o1 and can automatically learn and improve itself without human supervision.

“DeepSeek has injected a lot of energy into China’s AI players and, more broadly, into the global open-source AI community that will use its findings from its R1 paper to make progress on reasoning models,” said Wang Tiezhen, an engineer at AI research hub Hugging Face.

This week, investors dumped AI-related stocks, with Nvidia losing almost $600bn in market value on Monday. They were reacting to Chinese breakthroughs that show it is possible to build powerful models while pursuing a different strategy to the US one of building ever-larger computing clusters to get ahead in the AI race.

On Monday, Alibaba’s Qwen released Qwen2.5-1M, a series of new models that are capable of handling longer inputs, an important development that would mean the model could be deployed for AI agent applications with higher memory demands, according to Wang.

On the same day, DeepSeek released Janus-Pro, a text-to-image generation model that it claims can surpass state of the art ones from competitors such as OpenAI’s Dall-E 3 and Stability AI’s Stable Diffusion 3 on some benchmarks.

Zhipu, valued at its last funding round in December at $3bn, last week released an update to GLM-PC. The AI agent model is aimed at enterprise customers, enabling computers to automatically complete tasks such as filling out forms or digesting financial reports.

While Zhipu has not courted much attention for its LLM development, it has a lead among local AI start-ups in commercialising its technology, with support from local governments and state-owned enterprises that have partnered with the Beijing-based company to deploy its models.

Last week, another Beijing-based start-up Moonshot, which owns the popular AI chatbot Kimi, updated its reasoning model to Kimi k1.5, demonstrating strong results compared with established AI models for complex reasoning tasks. The latest release can process texts and images while handling long and complex queries.

It is standard practice for Chinese tech companies to release products before the long holiday, with the added benefit that potential customers with lots of free time during the break can test and explore them.

Once Chinese AI players return from their break, the race is on to become the leading player developing AI applications for commercial use. “If AI agents can create dramatic commercial value, one or two of the LLM players have a chance to transform into a new generation of software companies,” the AI investor said.



It was autumn, and Emma and her husband Alan were not expecting their baby for another six months. But beds at the YueGe post-partum confinement centre filled up quickly. The room wasn’t cheap, at Rmb150,000, or about $21,000, for 28 days. But unlike a normal hotel, it came with its own team of professional nurses and nannies. They would observe the new mother and her baby during the day and help with feeds at night. Twice a week, a doctor would check on the mother’s recovery. Meals would be tailored to her needs. At such a life-changing moment, there would be nothing for the new parents to worry about.

Emma and Alan had looked at several centres in Shanghai, but YueGe’s stood out. Online reviews raved, saying even the staff were well treated. They’d spoken to a manager, Wang, for two hours and been impressed. It helped that his boss, Liang, was from Taiwan, where the tradition of confinement had first emerged as a modern industry.

Emma is 34 and works in finance. Her friends were “all doing it” too, but that wasn’t the reason she found the idea of confinement so attractive. Nor had she immediately thought about the health benefits of the ancient practice, such as the need to avoid the cold of the wind entering your bones (a risk even at the height of summer). It was just appealing, the thought of having so many people to look after you. Plus, if she stayed at home, as her parents’ generation did, the excited new grandparents would end up moving into the couple’s two-bedroom apartment. They would “interfere”, and there would be all kinds of family conflict. No, in the confinement centre, she would be in charge.

In return for a discount, Emma and Alan agreed to pay upfront. At YueGe, the care was so attentive that a chat group was set up just for them, with seven or eight members of staff in it. The couple also attended three lectures at the site. But one Sunday in March, just two months before their baby was due, they received a strange message.

Purportedly sent by staff at the centre, the message explained in vague language that YueGe had undergone “structural changes” that were “beyond the authority and scope of the staff”. It went on to say the staff’s own wages were also in arrears, and they would take legal action. The message added that any other questions would need to be directed towards the managers Wang and Liang, who were copied in. It also listed another company: Beikang.

Alan and Emma didn’t know what had happened, but the implication was clear: YueGe had run out of money, including their advance payment, and there would be no month of confinement.

Emma’s first response was to go on to the internet, where she now came across rumblings of discontent about the centre. She also found a QR code of the kind that is common in China. It allowed the couple to enter into a WeChat weiquanqun, or “group for the protection of rights”. It was already full of other parents-to-be. “We realised,” says Alan, “that this was a very serious matter.”

The concept of “rights protection” has its roots, including a sense of powerlessness in the courts, in the legal code that emerged in China following the end of strict communism in the 1980s and 1990s. Today, it is most associated with the risks facing consumers who experience gyms closing midway through their contracts or property investment schemes going awry. While many see no option but to show up at the doors of the business itself seeking redress, social media has given aggrieved consumers somewhere to organise themselves.

Everyone in the newly created chat group had received the same vague text message, naming the two managers of YueGe. Wang was the manager who had met Alan and Emma. Liang’s Taiwanese nationality was, as one of few salient facts available, a focus for suspicion. “We need to stop Liang from fleeing to Taiwan,” wrote one user, echoing a widely held concern in mainland China over insiders absconding with company funds. But if that did happen, said another user, all might not be lost: “They hold people accountable [there], more than we can in the mainland.”

Some scrutinised the timing of the discounts people had been offered. “Mr Liang urged us to pay on November 26, and his WeChat moments stopped updating on November 28,” wrote one user. More messages emerged, indicating that in February, further discounts had been offered in return for full payment upfront, seemingly to plug some kind of cash shortage. “The Taiwanese guy called me and said the same thing, full payment before the Lantern festival.” “Premeditated,” said another user, in the absence of any other explanations. (The FT was unable to contact either Liang or Wang.)

Emma and Alan were content to quietly observe the discussion in the WeChat group, not wanting to draw attention to themselves. Besides, it was almost impossible to be sure who was sharing information. Despite the participants being Chinese, most of their usernames were in English or interspersed with emojis — not unusual in an internet environment where people often seek to obscure their identity.

The question of who could help was similarly unclear. One user had gone to the China Consumers Association, but it told him to contact the Health Bureau which, it claimed, regulated post-partum confinement centres. “Are there any friends here who understand the law?” he asked in bewilderment. Another claimed to be at a police station, where officers said that they could not file a case. Instead the advice was to go to the head office of the relevant company.

In the absence of clear identities, people were mainly distinguished by how much noise they made. The most prominent voice belonged to a user whose name included a bee emoji, and who claimed to “specialise in complaints”. When it came to the art of protecting rights, she was a natural, recalled Alan. She too had contacted the police, who told her this was a contract dispute, and nothing to do with them.

“The first thing the policeman said to me,” she wrote on the Sunday the group was formed, was: “Are you just one person, or are there a lot of you?” “It was then that I understood,” she continued, “that as just one person, he didn’t care at all.”

But with around 100 people now claiming to be victims, there was growing hope of recovery. Bee emoji suggested the group find a time to report the incident together. “If you aren’t getting your money,” she told them, “it’s because you aren’t making enough noise.”

Despite their widespread confidence in the Taiwan theory, by Monday, the group’s focus had begun to shift to the other company named in the original message, Beikang, which they mostly referred to as Saint Bella, the brand name for which it is best known. The company, launched by 38-year-old entrepreneur Xiang Hua in 2017, describes itself as “a family care group with a leading post-partum care and recovery operation”, and in 2023 had revenues of Rmb560mn, the second biggest from post-partum centres in China that year. Last year, it launched an IPO application in Hong Kong.

The company has a network of 72 “premium post-partum centers”, including one in Los Angeles which opened last year. It has also made a series of acquisitions. In December 2022, it carried out due diligence on the parent company of YueGe, called YueZiGe (a play on the Chinese word for confinement). The purchase of YueZiGe went through in February 2024, just a month before Emma and Alan received the news about their confinement centre.

For those who still had no idea what had happened to their money, Saint Bella now seemed to offer the best hope of compensation. Some in the group focused on the company’s indirect ownership stake in YueGe. Its potential vulnerability to negative publicity was also weighed, given the impending IPO. (One user referred to a complaints page on the Hong Kong stock exchange, another suggested exposing those responsible on a nationwide TV gala held on world consumer rights day.) Further suspicion was aroused when it was noted that online posts mentioning the company in relation to the scandal had been “harmonised” — a euphemism in China for deleted online content.

Meanwhile, members of the group were increasingly heading to confinement sites in person in the hope of finding and confronting responsible parties. That Monday evening, one user claimed to be at the YueGe site where Alan and Emma first visited. “Boss Wang and Boss Liang are here,” she wrote, and Saint Bella was on its way.

At 6.04pm, another user posted a livestream link from the site on Xiaohongshu, a social media platform with over 300 million users, to the group. In an environment used to highly sophisticated online censorship, what happened next still sowed confusion.

“Has the stream finished?” someone asked a quarter of an hour later, at 6.20pm. “It’s been taken down,” another replied.

The link was posted twice more, at 6.23pm and 6.31pm. On both occasions it lasted only a few minutes before apparently being taken down.

At 6.34pm, the link was posted one final time. Five minutes later another user posted: “It’s been turned off?”

For those watching, any hope of finding answers live from the confinement site had been frustrated. But Emma and Alan were beginning to notice something strange. The people who made the most noise soon became very quiet, and those who went to the sites “didn’t tell us anything” after they came back.

By Tuesday, with few other options available, Emma decided the only possible course of action left was to make a scene of her own. In another “rights protection” WeChat group she had joined, she proposed heading to the same confinement site with red protest banners with white characters, in the style of those used to display government slogans. Within two hours, as though someone was watching closely, her phone rang. It was Saint Bella, with a simple message:

“Let’s talk.”

The office building where they met Saint Bella near Shanghai’s Nanjing West Road looked rundown, said Alan. “You simply couldn’t believe it’s the same company if you compare it with the post-partum centres.”

From the start, 48 hours earlier, his reaction to the entire affair had been to comfort his pregnant wife, and to avoid showing too much emotion. That Tuesday morning, before they were invited to the meeting, he had been to the police station on his own. As expected, he found no legal solution. But he had encountered some other parents-to-be there, some of whom said they had negotiated a deal with Saint Bella, and he was afraid of missing out.

On the WeChat group there were also rumours that some, after protesting on site, had received an offer of a 40 per cent refund, a free nanny during their confinement month at home, and meal delivery. Others suggested there was another choice: discounts on rooms in other centres that the company ran in Shanghai, if they were willing to pay again. The claims attracted suspicion. One user deployed the term shui jun, referring to someone who is paid to post online, in response to a user who linked to an article about compensation.

Word of behind-the-scenes offers also exposed a disunity among the largely anonymous group. Saint Bella is “crossing the river by feeling each stone”, posted someone, referring to a famous quote from former leader of China, Deng Xiaoping. “It is dealing with you one by one, defeating you one by one, so that you will not gather together or post on social media.” “Something I just don’t understand,” added one user, “is if the two Taiwanese managers did this, and SBL completely didn’t know about it, why haven’t they sued them?” (There is no indication Wang is Taiwanese.) “They definitely cannot not know about this,” replied another.

In the office building, Emma and Alan sat around a table with five people, one of whom told them she represented all of the group’s sites in Shanghai. There was one small window in the room, and the lights were extremely bright. The company was indeed offering them a 40 per cent refund, or a discount on a new centre. The woman claimed that because the company had only 30 per cent of the shares in the centre, this was more than it needed to offer. Alan, who like his wife works in finance, contested this. “Don’t think we are so easy to fool,” he said. In his view, it was “sophistry”. The woman got angry. “We can’t rule out suing you directly,” she said.

At this Alan said his emotions got the better of him. “I usually pretend to be angry in negotiations,” he said, “but I really was angry.” The negotiation broke down. He slammed the table. In hindsight, his outburst proved helpful. It prompted an additional discount of Rmb40,000 on the new centre, though it would still cost the couple Rmb60,000 (about $8,200) on top of what they had spent already. The deal required them to sign a document saying they would not talk about Saint Bella in the media, on social media or in the rights group, nor would they take legal action against it. Saint Bella declined to comment on the meeting.

After three hours, Alan and Emma left. There was another family waiting outside.

The following day, under the name Beikang International and referencing its Saint Bella brand, the company released a statement distancing itself from the operations of YueGe, the company at the centre of the controversy. Neither Emma nor Alan remembers seeing it specifically, though similar points emerged in the WeChat group.

According to the company, it never intended to have any involvement with YueGe. Its connection came through a sprawl of subsidiaries typical of mainland China. The statement said that in February 2024 it had acquired a majority stake in YueZiGe, a post-partum centre business in Shanghai previously associated with a Taiwanese woman. But YueZiGe, in turn, owned a majority stake in a consultancy company, which in turn owned a majority stake in YueGe (the statement mentioned Liang by name as legal representative, but did not mention Wang). As a result, Beikang said it had a 23.35 per cent indirect stake in YueGe.

As a minority shareholder at the time of the incident, the company said it did “not bear any legal responsibility” for YueGe’s insolvency.

Saint Bella’s founder, Xiang Hua, declined to comment. But in a further statement provided to the FT, the company said it became aware of the incident with YueGe only after employees and clients, given public knowledge of the above stake, began to claim compensation from it.

The company said that “despite bearing no fault or responsibility for this incident”, it “provided emergency support” to affected customers, employees and matrons “out of a sense of social responsibility”.

The company declined to comment on the removal of online content. The official statement released in March, which hit out against “false statements and malicious accusations”, was later taken down from Xiaohongshu, the platform where it was initially published. “We removed the statement once the issue subsided to better focus on core business activities,” the company said, adding it was still publicly available elsewhere.

It also said a loan from YueZiGe to YueGe was made in August 2023, before its acquisition of the former company was complete. It said the loan was unrelated to Beikang, and it was unaware of any operational issues at the time. After the incident arose, it said it sought assistance from regulatory authorities and had filed a lawsuit against YueGe to recover the loan. It said it no longer has any indirect stake.

As for what had given rise to the complaints of YueGe customers, the original statement had a simple explanation: “poor management”.

In May, Emma gave birth to a daughter, Sherry. In line with the deal, she completed her post-partum confinement at another Shanghai site associated with Saint Bella. Part of a luxurious hotel, the brightly lit rooms at the site are full of green plants. A timetable of activities for mothers, including meditation, is propped up by the wall. Guests must spray their shoes and hands with disinfectant before entering. Emma and Alan said they were pleased with the experience.

One of the last discussions on the WeChat group was about how much money had been collectively involved, calculated through a list function. The total came to about Rmb4mn-5mn ($550,000 —$690,000), an amount that might easily fly under the radar in terms of attracting wider attention. Local broadcast state media in Shanghai did cover the story, talk of which rippled through the city, though participants’ faces were blurred out.

The group soon fell quiet, but intriguing messages occasionally trickled through, including a YueGe doctor’s claim on March 13 that he had not been paid for eight months, since, he said, Beikang had become involved, and that in the eight years working with YueGe and YueZiGe prior to that, he had always been paid on time. The company did not comment on the post.

Then, on March 26, a message appeared that was longer and more detailed than any that had come before. This poster alleged that he had reported the incident to the police on Monday March 11 2024, and had now received a reply: making reference to transfers between YueGe and YueZiGe, the police said no misappropriation of funds could be determined and no case could be filed.

Despite this the poster claimed YueGe’s operating funds were transferred out of the company through a loan agreement, including the last few deposits from parents-to-be, and that Wang and Liang had told him this at the time of the complaint. Owing to the “equity arrangement”, the poster suggested Saint Bella could remove money from its subsidiaries and offer compensation at a proportion of the amount. He added that the settlement agreement with Saint Bella had been signed by his wife, and did not bind him. “They’ve done something beautiful,” replied bee emoji.

Saint Bella did not comment on the post in the rights group WeChat. But in its statement to the FT, the company said it won its case against YueGe over the August 2023 loan. It did not respond to requests about whether any of the funds were recovered, but provided screenshots of court documents from October 31 last year, which showed a Shanghai court ordered YueGe to repay a loan principal amount of Rmb2mn, as well as interest and damages.

One other party was absent from the conversation: the Taiwanese woman associated with YueZiGe. Could she have helped to resolve the situation at YueGe? In its statement to the FT, Saint Bella said the other shareholder was “unable to participate due to illness”. The FT was unable to contact the woman.

In Shanghai, there are no longer any signs of YueGe. The site Emma and Alan first visited is still a confinement centre, but on the 16th floor nurses now wear badges with the name Baby Bella, one of the Saint Bella group’s several brands across the 25 cities in which it operates.

Sometimes Alan finds himself telling the story to friends and colleagues. One time he scrutinised the WeChat account of Wang, the manager who had so impressed them. He found only the vaguest of clues, a one-word signature. “Rensheng” it said, a Chinese word meaning “life”, followed by five dots and a single question mark.

Thomas Hale is the FT’s Shanghai correspondent. Wang Xueqiao is the FT’s news researcher in Shanghai. Some names have been changed

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend Magazine on X and FT Weekend on Instagram



Chinese crypto and artificial intelligence mogul Zhan Ketuan is facing a crisis.

US custom officials in recent months have impounded some shipments of Bitcoin mining rigs made by his company Bitmain. The pressure on the 45-year-old billionaire ramped up further this month, after Washington sanctioned his other companies that design and source artificial intelligence processors.

It is not the first time that Zhan’s ambitions to build China’s answer to Nvidia have jeopardised his business empire. Bitmain was nearly undone five years ago by his heavy spending to develop AI chips, sparking a civil war with his co-founder for control of the company.

While Bitmain continues to focus on crypto mining, Zhan subsequently shifted those AI chip efforts into Xiamen Sophgo Technologies, which along with 15 affiliates, was added to the US commerce department entity list this month.

The company’s troubles began when an AI processor made by the world’s premier chip fabricator, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, was found in a Huawei AI card, allegedly circumventing sanctions. TSMC began investigating if it was purchased by Sophgo.

The US said that Sophgo posed a risk of diversion to Huawei and alleged it was “acting at the behest of Beijing” to build up China’s indigenous chip production.

Sophgo, Bitmain and Zhan did not respond to requests for comment. Sophgo has previously denied working with Huawei and Bitmain said it was not involved in the matter.

TSMC declined to comment on customer relationships but said that, as a law-abiding company, it was committed to complying with all applicable rules and regulations including export controls.

Zhan’s latest challenges show the hurdles Chinese entrepreneurs face, particularly for those keen to make a mark in semiconductors, where the whiplash of US-China geopolitics has set back many of the country’s most ambitious tech companies.

People with knowledge of Sophgo’s operations describe a number of semiconductor related business lines. They include designing in-house AI processors and central processing units for supercomputers, as well as sourcing cutting edge Nvidia graphics processing units for Chinese data centres.

The US blacklisting formally cuts Sophgo off from TSMC, and could potentially pose challenges for its partner Bitmain, which also relies on the Taiwanese chipmaker to manufacture its chips.

People close to Bitmain said access to TSMC helped it become the world’s dominant maker of Bitcoin mining rigs with an estimated 80 per cent of the market. For years Bitmain spent hundreds of millions of dollars pre-purchasing TSMC capacity, forcing rival miner makers to turn to other less capable chip foundries, the people said.

“The energy-efficient chip is the heart of a mining machine,” said Nishant Sharma, founder of crypto mining advisory BlocksBridge Consulting.

Zhan was designing chips for TV sets when Bitcoin started to gain traction. In 2013, he turned his technical prowess towards designing specialised processors known as ASICs to more efficiently execute the hashing algorithms that unlock new Bitcoins. By 2017, Bitmain’s sales had jumped to $2.5bn, according to an IPO prospectus. Zhan’s vision for the company expanded towards AI. In the US, Google had just unveiled ASICs for running deep-learning algorithms, which it called TPUs.

“We are a company focused on high-performance processors,” Zhan told a gathering in Beijing in 2017. “We started with cryptocurrency processors and now we’re entering artificial intelligence, it’s a new area of application but not a complete pivot.”

Bitmain’s first AI chip, the BM1680, was made by TSMC and shipped in 2017. But then the price of bitcoin started to fall, and along with it demand for crypto mining rigs. Hopes for a blockbuster Bitmain IPO in Hong Kong vanished.

The start-up laid off hundreds of employees and Zhan’s co-founder Wu Jihan ousted him and reined in spending on AI. Zhan fought back by taking control of a Bitmain AI chip unit registered in his hometown of Fujian and sued Wu. The company, Fujian Sophon, told a court that Zhan’s ousting had the potential to change the direction of “our country’s chip and blockchain development”. Eventually Wu left.

In 2022, Zhan moved Bitmain’s AI chip efforts to Sophgo, which he owned almost entirely when it was set up. The lines between the two companies remain blurry. Bitmain’s and Sophgo’s affiliated entities share some executives, addresses and phone numbers in official Chinese business records. Last year, they jointly sought to recruit new graduates at Harbin Institute of Technology, according to an advert.

One customer for their AI chips, Haitu Technology, described Sophgo as Bitmain’s “recommended distributor” in a filing to Chinese securities regulators in late 2022. Bitmain itself does not sell its AI processors to small and medium-sized companies, Haitu said.

Sophgo has sent its AI processors to public security bureaus and smart city projects in Fujian, Anhui and Beijing, according to a company presentation seen by the Financial Times. Its AI accelerators have also been used to build an AI computing cluster in Shandong.

Nick Brown, a researcher at the University of Edinburgh, said the company’s latest CPU, the SG2042, represented a leap forward for the open source RISC-V architecture it was built on, and was comparable with Intel and AMD processors for some supercomputing tasks.

“For workloads that need lots of computation, lots of processing, lots of calculations, it performs really well,” Brown said, after testing the chips on the university’s supercomputing hardware.

“It’s the first RISC-V CPU that you could say is a serious proposition for high performance workloads,” said Brown.

Public records show some Chinese supercomputing centres, which are cut off from American chips, have begun to use Sophgo’s processors.

“Once Chinese companies gain a foothold, western companies basically stand no chance,” Zhan told a conference in 2019. Now Sophgo will have to figure out how to get its processors made in China.

Additional reporting by Eleanor Olcott and Nian Liu in Beijing



Denton Peng, the onetime “solar king” of China who was briefly the country’s youngest billionaire, emigrated to California in 2018 with plans to defibrillate a moribund industry: electric buses. Now several years into the effort, shares of his company Phoenix Motor trade for mere pennies and it has received two delisting warnings from Nasdaq. Despite generous US subsidies to help cities adopt zero-emission mass transit, Phoenix was able to deliver only about 40 buses in 2024, and it has lost money in every year of operation under Peng’s leadership. The story of Phoenix illustrates the inherent challenge of manufacturing electric vehicles in the US and the seemingly quixotic goal of government-backed incentives to get the industry off the ground, much less become competitive with its Chinese counterparts. Though both China and the US have provided seed funding to the fledgling industry, inefficiency and cost structures — especially for labour — make western production a long-shot challenge.

Out of the top 10 electric-bus makers in the world, only two are based in the US — one of which was bought by Peng after it went bankrupt. “Peng is just running into the same issues that many US electric-car makers are facing — that they can’t build a profitable vehicle without a huge part of their supply chain being from China,” said Tu Le, founder of Sino Auto Insights, a Detroit-based consultancy. “Regardless of how much is reshored, the United States will have a hard time getting to the cost level with China.”

China’s EV industry features a large pool of cheap and productive labour, as well as a highly efficient supply chain few countries can rival.

“If it takes one month to complete a project in China,” said Peng in an interview with the Financial Times, “it takes four to five in the US.”

Government support played a crucial role in driving Peng’s earlier success. When he faced a funding gap to make the profitable yet capital-intensive solar wafer, a key component of solar cells, in 2005, local authorities in China lent him Rmb200mn and encouraged banks to provide more than Rmb25bn lines of credit for his venture, called LDK. Chinese press nicknamed him the “solar king”.

Business prospered as the company profited from the solar power boom in European countries. The bonanza ended after western nations began imposing sanctions on Chinese solar products in 2012, a blow to LDK that relied on developed markets for growth.

Peng lost control of LDK in 2012 after the local government took over the company. Chinese authorities accused him of fraud related to a subsequent group he launched. Peng denied wrongdoing.

Peng bought Phoenix Motorcars, a California-based electric-bus maker, for $12.5mn as he sought to return to manufacturing.

“There is a chance I can succeed in making EVs in the US,” he said.

Three years later, Peng paid $10mn to acquire the transit bus operation of Proterra, a leading electric-bus maker that filed for bankruptcy a few months earlier, as he looked to increase capacity to meet orders.

Phoenix merged with Proterra, creating one of the biggest electric-bus makers in the country. There was no shortage of demand for the vehicles as both the federal and state governments made a push to build more environmentally friendly public transit systems.

The Federal Transit Administration has over the past three years provided $4.9bn in subsidies for local authorities to purchase more than 4,600 zero or low emission buses, mostly electric ones.

While the programme is a boon for Phoenix, it comes with a caveat — the company must locally source more than 70 per cent of its parts, measured by value, to qualify for the subsidy.

That has slowed down production and created a backlog of orders as the EV supply chains in the US remain under-developed.

“The US EV industry is facing challenges in building a more efficient and affordable supply chain,” said Peng. “We have trouble meeting orders partly because our suppliers are slow in making deliveries.”

Pavel Molchanov, an analyst at Raymond James & Associates, said the US electric bus industry, while growing fast, was “too small to produce on a scale” that allows a well-established supply chain to emerge.

Molchanov added that it would take at least five years for the US electric bus market to become “meaningful”.

Yet Peng could barely afford to wait for that long. Shares of Phoenix have traded at less than $1 — a threshold that could trigger delisting by Nasdaq — most of the time since he bought Proterra in 2023.

The best solution is to work with Chinese suppliers that enjoy cost and quality advantages over their US counterparts.

Peng said Phoenix two years ago launched, without government subsidy, an electric shuttle bus aimed at commercial clients that cost 65 per cent less than its previous model by outsourcing parts to China.

Yet the Buy America requirement for government-subsidised electric transit buses, a major source of revenue for Phoenix, has made it difficult for Peng to replicate his cost-cutting magic.

He said he did not use Chinese-made batteries, known for their low price and high efficiency, for products with federal subsidy as they accounted for at least 30 per cent of the costs of components needed to make a bus.

Despite the challenge, Peng is still keen to tap Chinese suppliers when possible. He said he was considering building electric bus or parts factories in China where production costs were less than half of the level in the US.

The new factories, according to Peng, would serve markets outside the US under an American brand and technology, which customers were willing to pay a premium for.

Peng added that his future car parts factories in China would “certainly consider” serving the US market if policy allowed.

Molchanov of Raymond James said outsourcing to China “makes a lot of sense from an economic perspective”, but could be “politically controversial”.

He went on to warn that Trump’s pledge to revoke electric vehicle support might create “additional headwind” for electric buses that could become out of reach for buyers without government subsidy.

Peng has pinned his hopes on environmentally conscious states such as California that will ban sales of gas-powered cars by 2035.

“As long as we can survive until then,” he said, “our company will definitely grow into a big one.”



A couple of days before the Chinese New Year of 2004, my friend Fan Qun, her husband and I travelled by bus, minibus, boat and, finally, foot, to her family’s remote village in the hills of Hunan province; her two brothers, migrant workers in Guangzhou, had also returned for the festival. On New Year’s Eve, we rounded up a rooster from the paddy fields outside and her father dispatched it quickly with a cleaver, while the meat of a fattened pig that had already been slaughtered was smoked above the kitchen fire. Fan Qun’s father made offerings to his ancestors at a domestic altar laid with the pig’s head, a whole smoked fish and a block of tofu, as well as enamelled mugs of rice wine and homegrown tea.

All day, Fan Qun’s mother and sister-in-law laboured in the kitchen. A chicken stew hung in a blackened cauldron over the fire; another pot filled with dried radishes sat in the embers. Steam billowed from the woks as the two women sizzled meats and vegetables on an old-fashioned, wood-fired range. Mid-afternoon, they brought out the feast: sweet, golden fritters of glutinous rice, home-cured bacon and carp, Cantonese roast duck brought home by the brothers, a magnificent rooster soup with medicinal herbs, dried squid with jujubes, smoked pork intestines, dishes of tofu and homegrown vegetables and a potful of rice with sweet potatoes. The young nieces, dressed in festive scarlet and pink, sang a song. Then we drank toasts of grain liquor and Coca-Cola and ate. At midnight, we all went outside to light firecrackers that snapped, sputtered and echoed up and down the valley.

The New Year’s Eve reunion dinner (tuan nian fan) is at the heart of Lunar New Year celebrations all over the world. Traditionally, family members return to their ancestral homes for a sumptuous banquet of home-cooked dishes, followed by a week or two of idling and visiting relatives and friends. In rural areas of China, home-reared pork is often served, along with chicken and a whole fish, the latter because the phrase “a fish every year” (nian nian you yu) sounds the same as “a surplus every year”. But as the Chinese world is on a scale to rival Christendom, local festive food customs vary as much as global Christmas dinners. In the wheat-eating north of China, people traditionally prepare jiaozi dumplings, while the Sichuanese steam fat slices of pork belly in clay bowls packed with salted vegetables. In many parts of the country, families gather around bubbling hotpots packed with meatballs, quail eggs, chunks of pork belly and other delicacies.

While the symbolic whole fish is almost ubiquitous on the Chinese festive table, the Cantonese are particularly playful with the auspicious meanings of their New Year dishes (the Chinese language is replete with homonyms and therefore ripe for punning). Slabs of New Year Cake, a sweet pudding made from glutinous rice, are eaten over the holidays because their name, nian gao, plays on another word with the same sound (gao): “higher” — in wealth, school grades, status or stature. In advance of the festivities, people gift each other coupons that can be redeemed at specific restaurants or shops for this and other seasonal cakes, also known as gao, made from radish and taro (“radish cake futures,” my Cantonese friend Roberta quips). Kumquats and mandarins are served because their golden colour invites prosperity, along with ruddy deep-fried chickens — red being the traditional colour of Chinese celebrations.

In Hong Kong and other centres of Cantonese society, restaurants create menus of lucky-number eight dishes, each one with a name that signifies luck, wealth or one of the other bonuses of life. “So many people dine out around the New Year that we have to offer set menus because the kitchen cannot cope with à la carte,” says Lau Kin-wai, veteran food columnist and proprietor of Kin’s Kitchen in the Wanchai district. His restaurant is offering two set menus this year, priced per table at figures in Hong Kong dollars involving lots of auspicious “8”s: the pricier “Four Seasons of Prosperity” menu, for example, costs HK$9,888 ($1,270/£1,030) for a table of 12. Every dish has a poetic name imbued with optimistic meanings, seasonal symbolism or punning words, from “Make a Fortune, Increase Wealth and Honour” (a dish made with hair moss — facai, which sounds the same as “make a fortune” — and “golden coin” dried scallops) to “Golden Dragon Welcomes the New Year” (tiger shrimps in cheese sauce with egg noodles) and “Dancing Phoenix Augments the Joyful Occasion” (deep-fried chicken).

“When I was small,” says Lau, “people didn’t have much money and cooked more themselves, so the New Year’s Eve dinner normally took place at home. We would stock up on seasonal foods like cured pork and dried oysters [their name a pun on ‘good business’], as well as lucky sweets and seeds to offer visitors. On the first day of the New Year, we would eat a vegetarian meal because the markets were closed.

“These days,” he adds, “more and more Hongkongers have their celebratory meal in restaurants. And in the past few years, they’ve been increasingly popping over to Shenzhen on the mainland, where they can eat lavishly for half the price, or seizing the chance to fly off on a foreign holiday.”

Cantonese food customs have spilled over into diaspora communities. Chinese restaurants all over the world offer New Year cakes and symbolic menus. In recent years, an auspicious Malaysian and Singaporean dish has become wildly popular in Chinese circles all over the world: yu sheng, or “prosperity toss”. A colourful assembly of shredded ingredients, including raw fish, are bathed in a sweet dressing, then everyone around the table tosses the food together with their chopsticks while voicing good wishes for the year ahead — and the higher the ingredients fly above the table, the “higher” the luck. This year, far from China, that New Year with Fan Qun’s family a distant memory, I’ll be celebrating over a home-cooked Shanghainese feast in London — and I’m looking forward to tossing the prosperity salad while welcoming the Year of the Snake.

Fuchsia Dunlop is the author of “Invitation to a Banquet: The Story of Chinese Food”, Fortnum & Mason Food Book of 2024

Wherever you are in the world, how do you celebrate the Lunar New Year? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



President Donald Trump threatened tariffs so many times against so many nations before his re-election that some wondered whether he was serious. In the event, his first target was Colombia, a South American oil and coffee exporter. Its harsh treatment last Sunday holds lessons for other nations weighing the consequences of the president’s America First policies.

As a leftwing former guerrilla, Colombia’s President Gustavo Petro was never going to be a Trump fan. But he incurred the US president’s particular wrath after publicly vowing to turn back American military flights deporting migrants, complaining that his compatriots were being treated like criminals.

For a few hours, Bogotá’s status flipped from traditional Washington ally to rogue state. Trump announced immediate 25 per cent tariffs on Colombian imports, rising to 50 per cent in a week, banking sanctions and a US travel ban for Colombian government officials and their allies. Petro initially vowed retaliatory tariffs but quickly folded. He had little choice. For Colombia, a trade war with its biggest trading partner would have been devastating.

Denmark and Panama will have been watching closely. Both are small nations in Trump’s sights because they possess valuable territorial assets he covets. In Denmark’s case, it is the strategic Arctic territory of Greenland and in Panama’s, the shipping canal built by America over a century ago.

Mexico and Canada, US neighbours and big trading partners, are waiting to discover whether Trump will fulfil a threat to impose 25 per cent tariffs as soon as Saturday, tearing up three decades of North American free trade.

Republicans may be celebrating Trump’s quick win over a comparatively weak South American president, who had apparently not thought through his impulsive decision. (Colombia had been accepting US military flights deporting its nationals since well before Trump’s inauguration). But the long-term consequences of punishing and publicly humiliating an erstwhile ally are unlikely to favour the US.

Washington has long portrayed itself as a reliable trade and security partner because it can be trusted to stick to international agreements and follow rules. In the Trump era, this no longer appears to be a given. While America has a right to detain and deport migrants who enter illegally — and Trump has an electoral mandate for that — anti-US sentiment around the world is likely to be stoked by a return to the bullying tactics of a bygone era.

There is a potential opening here for the EU to provide an alternative to America First, by stepping up its own investment in the region and ratifying a long-stalled trade pact with South American nations. But China and Russia will be looking for opportunities.

Beijing has touted itself to developing nations as a trusted long-term partner interested in trade and investment rather than playing politics. The experience of some African and Latin American nations has sometimes shown otherwise, but compared with Trump’s unpredictable tactics, Beijing may start to look more attractive.

By choosing in his first week to make threats against Colombia, Panama and Mexico, some of the closest US allies in the Americas, Trump has signalled a shift away from the soft power approach the US has favoured in recent decades to a harder form of power. While that may — as it did with Colombia — deliver short-term results, in the longer term it is just as likely to drive countries away from America. Since Beijing has already demonstrated its willingness to invest heavily in the region, the big winner from Trump’s policies may ultimately not be the US, but China.



America’s superinflated tech stocks had seemed due for a correction for months, but the trigger has come from an unexpected source. The latest large language model from China’s artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek may not be quite a “Sputnik moment”. There are parallels, even so, with the early space race, when ingenuity helped Soviet engineers keep pace with and sometimes surpass US rivals, despite their relative lack of computing power and cutting-edge technologies. The US went on to win the Moon race, and establish a sustainable edge in space. But DeepSeek’s breakthrough upturns the assumptions that have underpinned US tech valuations, of an unassailable supremacy in AI that would be extended by spending billions of dollars on chips and infrastructure.

DeepSeek’s achievement is to have developed an LLM that AI experts say achieves a performance similar to US rivals OpenAI and Meta but claims to use far fewer — and less advanced — Nvidia chips, and to have been trained for a fraction of the cost. Some of its assertions remain to be verified. If they are true, however, it represents a potentially formidable competitor.

First, like Meta of the US but unlike OpenAI or Google’s Gemini, it is open source — ready to share the recipe for its secret sauce rather than keep it locked away in hope of extracting maximum financial gain. That makes it appealing for developers to use and build on. Second, it can be put together on much more of a shoestring budget and with much less computing power. This explains Monday’s plunging stock prices not just of front-line tech companies but of those that make chip equipment and supply electrical hardware for data centres.

The big US companies are focused on a particular model of scaling AI by throwing vast amounts of capital, data and computing power at the problem. First Mistral, a French AI start-up, and now DeepSeek have demonstrated that companies with fewer resources may end up with smarter and more efficient models. The increasing efficiency of these models is also likely to spur increased demand for their use.

DeepSeek’s advance highlights, too, that China is managing to make technological leaps in AI despite export controls introduced by the Biden administration intended to deprive it of both the most powerful chips and the advanced tools needed to make them. Chinese AI start-ups have been compelled to find inventive ways of extracting the most juice from the chips they do have. Far from stifling Chinese innovation, Washington may have stimulated it. And the success of often domestically trained Chinese engineers in increasing efficiency and finding workarounds raises questions over whether the technological “moat” established by high-spending US groups such as Meta, Google, OpenAI and Anthropic is as wide and impregnable as they had thought.

Many advanced democracies will be wary of a Chinese government seen in many ways as inimical to western interests potentially acquiring leadership in the most transformative technology of our era. Yet some political leaders elsewhere, along with many consumers and developers, may welcome a market that is less dominated by a handful of American companies.

The open question now is not necessarily who will develop the best AI models but who can apply them best to real-world tasks. Kai-Fu Lee, a Chinese AI pioneer, has long argued that China excels on the application front even if it may lag behind in infrastructure. That was before the Chinese start-up world was squeezed by the political clampdown on tech entrepreneurs and the surge of investment in US AI start-ups. But after DeepSeek’s achievement, it looks a much more even game.



When US presidents opine on China, it is rarely good news for investors in Chinese equities. At least in recent years, announcements have tended to mark punitive measures such as blacklists, export restrictions and tariffs.

That trend was bucked on Friday. Chinese stocks rose after Donald Trump remarked on a “friendly” conversation with Xi Jinping and hinted at a potentially softer approach toward tariffs. The diplomatic cordiality between geopolitical rivals may not guarantee lasting progress on trade talks. Yet for local stocks, it arrives at a perfect time.

Blue-chips such as Tencent, Alibaba and JD.com gained 3 per cent on Friday, as did Hong Kong’s benchmark index which is particularly sensitive to geopolitical tensions. The Hang Seng rose about 2 per cent, bringing gains to 6 per cent since last week. That suggests relief that Trump says he would rather not have to use tariffs against on Chinese goods — a big question hanging over valuations for the past year.

China’s exports to the US account for about 4 per cent of its GDP. In the short term, tariffs drive up costs for Chinese exporters and squeeze margins. Their long-term effects, such as weakening the renminbi and inflating risk premium for Chinese stocks, raise concerns about capital flight. If Trump is taking a more flexible approach, these measures may end up being used as a bargaining tool with China rather than an end goal.

That in turn allows investors to consider other factors that could support Chinese stocks in future. Beijing is trying to improve shareholder returns. Large-scale stimulus measures and plans to inject around Rmb1tn ($138bn) in long-term capital into the financial system ought to improve sentiment.

Chinese companies paid out a record Rmb2.4tn in dividends last year while share buybacks also hit an all-time high, according to official data. This push has particularly benefited high-dividend stocks, such as banks, insurers and utilities. Meanwhile, regulators have been directing insurers and mutual funds to increase local stock holdings — which could draw more capital into the country’s markets.

Valuations remain relatively low, with China’s blue-chip CSI 300 Index trading at around 1.3 times book value. By contrast, the S&P 500 stands at around four times that level.

The reliance of local exporters’ earnings on geopolitical dynamics means their share prices will remain highly sensitive to unfolding developments in the coming months. But for now, there is enough good news — both real and rhetorical — to support short-term gains.

june.yoon@ft.com



What happens when the world’s largest oil producer goes all-out to boost production just as the appetite of the world’s largest oil importer may be peaking? Demand from China — which has accounted for half of all world oil demand growth over three decades — shows signs of levelling off thanks to slowing economic expansion and an epochal shift to green power and electric vehicles. Returning US President Donald Trump has, meanwhile, declared a national energy emergency intended to boost fossil fuel output, and begun to reverse the Biden administration’s green agenda. In theory, these dynamics might lead to an oil glut and falling prices. The reality is more complex.

The US-China divergence is at root about competing visions of energy security. Beijing’s embrace of renewable energy reflects less a noble conversion to saving the planet, and more a strategic determination to reduce dependence on imported oil. Conversely, alongside the popularity of his “drill, baby, drill” mantra among consumers balking at the costs of the green transition, Trump does not want the US to rely on a green energy supply chain dominated by China.

Trump’s Treasury secretary pick, Scott Bessent, suggests America can produce an additional 3mn barrels of oil-equivalent a day by 2028. There may be scope, in time, to lift output of natural gas, which the president is eager to export to Europe. For all the rhetoric and deregulation, however, US oil production — which at 13mn b/d is already a record for any country — will be much harder to raise. Producers are unlikely to boost drilling a lot at current US benchmark prices of about $75 a barrel; a recent survey found oil groups needed a $65 price for drilling to be profitable, and $89 to justify a substantial increase.

At the same time, exports from some other suppliers may fall — thanks to US actions. The departing Biden administration this month imposed stiff new sanctions on Russian oil, which by some estimates could remove up to 2mn b/d from the market. The new US president threatened this week to go further unless Vladimir Putin strikes a deal to end the war in Ukraine. Tougher US moves to restrict Iranian exports, in line with Trump’s first-term approach, could take hundreds of thousands of barrels a day more off the market.

This would open a potential opportunity for the world’s swing producer — Saudi Arabia; the Opec consortium has for months been holding back planned production increases, to balance the market with Chinese demand drooping. Trump’s programme could then lead ironically to Saudi Aramco, more than US oil companies, opening the spigots. (Addressing the World Economic Forum on Thursday, the US president explicitly called on Opec to push down global oil prices.) For Trump, this could create leeway to pursue his geopolitical goals without pushing up prices at the pump. Even if US oil producers do not end up raising their own output by much, they will be happy to see Trump acting to stimulate demand, for example by cutting incentives to switch to EVs.

Indeed, Trump’s “drill, baby, drill” slogan seems aimed at giving confidence to oil and gas producers, not just in America but in much of the world. It symbolises his intention to remove the regulatory controls and environmental, social and governance investment principles that have constrained the industry in recent years, and his repudiation of efforts to curb climate change.

It is hard to see how those efforts can succeed without a vast global shift to electric power from green sources. Though it is still burning a lot of coal, China’s green energy shift looks, then, like a bet on the future, while the US is betting on the status quo. There may be hard-nosed reasons for Trump’s America to make that choice. But the consequences may be that the US is left on the “wrong” side of history — and the existential battle to contain global warming is dealt a severe blow.



There was a time when nearly every hotel room seemed to have a TV with a Sony, Panasonic, Samsung or LG logo on the bottom of the screen. Affordable Chinese models have long been chipping away at the dominance of such Japanese and South Korean brands. Now, however, China’s ascent is about more than just price.

Take what’s happening in Japan. Local brands are increasingly being displaced by Chinese manufacturers on their home turf. Chinese makers accounted for more than half of all flat-screen TVs sold in Japan last year for the first time on record, according to research firm BCN.

In the past, Chinese companies have disrupted industries primarily through cheapness. That meant even as they gained market share, a clear distinction remained between premium and budget segments. The high-end market, which typically has fatter margins, still provided a lucrative buffer for incumbent players to sustain their business as Chinese makers focused on affordability. That may now be changing.

TV makers aiming to capture the premium segment typically differentiate themselves in two ways: advancements in display technology and the integration of artificial intelligence features. Chinese electronics groups including Hisense, TCL and Xiaomi have been quick to integrate the latest AI features into their TVs to enhance picture clarity, contrast and colour based on real-time scene detection, as well as suggest content based on user preferences. They also offer seamless integration with global smart TV platforms and streaming services.

Premium TVs using Oled technology, which enables ultra-slim display panels and vivid colours, were once the exclusive domain of Japanese and South Korean makers. These TVs offered higher profit margins compared with traditional LCD TVs, offsetting weakness in the lower-end market. Yet over the past five years, Chinese makers led by Xiaomi, TCL and Hisense have been aggressively expanding their offerings here, as their investments in display innovation begin to pay off.

Shares of Xiaomi have more than doubled in the past six months, while TCL Electronics stock has nearly tripled in the past year. Even after those gains, TCL trades at just below 12 times forward earnings — a steep discount to Japanese peers. That would be justifiable if Chinese TV makers weren’t moving upmarket.

Underestimating the ingenuity of Chinese competitors has proven unwise: look no further than DeepSeek’s dramatic arrival in the AI arms race. Investors in Japanese electronics groups used to regarding China as no more than a supporting actor should be on guard.

june.yoon@ft.com



In China, Liang Wenfeng is being celebrated as a hero this week, a digital David fighting America’s Big Tech Goliath, armed with a modest cluster of artificial intelligence chips and a small crack team of engineers.

His computational projectile was a series of papers released by his AI start-up DeepSeek, which appeared to show that it was possible to build powerful large language models with far fewer Nvidia chips than US rivals. Global investors wiped almost $600bn off Nvidia’s market capitalisation as a result, questioning whether pouring hundreds of billions of dollars into gargantuan AI computing clusters was necessary.

These concerns were all far from the minds of Mililing villagers, a small community in the southern province of Guangdong where Liang grew up and where the 40-year-old billionaire returned home for the Lunar New Year holiday, flanked by security guards. Mililing is so small that there appears to have hitherto been nothing written about it online in English.

The reception was jubilant. “Liang Wenfeng returns to his hometown to spread good results and add energy to rural revitalisation,” wrote one banner adorning an inflatable red arch.

Liang’s family home has become an unlikely pilgrimage site for those interested in seeing where this reluctant celebrity was raised. But while his neighbours praised his achievements, none could say much about the current life of the mysterious man who has sparked an existential panic in Silicon Valley. DeepSeek and Liang did not respond to a request for comment.

Locals say Liang comes from a family of educators. His parents and grandfather were all teachers.

“His parents are good people. He left the village for school at a young age,” says one neighbour also surnamed Liang but not related. Mililing, he says, is a village “of a thousand Liangs”.

At the middle school in the nearby town, one of his teachers says Liang stood out in the 50-student class as “well behaved and mild mannered”. “He was a top student, especially in maths. He liked reading comic books,” he adds.

Liang left high school in 2002 and went to Zhejiang University to complete an undergraduate degree and a masters in computer science, where he penned a thesis about motion detection algorithms. After graduating in 2010, he parlayed his computing skills into automated stock trading, first as a freelancer then at his own hedge fund High-Flyer in 2015.

High-Flyer has grown to become one of China’s top four quant funds, using algorithms to execute trades. After building a fortune in trading, Liang pivoted into generative AI, utilising both talent and computing resources from High-Flyer to launch DeepSeek in 2023.

One manager at a rival fund who has known Liang for years says: “He stands out from our crowd because he’s a true engineer. He thinks and acts like one. While we’re managing people and funds, he is coding every day.”

Liang’s stated goal with DeepSeek is to pursue artificial general intelligence, a holy grail that OpenAI is also working towards, which will herald a time when computers are capable of humanlike critical thinking. The fund manager says Liang will finally “be able to entirely remove the human factor” by achieving AGI.

Liang’s fellow quants are happy to see him find success with DeepSeek. “I hope this will mean Beijing will be more friendly to us,” says another trader.

While quants are revered in the west as financial geniuses of the digital age, they have been vilified in China. During stock market routs, regulators have limited their activity, accusing quants of profiting at the expense of the country’s roughly 200mn retail investors. The wider finance industry has also experienced a number of rocky years, with officials capping pay at state-owned funds and criticising the sector for not contributing to societal development.

Beijing has a more positive attitude towards AI companies and has recognised Liang’s contributions at DeepSeek. Before the holiday, he was selected as the only AI leader to join a publicised meeting with China’s second-in-command, Li Qiang. Along with a small group of entrepreneurs, he was exhorted to make technological breakthroughs for the country.

In public, Liang has remained silent, even as he has become a focal point in US-China tensions, with some US lawmakers reacting to DeepSeek’s progress by suggesting further limits on China’s access to Nvidia chips.

Liang’s silence is true to his character. “For those who know him well, he can talk a lot when it’s a topic of interest. You need to get used to his communication style. He’s not being rude when he’s suddenly quiet, which often happens. He’s thinking,” says another fund manager. “If he doesn’t want to talk to you, he’ll let you know.”

DeepSeek has not responded to attacks from US rivals, which range from accusations of technology theft to claims that the company is being used as an asset of the Chinese state.

The internet has also been left to hunt for clues about Liang, dissecting the sparse public information available.

But for residents of Mililing, he represents something more innocent: a hard-working student from a small farming community that made it big. “We all grew up in this village,” says Leon Liang, who used to play football with the younger Liang. “We’re very proud of him.”

eleanor.olcott@ft.com, zijing.wu@ft.com

Additional reporting by Ryan McMorrow in Beijing



Hong Kong’s securities regulator has announced that asset managers will be permitted to launch leveraged and inverse exchange traded funds tracking single stocks overseas, as well as defined outcome listed structured funds.

The Securities and Futures Commission said in a circular that single stock leveraged and inverse ETFs and defined outcome listed structured funds had become “increasingly popular in overseas markets”.

Single stock leveraged and inverse products have been available in Europe since 2018, with the US following suit in 2022, where they have proved popular with international investors looking to trade or hedge positions in large-cap stocks such as Nvidia and Tesla.

“Against this backdrop, there has been growing interest among product issuers in launching them in Hong Kong, in the light of their distinct appeal to investors,” said the SFC.

Single stock leveraged and inverse products use derivatives to deliver multiples of the performance of a single stock’s daily price return, or profit from declines in their value.

Defined outcome listed structured funds use options contracts to protect investors against losses, while capping their potential investment gains.

Single stock leveraged and inverse products could allow investors to trade or hedge their positions in individual stocks listed overseas and provide price discovery tools for overseas exposure during Asian trading hours, continued the regulator.

Christina Choi, the SFC’s executive director of investment products, said the circular provided a “clear pathway for those seeking product authorisation”, while also spelling out the regulator’s expectation for products to meet robust regulatory standards.

For single-stock leveraged and inverse products, the SFC said it would only accept those tracking a “highly liquid megacap stock listed on a major overseas exchange”, excluding overseas stocks with a dual listing in Hong Kong, and stocks listed on any mainland exchange.

The maximum leverage of these products will be capped at a factor of 2x, or -2x.

Jean-Francois Mesnard-Sense, head of exchange traded products at Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, said Hong Kong had become the first market in Asia to offer single stock leveraged and inverse products.

“This will further enhance our product ecosystem, reinforcing Hong Kong’s role as a leading ETP marketplace in Asia,” said Mesnard-Sense, adding that HKEX would work with issuers and stakeholders towards introducing the new products.

Sally Wong, chief executive of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Association, said she welcomed greater flexibility to allow more innovation in product offering as a general principle.

But she also noted that the complexity and risk profile of these types of products would mean they would only be catering to a “very niche market segment”.

Hong Kong allowed the first leveraged and inverse products in 2016, initially limited to products tracking liquid and broadly based “non-Hong Kong, non-mainland foreign equity indexes”.

Products tracking Hong Kong’s stock market were added in 2017 and the product universe was extended to China’s onshore stock markets in 2020.

Bosera Asset Management, China Asset Management (HK), CSOP Asset Management and Fubon Fund Management have launched a total of 19 leveraged and inverse products in Hong Kong so far, tracking equities indexes and commodities including cryptocurrencies.

In the circular, the SFC said the new product types would have to meet existing rules for listed structured funds and ETFs, in addition to some other requirements for leveraged and inverse products around their naming and other aspects.

The SFC does not allow leveraged and inverse products to be named “ETFs” in order to differentiate them from conventional ETFs. The products are also required to include the leverage or inverse factor and the word “daily” in the name, to emphasise their daily rebalancing feature.

Issuers were also expected to conduct “extensive investor education before launching the funds in Hong Kong”, said the regulator.

The SFC might consider introducing further requirements applicable to specific types of listed structured funds as necessary, according to the circular.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



Apple revealed quarterly results that slightly exceeded Wall Street expectations, SoftBank is in talks to invest as much as $25bn into OpenAI, and the European Central Bank cut interest rates as it warned about headwinds to the bloc’s economy. Plus, there are concerns that China’s hukou system creates second-class citizens and holds back consumption in urban areas.

Mentioned in this podcast:

Apple results top estimates even as iPhone sales stall

SoftBank in talks to invest up to $25bn in OpenAI

ECB warns of ‘headwinds’ to Eurozone economy as it cuts rate to 2.75%

How a Mao-era system creates second-class citizens in modern China

The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian, Lulu Smyth, and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



In the white heat of the space race, America spent millions of taxpayer dollars developing a ball-point pen that would work in zero gravity. Confronted with the same problem the Russians used . . . a pencil.

This is, inconveniently, a fairytale. Both sides tried pencils and both sides ended up using the Space Pen, a product developed entirely in the private sector. But the myth often resurfaces as an industrial, geopolitical and ideological parable because it nicely captures the terror that infuses all those fields: that the other company/side/economic model can, and may, be structurally better placed to work smarter and cheaper.

Did the “Space Pen” meme return this week as investors and governments gawped at China’s supposedly low-cost DeepSeek AI model, wondered whether US export controls had backfired, then lost their nerve around the billions invested in the more costly American approach to the same problem? Of course it did.

The more unsettling phrase of the moment, though, should be kaizen — the Japanese concept of “continuous improvement” which once struck nervous awe into US corporate hearts and which China, one way or another, now looks to have quietly mastered. Partly by hiring Japanese kaizen masters undervalued in their own economy.

Kaizen first properly entered the international business lexicon in the 1980s, when American and European companies needed to understand why Japanese companies were beating them — in terms of both price and quality — on cars, consumer electronics and semiconductors. It suited both sides to identify the differentiator as a patient, distinctly Japanese, betterment of product and process.

The practical effects of kaizen were remarkable: they were among the prime reasons that Japan’s economy became huge in the 1970s and 80s, and why so many of its companies retain global competitiveness in a formidable range of manufacturing fields.

But kaizen’s evolution during Japan’s long, stagnant post-bubble decades is perhaps more extraordinary. Once the era of financial excess evaporated, kaizen became a survival superpower: a simultaneous propellant of higher quality and leanness in corrosive times. Deflation, and the inability of Japanese manufacturers to secure pricing power in their domestic market, made cost-cutting a fine art.

Chinese manufacturers, with their attention long fixed on cost and technology, have been closely scrutinising all this, and have seen ways to make kaizen their own. DeepSeek may represent a software breakthrough, but it is one borne on the shoulders of a now relentlessly, incrementally advancing hardware sector.

Many will argue that China’s acquisition of technology has been opportunist at best and underhanded at worst. Where outright theft or coercion is not blamed (and it is, frequently), foreign companies have lost key technology to badly formulated transfer deals or excessive optimism over the ability to protect IP. But that has long ceased to explain everything.

In China’s most recent and visible industrial achievements — the production of low-cost, competitive quality electric cars, consumer electronics, industrial machinery, high speed trains and robots — some version of kaizen is now at work. And there are reasons to suspect that the Chinese iteration may, for a stint, work faster, more disruptively and with more visible results, than the original.

First, China has the numbers and talent to throw at kaizen on a much larger scale than Japan ever mustered. Increments work best when there are a lot of them.

Second, it is happening in an era where consumers are far quicker to identify and communicate when a product is not exactly as they would like it.

But a third is that they may be able to pay for speed. As well as directly observing kaizen in action at Japanese manufacturing operations, Chinese companies, according to recruitment agents in Tokyo, have found they can lure away Japanese semiconductor, railway and robotics engineers as consultants. This is not new, say the agents, but it is now sharply accelerating.

Japanese companies tend to retire highly qualified people early, have not, for some years during the deflationary period, paid them especially handsomely and have instilled less parting loyalty than they might have hoped. They can be paid well by a Chinese company and, without explicitly imparting industrial secrets, their worth is immense: kaizen is fundamentally a process of trial and error, and an experienced engineer can impart the invaluable, cost-saving nod on what was tried but didn’t work.

Advice such as: forget the pencil, it was useless.

leo.lewis@ft.com



Decoupling can be painful. Germany found that out the hard way after weaning itself off its dependence on cheap Russian gas following the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.

Now German companies from Volkswagen and BMW to BASF and Mercedes-Benz are facing what could be a stiffer challenge: a potential scaling back of ties with China, once one of the main sources of their profits. The corporate and political winds appear to be blowing increasingly in that direction.

Friedrich Merz, the frontrunner to become German chancellor in elections next month, warned companies that China was part of an “axis of autocracies” and that investing there involved “great risk”. “My heartfelt request to all companies . . . Limit the risk you take in order to avoid endangering your own company if it triggers an immediate write-off,” he said last week.

That appears to mark a change from the rhetoric of current chancellor Olaf Scholz, who has vaguely talked of “de-risking” from China but also lobbied for better market access for German companies on a trip last year to Beijing together with business leaders. There is also pressure from the US, increasing with Donald Trump’s presidency, for Germany to choose a side between Washington and Beijing.

For big German companies, this might all be beside the point. A decision on China ties may not be entirely in their hands to take.

The potential from China’s huge population and its rising middle class enticed German carmakers and metal bashing industrial companies to expand in the country, overriding any worries about geopolitical tensions or human rights concerns.

But long-standing correlation between Chinese economic growth and German exports to China has broken down since the Covid-19 pandemic. German exports to China increased faster than to any other major trading partner from 2015-20 but have fallen back since.

German companies, particularly the carmakers, face huge market pressure in China. For years derided as producing cheap, clunky cars, Chinese manufacturers — admittedly heavily supported by the state — have shot past their German counterparts in developing electric vehicles.

German carmakers’ EV market share in China was just 4 per cent in 2024, the lowest of any country, according to the German Association of the Automotive Industry. This matters as EV sales in China are more than double those in Europe, US, Canada, Japan and South Korea combined.

One non-German automotive boss thinks that German manufacturers need to give up on China, an especially difficult thing given how lucrative the market has been for them in the past. “Their share is pretty much going to zero. It will be painful,” he adds.

The issue is how painful and fast the process will be. VW delivered 4.2mn cars in China in 2019, making €4.4bn in operating profit. By 2023, those figures were down to 3.2mn deliveries and €2.6bn in operating profit.

Overall, sales of foreign brands in China have fallen to a record low of less than 40 per cent market share, down from more than 60 per cent in 2020, according to data from Shanghai consultancy Automobility. China still represents between a quarter and almost half of sales for VW, BMW and Mercedes suggesting more suffering could come.

German carmakers are keen to protect what they have, however, leading to some strange developments. Analysts estimate German groups such as VW may have to fork out hundreds of millions of euros to Chinese rivals to buy carbon credits to meet new EU pollution rules for this year.

Then there is the spectacle of BMW and Mercedes joining Chinese manufacturers in suing the EU over tariffs on EVs from China. Ola Källenius, chief executive of Mercedes, also told the FT this month that the EU should instead try to encourage Chinese carmakers to open more plants in Europe.

German carmakers are also pushing back against an EU ban on the sale of new fossil-fuel cars from 2035. All of which raises the question of whether German reluctance to decouple from an autocracy is driving EU policy in an unwanted direction.

“German dependency on Russian gas slowed the transition to renewable energy. I’m worried now they are slowing our transition to EVs,” says one European industrial boss.

How this German de-risking or decoupling plays out will be one of the main European corporate stories of the coming years. Can its companies avoid a lose-lose situation, where they find themselves squeezed out of the Chinese market and/or outcompeted by Chinese rivals at home?

richard.milne@ft.com



Politicians in Lestijärvi thought they had the answer to Finland’s demographic woes: each mother of a newborn baby would receive €1,000 a year for 10 years if they stayed in the Nordic country’s second-smallest municipality.

But more than a decade after they introduced the payments, and over €400,000 poorer, officials were forced to concede defeat: Lestijärvi’s population has shrunk by a fifth since the scheme started.

“It wasn’t worth doing at all,” said Niko Aihio, the town’s former head of education. “The baby boom only lasted one year.”

Policymakers around the world are grappling with the same problems as those in Lestijärvi: no matter what they seem to offer in the way of incentives, people are not having more babies. For the Finnish municipality it failed even to lure people from elsewhere: “It didn’t stop people moving away, and it didn’t attract new families,” Aihio said.

China has offered free fertility treatments, Hungary big tax exemptions and cash, and Singapore grants for parents and grandparents. A Danish travel company even ran an ad campaign to “Do it for Denmark”. In Japan, the state funds AI-powered matchmaking, while Tokyo’s metropolitan government is offering a four-day working week to staff in an attempt to encourage people to become parents.

Governments are still hunting for policy options to counter a looming economic crisis as older populations expand and the pool of workers shrinks. It is a shift that think-tank the Robert Schuman Foundation has called “demographic suicide”.

The reasons for the trend have been fiercely debated, while some potential solutions, such as immigration and pushing people to retire later, have proved deeply politically unpalatable.

“The issue of population ageing presents multiple challenges for Europe,” said Olli Rehn, governor of the Finnish central bank. “First, the worsening dependency ratio is putting significant pressure on public finances. Second, an ageing society tends to be less economically dynamic and less entrepreneurial.”

The decline in birth rates is a peculiarly universal problem — no continent has been left unscathed by the trend. Two-thirds of the world’s population now lives in countries where people are having babies at a rate too low to replace their population.

More and more countries are joining the list. By 2100, just 12 countries — 11 in Africa and the tiny Pacific island state of Vanuatu — are expected to have fertility rates above the crucial level of 2.1 births per woman. Not a single country is expected to have a rate above 2.3 by the end of the century.

Policymakers may be tempted to focus on more immediate crises. But the decline in fertility rates threatens to lead to deep economic malaise. Fewer babies and more older residents lead to a lower proportion of people of working age, denting tax revenues at the same time as costs associated with ageing societies, such as state pensions and healthcare, increase.

Without sufficient policy action, analysts at rating agency S&P Global estimated in 2023 that fiscal deficits would balloon by 2060 from a global average now of 2.4 per cent of GDP to 9.1 per cent. The global net government debt-to-GDP level would very nearly triple.

Meanwhile, a McKinsey report in January suggested many of the world’s richest economies, such as the UK, US and Japan, would need to at least double productivity growth to maintain historical improvements in living standards amid sharp falls in their birth rates.

Parts of Asia, especially China, and Latin American countries are particularly exposed. In 1995, 10 workers in eastern Asia supported one old-age person; by 2085, it is projected to be one to one.

Politicians worry that they may be powerless to act, as social pressures on women undergo a profound change. Sarah Harper, professor of gerontology and director of the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing, said surveys of young women across the world, from Europe to south-east Asia, suggested a once built-in social obligation for women to reproduce — and an assumption on their part that if they could, they probably would have children — no longer existed.

Careers and increased gender equality are a part of that. “We have a whole cohort of women in high-income countries, but also in south-east Asia, and particularly east Asia . . . who have been educated in a very gender-neutral way,” said Harper. “They enter the workplace in a gender-neutral way, and then they become parents and suddenly, no matter how hard one tries, it’s not gender-neutral.”

Policy is also likely to have little effect where norms around the number of children are ingrained. Harper noted that in China, despite the end of the one-child policy in 2016, women still generally had just one child.

“Once you come to a one-child society, then why would you want to have two children? Because everyone has one child . . . everyone is geared up to having one child. Institutions are geared up to having one child,” Harper said.

Heidi Colleran, an academic at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Germany, said that despite decades of research and thousands of people working on demographic trends, there was little to no consensus on why fertility rates kept declining.

“There’s lots of general threads to pull on: the rise of the nuclear family, changes in the age of marriage, the rate at which people live together, the age at which people start having their first child is getting older and older,” she said. “There’s lots of these individual-level features . . . and they’re all correct . . . [But] the same constellation of predictors, they are going to be correlated with each other in a different way in different places.”

Yet, while personal choice has played a part in the global decline in childbearing, studies indicate people are often having fewer children than they would like to — indicating there could still be a role for public policies in changing that.

Barriers such as the cost of childcare and housing, financial instability, persistent gender inequality, inflexible working conditions, and a lack of job security are among the factors holding people back from having more children.

Better policies may not be able to close the gap completely, but they can help. “Supportive family policies — such as accessible childcare, financial incentives, and cultural acceptance of working parents — can significantly impact demographic trends,” Rehn said.

Experts agree. “Conventional pro-natal policy that is chucking money at the problem works to an extent,” said Lyman Stone, demographer at the Institute of Family Studies, who specialises in fertility.

Stone said studies showed South Korean fertility rates could be even lower than they are now without baby bonus programmes, the expansion of state-funded childcare, subsidised fertility treatments and housing assistance.

At the same time, Finland remains one of the world’s most rapidly ageing societies thanks to a big baby boom after the second world war. Neither cheap childcare, nor “baby money” paid out by dozens of municipalities, appear to have had much impact on the country’s birth rate, which remains among Europe’s lowest.

Aihio said that good local services — such as libraries, swimming pools and decent childcare — seemed more important than money in encouraging women to have babies. And Rehn acknowledged that policies could take a “long time” to show any pay-off.

Some governments have also faced criticism for how they target measures to encourage people to become parents. In Italy, for example — where the fertility rate stands at a modest 1.2 — only heterosexual, married women are allowed to undergo in vitro fertilisation, even privately. Single women and those in same-sex partnerships are denied access.

Another “huge headache for policymakers”, said Paula Sheppard, evolutionary anthropologist at Oxford university, was that different parts of the population needed different policies.

Women with low levels of education delay having children because of concerns about the stability of their relationships and the need to live near their parents. By contrast, those with a university education worry about dropping down the career ladder and want a hands-on partner, her research has suggested.

Others studying the challenge of old-age dependency ratios argue there is no need to focus policy changes primarily on births.

Edward Paice, a demographics expert focusing on Africa, said there was an obvious answer to the west’s demographic problems: immigration. “Europe can’t hermetically seal itself anyway. There are tremendous opportunities for western countries to rethink how they engage with African countries,” he said.

An influx of foreigners has slowly but steadily increased Finland’s population in recent years. But while Rehn acknowledged that work- and education-related immigration was “an essential part of the solution”, he added: “Of course, in the age of populism this is a politically challenging message.”

Governments also want people to work for longer. Harper, the professor of gerontology, said it was important for societies to acknowledge that retiring from the workforce and then expecting to live on social support for decades afterwards was “just not sustainable”.

Like immigration, raising the retirement age can come at a steep political cost.

In France in 2023, people took to the streets in protest as President Emmanuel Macron rammed through legislation to raise the retirement age from 62 to just 64. Many Chinese have reacted angrily to legislation to raise statutory retirement ages, which are some of the world’s lowest.

“You can either increase migration rates or retirement age, or encourage people to have more children,” said Edward Davies, policy director at the Centre for Social Justice in the UK. “I suspect of the three, people naturally would like to have families, whereas actually telling them they have to retire later or you have to have mass migration — it’s probably just less popular.”

Additional reporting by David Pilling in London

Letter in response to this article:

How global demography resembles a Ponzi scheme / From Eric Filseth, Palo Alto, CA, US



The Chinese company DeepSeek has shocked the world with an AI model that could rival those built by the biggest artificial intelligence companies in Silicon Valley. For years it has been assumed that China’s AI companies were trailing in the wake of US rivals such as OpenAI, creator of ChatGPT. Murad Ahmed, the FT’s technology news editor, is joined by the FT’s China technology correspondent Eleanor Olcott to discuss whether DeepSeek’s model shows that China is catching up in the AI race, with expert analysis from Tiezhen Wang from AI open-source community platform Hugging Face.

Free to read:

How small Chinese AI start-up DeepSeek shocked Silicon Valley

Why Nvidia investors are spooked by Chinese AI upstart DeepSeek

OpenAI’s Sam Altman vows ‘better models’ as China’s DeepSeek disrupts global race

This season of Tech Tonic is presented by Murad Ahmed, and produced by Persis Love. Edwin Lane is the senior producer and Manuela Saragosa is the executive producer. Sound design by Breen Turner and Samantha Giovinco, with original music from Metaphor Music. The FT’s head of audio is Cheryl Brumley.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



We’ve already spent a lot of time gawping at the vanishing spread between Japanese and Chinese government bond yields, and its myriad implications.

Well, here’s another fixed income spread that says something interesting about the global economy today. Or at least something interesting about how investors see the global economy today.

Lo, the spread between India and China’s 10 year sovereign bond yields hit an 11-year high of 5.2 percentage points earlier this month, and remains near its highest ever levels.

The recent ballooning is mostly due to Chinese yields grinding lower and lower. Indian yields have actually fallen as well lately, due to expectations for rate cuts from the Reserve Bank of India, the surging US dollar, and last year’s inclusion into JPMorgan’s influential emerging market bond indices.

However, the economic outlook for India is lot more positive than it is for China. As a result, the inflation picture is also radically different, as Chetan Ahya, chief Asia economist at Morgan Stanley points out:

Trinh Nguyen, economist for emerging Asia at Natixis, adds that India has some tailwinds that China now lacks:

As a result, Indian bond yields have remained relatively high — the 10-year yield has dipped from above 7 per cent in the middle of 2024 to around 6.7 per cent right now — even as Chinese bond yields have puked hard.

In fact, the 10-year Chinese government bond yield is now only a whisker above 1.5 per cent, a figurative fixed income market howl that there’s a danger that deflation becomes entrenched.

In a sign of how serious the situation is for China, its 30-year yield fell below that of Japan’s last year, and China’s 10-year government bond yield is now only 0.4 percentage point higher than that of Japan.

The United Nations predicts that India will remain the fastest growing major economy in the world, forecasting GDP growth of 6.6 per cent in 2025, even Chinese economic growth slows to 4.8 per cent.

The whole India versus China thing seems to be becoming a bit of a narrative, with UBS recently releasing a 139-page tome that compares the two countries across a range of different macro and capital market metrics. Most notably, the report predicts that India could overtake China in MSCI’s equity weightings by as early as 2028.

Of course, it wasn’t that long ago that people were just as bullish on China . . .



International hotel groups are increasing their presence in China, betting on the cheaper end of the market as the country’s economic slowdown hurts travellers’ budgets.

Hyatt, IHG and Radisson are among the global hotel chains expanding in the world’s second-biggest economy — and converting some of the many unoccupied office blocks to hotels — as they look to target younger, more cost-conscious travellers.

Hyatt, the US hospitality group known for upmarket brands such as Grand Hyatt and Hyatt Regency, has about 170 of its more than 1,300 hotels in China. It plans to add another 140 in the next four years, about half of which will be part of the mid-range UrCove brand.

UrCove charges about $60 a night on average for rooms in its 50-plus hotels in China, about half the cost of a night in some of the Hyatt Regency’s nearly 40 hotels in the country.

Hyatt’s focus on UrCove, a joint development with Chinese hotel chain BTG Homeinns, would allow it to expand into more cities and “grow our base”, including for young domestic travellers, said Stephen Ho, who runs Hyatt’s greater China business.

With Chinese companies cutting costs and trimming travel budgets, demand for expensive hotel rooms had fallen sharply in recent months, said Zhou Mingqi, founder of China-based consultancy Jingjian Consulting, which specialises in tourism and real estate.

“[Many] Chinese are more cautious on spending in a slower economy [but are still pursuing] quality,” said Ernan Cui, a consumer market analyst at Gavekal. “As a result, mid-to-upscale hotels are favoured and would see stronger growth than [high-end luxury hotels].”

Some hoteliers are renting and converting empty office blocks into affordable hotels. Seven of Hyatt’s UrCove hotels in the tech hub of Shenzhen were converted from empty floors in existing office buildings, said Ho.

“[We] can convert office space, even residential space, sometimes existing buildings . . . [and] reconfigure it into a hotel,” he said. “Most of the time they only have one restaurant, [limited] meeting space and no swimming pool . . . so it makes it easier to convert [from] an office space.

“It’s a worthwhile investment,” he added. “You don’t have to build the building, you don’t have to buy the land, right?”

Daniel Aylmer, chief executive at IHG Greater China, said “over half of our open and pipeline hotels” in the greater China region — which includes the mainland, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan — would fall under two of its mid-range brands, Holiday Inn and Holiday Inn Express.

He added there had been a “ramp-up in recent years” of conversions from existing buildings, accounting for nearly 30 per cent of its openings in greater China in the first half of last year. The group said mid-range hotels were experiencing “substantial” growth in China as “consumer behaviours evolve”.

Belgium-based Radisson, which was acquired by Chinese conglomerate Jin Jiang International in 2018, said it was planning about 400 new hotels in China by 2030, including a large number of mid-range rooms.

Some of its new hotels would be converted from office buildings, said Elie Younes, Radisson’s global chief development officer. “People in secondary cities are spending less in China, so I have to afford to build the hotel that the customer can afford,” he said.

Average room rates at luxury and upscale hotels in China were down by up to 20 per cent in October compared with the previous year, said Rao Linfeng, a China-based hotel investment strategist. Overall room rates are still growing but at a slower pace this year as the post-pandemic travel demand surge loses steam and economic growth remains slow.

The decline in consumer spending at China’s luxury hotels was “evident”, said Harlem Chow, a former executive at H World and Wyndham. “Former five-star hotel guests now choose four-star options, while four-star guests turn to upper mid-range hotels.” Guests were also opting for cheaper brands and having fewer overnight stays, said Chow.

As international hotel groups target the more cost-conscious traveller, they face increased domestic competition.

Groups such as H World and Atour were also investing in mid-range hotels, said Kevin Hei, business development manager at Empark Hotels & Resorts.

The higher-end market was “unlikely to see a strong rebound any time soon”, said Zhou of Jingjian Consulting, adding that international brands would increasingly see thin margins. “Ultimately, they’ll have to compete just as aggressively as local brands do.”



Until this month, the oil-rich United Arab Emirates had modest ambitions when it came to renewable energy: to install roughly as many solar panels each year as the UK.

But then Masdar, the country’s state-owned renewable energy company, decided to make a splash at a huge trade fair in Abu Dhabi.

In front of the UAE president, it announced it would build a $6bn 5 gigawatt solar plant backed with more than 19GWh of battery storage — the largest such project ever attempted.

When it starts in two years’ time, its batteries will give the country a constant output of 1GW, enough to power more than 700,000 homes without having to rely on gas-fired plants when the sun is not shining.

“This will transform renewable energy into baseload energy,” said Sultan Al Jaber, the chair of Masdar. “It is a first step that could become a giant leap.”

As the UAE was revealing its new solar project, Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, announced a joint venture that would start producing lithium, a key ingredient for batteries, as early as 2027.

The two countries, and their neighbours in the Gulf, have always been able to rely on their abundant reserves of fossil fuels, and both Saudi Arabia and the UAE plan to produce significantly more oil and gas in the years ahead.

But the Gulf is also accelerating its use of renewable energy, spying an economic opportunity to use cheap solar panels, wind turbines and batteries for its domestic electricity, and freeing up more oil and gas for export.

“The perfect recipe [for renewable energy] exists here,” said Mazin Khan, Masdar’s chief financial officer, adding that the cost of the new solar and battery plant would be, for the first time, “comparable, if not cheaper, than conventional gas”.

“We have abundant solar resources. We have relationships with manufacturers that we can leverage to get the best price possible. The regulatory market here in the UAE is very competitive and we have a line of commercial banks queueing up to be part of the project.”

The most active companies bidding for contracts to build renewable projects in the Gulf are regional players including Masdar and Saudi Arabia’s Acwa Power, Asian companies such as South Korea’s Kepco, Japan’s Jera and China’s Jinko Power, and Europe’s TotalEnergies, EDF and Engie.

The wider Middle East, including Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan and Syria, is far behind Europe, the US and China in using renewable energy.

According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (Irena), the Middle East has less than 1 per cent of the world’s renewable capacity. But from a low base, it is also the fastest-growing region outside China, in terms of adding capacity.

With a series of huge projects, the Gulf is rapidly changing its energy mix. In five years’ time, renewables will make 30 per cent of the total capacity across Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, according to data from Rystad, an energy consultancy.

“They have a lot of capital now from oil and gas, and they are trying to become less reliant on any one source of energy,” said Vegard Wiik Vollset, head of renewables at Rystad.

“It is also an economic benefit because they already have the best conditions for solar of almost anywhere in the world, and if you can get cheaper electricity than it costs for gas, you can export the gas instead.”

Rystad’s projections are based on multiple new project announcements across the region, but the energy consultancy also adjusts its forecast to take into account that the Gulf’s ambitions appear to be running ahead of reality.

Saudi Arabia, for example, targets to generate 50 per cent of its electricity from renewables by 2030, requiring it to install 130GW of renewables in just a few years, enough to power about 25mn homes. “They will have to ramp up their efforts quite substantially,” said Vollset.

“2030 is quite soon. Of course, in the Middle East the turnaround can be very quick, like the UAE project. That timeline would never happen in Europe and North America.”

The drive for renewables is also being fed by ambitions to build AI data centres and fledgling plans to produce “green” hydrogen — a transition fuel that is electrolysed using renewable power — and export it to countries where higher power prices make its production uncompetitive.

Kuwait, which only had enough renewable capacity to power a few thousand homes at the end of 2023, according to Irena, awarded a contract in July last year to US engineering firm KBR to create 17GW of renewables, or enough energy for about 500,000 homes, and 25GW of green hydrogen capacity by 2050.

Most of the suppliers of green products are Chinese. At this month’s trade fair, dozens of the country’s leading manufacturers crammed into Abu Dhabi’s National Exhibition Centre, showing off a range of products customised for the local market, such as self-cleaning solar arrays, with robots that brush away dust and sand to keep panels running efficiently.

“Our batteries can withstand temperatures of over 60C, and they are sand, water and wind resistant,” said Yong Liu, a marketing executive at BYD, one of China’s leading battery and electric car companies.

BYD provided the batteries for Saudi Arabia’s Bisha plant, which until the UAE’s announcement, was the world’s largest solar and battery project.

“Business is growing very fast here and the projects are huge,” said Beijing Hyperstrong, a well-established Chinese battery company. “It is a new emerging market for us. While we already set up a presence in Europe and the US, the Middle East is equally important for us in the long run.”

However, the challenge will be for Gulf states to integrate a rapid rollout of renewables into their power grids, said Vollset. “What they do not currently have is the infrastructure, in terms of the grid, which is built for fossil fuels, not solar power. So there’s a question mark over how they overcome that obstacle.”

Data visualisation by Will Crofton in London



It is hard to talk about 21st-century economic history without discussing the “China shock”. That is the term often used to describe China’s entrance into the global market, a change that brought rich countries an abundance of cheap goods, but left entire industries and workforces mothballed.

DeepSeek may provide a sequel. A little-known Chinese hedge fund has thrown a grenade into the world of artificial intelligence with a large language model that, in effect, matches the market leader, Sam Altman’s OpenAI, at a fraction of the cost. And while OpenAI treats its models’ workings as proprietary, DeepSeek’s R1 wears its technical innards on the outside, making it attractive for developers to use and build on.

Things move faster in the AI age; terrifyingly so. Five of the biggest technology stocks geared to AI — chipmaker Nvidia and so-called hyperscalers Alphabet, Amazon, Microsoft and Meta Platforms — collectively shed almost $750bn of market value before US markets opened on Monday. It could be particularly grim for Nvidia if it proves true that DeepSeek won without the use of its shiniest chips.

Investors in tech companies, including Europeans such as chipmaking equipment maker ASML, and energy companies that investors hoped would get a boost from fuelling data centres, are left wondering whether their investments will go up in smoke. The hyperscalers were due to plough almost $300bn into capital expenditure this year, according to Visible Alpha estimates. Analysts expect that on Wednesday, when they report earnings, Meta and Microsoft will report investment for 2024 totalling $94bn.

In truth, the game is not over. DeepSeek’s actual potential is still unclear, and it has yet to achieve “artificial general intelligence”, the humanlike state that Meta and OpenAI are pursuing. But the rules might have changed. At the very least, DeepSeek may take some of the US giants’ customers. At worst, it has challenged the core belief that more hardware is the key to better AI. That principle has underpinned the market value of Silicon Valley companies as they invest hand over fist.

What is bad for the hyperscalers could still be a windfall for everyone else. For most business users, having the absolute best model is less important than having one that’s reliable and good enough. Not every driver needs a Ferrari. Advances in reasoning such as R1 could be a big step for “agents” that deal with customers and perform tasks in the workplace. If those are available more cheaply, corporate profitability should rise.

In that sense, this second China shock could resemble the first. It could bring not just destruction but a reshuffling — albeit a painful one for many. Researchers have estimated that for every job lost to the China shock, US households’ purchasing power rose by more than $400,000. The race for AI supremacy is on pause; the great giveaway has begun.

john.foley@ft.com

Letter in response to this article:

Enjoyable serendipity / From Stuart Dawkins, Leicester, Leicestershire, UK



Leading Chinese property developer Vanke has forecast a $6.2bn annual loss and announced the sudden resignation of its top leadership, reigniting concerns over funding and confidence across China’s economically critical real estate sector.

The developer, partly owned by local authorities in Shenzhen, is the latest focal point of a cash crunch that began with the collapse of peer Evergrande in 2021 and has since engulfed a host of other developers including Country Garden.

After weeks of swirling concerns over the health of Vanke, the company said in a filing to the Hong Kong stock exchange on Monday that chair Yu Liang had resigned for “work adjustment reasons”. It said chief executive Zhu Jiusheng had departed for “health reasons”.

The “sudden and simultaneous” resignations were “unprecedented in recent memory” for a big participant such as Vanke, said Foreky Wong, founding partner at Hong Kong advisory company Fortune Ark Restructuring.

Vanke said in a separate filing that it expected to have made a loss of Rmb45bn ($6.2bn) in 2024, compared with profits of Rmb12bn a year earlier, highlighting a continued decline in sales of new homes in China. The company said it was experiencing “temporary liquidity difficulties” due to the loss.

Xin Jie, head of Shenzhen Metro, which owns about a third of Vanke, will become the company’s new chair. Vanke is now set to become the latest test of authorities’ willingness to support individual developers, which typically borrow heavily to finance their activities. Vanke has Rmb36bn of capital market debt coming due this year.

Given the company’s well-known status in China, its struggles also pose a fresh challenge to homebuyer confidence, which remains weak despite a barrage of recent efforts from policymakers.

Rather than carrying out individual bailouts, Beijing has, since Evergrande’s default in 2021, prioritised completing unfinished projects, reducing borrowing costs for homeowners and encouraging banks and other lenders to refinance the sector.

Policymakers unveiled vast credit lines from state-owned banks in late 2022 and, in May, announced a new policy of encouraging state-owned enterprises to buy unsold housing. However, overall investment and sales have continued to decline, weighing on China’s economic momentum.

Zerlina Zeng, head of Asia credit strategy at CreditSights, said the crucial question was how much contagion risk Vanke’s plight would create, adding that the central and local governments might not be expecting “so much of a systemic impact” from a restructuring.

“If the market thinks otherwise and we see a funding freeze . . . and that leads to banks becoming even less willing to extend money to property, even at the project level, then that would [mean] big trouble for the Chinese government,” she said.

The resignations at Vanke come after a period of mounting concern over its liquidity, echoing the experience of other developers such as Country Garden in 2023. Leading rating agencies had downgraded its debt in recent weeks.

Fitch, which downgraded its debt to B minus last week, pointing to a “deterioration in Vanke’s sales and cash generation”, saying it was now reliant on new bank borrowing and asset disposals to repay its looming debts.

Zeng said the Shenzhen government had over the past year “not provided much liquidity and financial support to Vanke”, and that the cash required was “not something that a local government, even a wealthy one, would be able to [provide]”.



Tesla is suing the EU over tariffs the bloc imposed on imports of electric vehicles from China, in the latest confrontation between the carmaker’s billionaire boss Elon Musk and Brussels.

The European Court of Justice published confirmation of the case, filed by Tesla’s Shanghai subsidiary, on its website on Monday without giving further details.

Tesla’s lawsuit follows similar claims filed by Germany’s BMW and several Chinese carmakers.

In October the EU imposed anti-subsidy tariffs of up to 7.8 per cent for Tesla and up to 35.3 per cent on other Chinese electric vehicle imports produced by other carmakers. They were in addition to a 10 per cent standard import tariff for the industry.

The anti-subsidy tariffs came after an EU investigation launched in 2023 on China’s unfair support for its EV industry. Brussels found that carmakers had benefited from soft loans, cheap land deals and subsidies for suppliers such as steelmakers.

About a fifth of all electric cars sold across the EU last year, or 300,000 units, were built in China. Tesla accounted for 28 per cent of Chinese-made EVs imported into the bloc in 2023, more than any other brand, according to Transport and Environment, an environmental NGO.

Tesla was hit with the lowest tariff after an individual examination by the EU found that it received the smallest amount of support from the Chinese government.

Tesla executives have said they are adjusting their import policy from China to respond to the EU tariffs. The company currently exports Model 3 vehicles from Shanghai to the EU, while it produces the Model Y in Berlin.

The legal filing gave no details about Tesla’s argument. The case against the European Commission will be heard at the General Court, the EU’s second-highest court, and the verdict can be appealed against to the ECJ. The process could take about 18 months.

European Commission trade spokesperson Olof Gill said on Monday in response to Tesla’s filing: “We’re prepared to defend our case in court as necessary.”

Musk, an adviser to US President Donald Trump and an outspoken critic of EU technology regulation, has backed the far-right Alternative for Germany party in the country’s election campaign.

New Tesla registrations fell 13 per cent year on year to 242,945 vehicles in 2024, according to Acea, the European car industry body. Musk’s political activism has been blamed for deterring some drivers from buying a Tesla, though it has made others more likely to buy one.



Chinese regulators are investigating the quality of domestic generic drugs after a rare public backlash against a cost-cutting campaign that prioritised their use in the national healthcare system but has led to doctors complaining about their effectiveness.

The probe comes amid increasing concerns among foreign pharmaceutical companies that China’s drug procurement system, in which producers bid for bulk tenders to supply public hospitals, in effect discriminates against international competition.

China’s pharmaceuticals market is one of the most important for drug companies, second in size only to the US, with sales of $239bn in 2023, according to a report by research group Frost & Sullivan.

But healthcare costs in the country have soared, and Chinese policymakers have sought for years to revamp the medical insurance system and rein in prices. In 2018, they began rolling out a centralised drug procurement scheme, replacing a fragmented system in which hospitals negotiated individually for medical supplies.

The programme drove down costs, with the average price of some medications falling more than 50 per cent. But some of those discounts came from replacing more expensive, off-patent drugs from companies such as AstraZeneca and GSK with cheaper domestic alternatives. Patients and doctors have expressed concerns about the effectiveness of some domestic generics.

In a rare public complaint on January 16, Zheng Minhua, a senior surgeon at Shanghai’s Ruijin Hospital, and 19 other prominent doctors, said it was an “undeniable fact” that domestic drugs showed poor efficacy with their patients, even when dosages were increased.

“Hypertension does not drop effectively, anaesthetics do not put patients to sleep and laxatives do not cause diarrhoea,” they wrote in a policy proposal submitted to Shanghai’s municipal legislature and seen by the Financial Times. “Questionable drug efficacy poses the greatest safety risk to patients,” they added.

The doctors called for “greater flexibility” in drug contract bidding to have western brand-named drugs covered by insurance.

Growing public anger prompted the National Healthcare Security Administration to dispatch a team to Shanghai last Tuesday to examine hospital data on domestic generic prescriptions, according to a statement.

The issue of medical safety is especially sensitive in China, where past scandals over tainted infant formula and blood transfusions that had proven deadly stoked public outrage over lax regulations.

Chinese patients can still purchase some foreign drugs online, but they are not covered by insurance, and doctors usually do not provide advice on non-approved medication. In the procurement process for Shanghai’s public health system last month, more than 20 foreign brands including Pfizer, Bayer and MSD sent bids for 32 off-patent drugs. None were selected.

Foreign companies have also become increasingly vocal about lack of access to China’s drugs and medical devices market.

The European Union Chamber of Commerce in China told the FT it “would closely monitor” the probe, adding that it hoped “to see steps taken to ensure that the procurement system for drugs does not prioritise low prices at the expense of product safety and clinical outcomes”.

American Chamber of Commerce in China president Michael Hart said: “If companies can’t sell and make a reasonable profit in China, they won’t offer their products and services to China. And we think that would be to the detriment of the healthcare market.”

One nurse who works in an operating room at a top hospital in Shanghai expressed concerns that domestic medical devices were often inferior to foreign competitors.

“Items like tumour removal forceps may look identical to imported ones, [but] during precise operations, domestic tools often fail to grip properly,” they said, adding that there were cases of patients “waking up during surgeries” after taking domestically produced anaesthetics.

Jumbo, a 35-year-old lecturer in Shanghai who preferred to be identified by one name, was prescribed a Chinese antiviral drug at a public hospital for chickenpox last year.

But the virus spread aggressively, and her own research led her to believe the drug’s active ingredient was far less effective than imported alternatives such as GSK’s Valtrex. She doubled her dosage without consulting her doctor.

“I understand why hospitals prescribe domestic drugs, but I’m willing to pay for more expensive foreign medications,” Jumbo said. “Patients need all available treatment options and the healthcare system should not block us from another path.”

Additional reporting by Wang Xueqiao in Shanghai



Volkswagen is open to allowing Chinese carmakers to take over its excess production lines in Europe, as it grapples with falling demand and rising competition from the very same companies eyeing its factories.

Executives at Audi and VW’s eponymous flagship brand told the Financial Times that partnering with Chinese makers of EVs, which are looking to expand their footprint in Europe, was one option to address declining sales in the region.

“For sure, that is thinkable,” said Gernot Döllner, chief executive of Audi. Such a move would “lower the entrance barrier of these competitors”, adding: “I believe in free trade.”

Audi has partnered with MG-maker SAIC to build EVs in China that appeal to local consumers — a type of collaboration that Döllner said Chinese brands might also seek to recreate in Europe.

In a separate interview, David Powels, chief financial officer at the VW brand, would also not rule out the idea of Chinese carmakers taking over idle production lines at the company’s German plants.

“We’re open for any discussion on any topic with any partner,” he said. “In a dynamic world, you have to keep all options open.”

The comments come as Europe’s legacy carmakers race to shift to EVs, a segment where Chinese brands such as BYD are producing what are considered more technologically advanced vehicles, helped both by subsidies from Beijing and a lower cost base.

For decades, China was VW’s most profitable market but in the past five years, the market share of its flagship brand has nearly halved due to its weak position in the rapidly growing battery-run vehicle market.

Europe’s largest carmaker has also been hit hard by the shrinking automotive market in its home region, where 2mn fewer cars were sold last year compared with five years earlier.

Last month, VW reached an agreement with workers at its flagship brand to scale back production capacity across Germany, avoiding a more drastic plan that would have involved closing at least three plants in the country.

The closure of production lines means that the VW brand — which accounts for roughly half of the group’s sales by volume — was set to reduce its annual capacity by roughly 730,000 cars from about 1.5mn by 2030, the carmaker said.

Excess capacity started to rise during the pandemic when VW began cancelling night shifts due to lower demand, with the brand producing about 900,000 cars in Germany in 2024.

VW’s plants will have to reach new undisclosed productivity targets to fight for remaining capacity, and those unable to meet them will be considered for “alternative use” — which could include being put up for sale.

Some Chinese carmakers see using excess production capacity in Europe as a way to enhance their presence in the bloc.

Stellantis, for example, has taken a 20 per cent stake in Chinese start-up Leapmotor, giving it exclusive rights to build and sell Leapmotor cars outside China through a joint venture. If Leapmotor sales grow in Europe, Stellantis could utilise more spare capacity at its own factories and avoid politically controversial closures.

Döllner said Audi was also opposed to the EU’s higher tariffs on Chinese-imported EVs, saying the protectionist measures would ultimately hurt its position.

China remains a crucial market for many non-Chinese carmakers, while several companies manufacture vehicles in the country and then import them back into Europe.

“Tariffs will only block [competition] for some time and give you a wrong [sense of] security. We have to keep pace,” Döllner added.



Singapore’s central bank has eased monetary policy for the first time in four years amid rising expectations of trade turmoil after Donald Trump’s return to the US presidency and moderating domestic inflation.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore on Friday said it would slow the rate of the Singapore dollar’s appreciation against a basket of its trading partners’ currencies, citing anticipations of trade friction.

“Global economic policy uncertainty has risen since the October monetary policy review, mainly reflecting expectations of increasing trade policy frictions,” the MAS said in a statement, adding that global growth could slow in 2025.

Unlike most central banks, the MAS does not use domestic interest rates to set monetary policy. Instead, it has a long-term policy of allowing the Singapore dollar to gradually appreciate against other currencies.

By reducing the slope of its appreciation, the monetary authority in effect lowers borrowing rates in the city-state’s heavily trade-dependent economy.

The move — the first time the MAS has loosened policy since the outbreak of Covid-19 in 2020 — came after inflation data released on Thursday showed the city-state’s core consumer price index rose 1.8 per cent in December from a year earlier, the second consecutive month of growth below 2 per cent.

The central bank also lowered its inflation forecast for 2025 to between 1 and 2 per cent, down from 1.5 to 2.5 per cent in October. Although the MAS does not set a hard inflation target, it has said a rate under 2 per cent “is consistent with overall price stability”.

Singapore’s small and open economy is highly exposed to global trade and financial flows, allowing the MAS to control lending rates through the exchange rate. According to the central bank, 40 cents of every dollar spent in Singapore is on imports, while gross imports and exports of goods and services account for more than 300 per cent of GDP.

The MAS sets a policy band for its foreign exchange rate, though it does not disclose the exact levels.

It adjusts the slope, level and width of the band to control the pace and volatility of currency moves, allowing the Singapore dollar to strengthen or weaken against the currencies of its biggest trading partners.

The MAS also said on Friday that Singapore’s GDP growth was expected to drop from 4 per cent in 2024 to between 1 and 3 per cent this year.

“Overall, the outlook for Singapore’s growth and thus inflation remains subject to uncertainties in the external environment,” said the central bank.

The Singapore dollar edged down in early trading on Friday before reversing course to trade at S$1.3526 per US dollar.



TikTok parent ByteDance is asking Chinese staff at its Singapore headquarters to pay tax to their home country or risk losing their ability to cash out on stock options, as Beijing steps up enforcement of its global tax scheme.

Employees at ByteDance who relocated from China to Singapore received an internal memo on Tuesday requiring them to report their income to Chinese tax authorities and pay relevant taxes to cash out on stock options that make up a significant portion of their pay, according to three people with knowledge of the matter.

Those hired locally with Chinese citizenship were encouraged to report their income but not required to do so, according to the people. More than 1,000 employees could be affected, and the tax difference could be as high as 21 percentage points depending on individual salaries, as both countries have a tiered tax structure.

Singapore has emerged as a regional hub for many Chinese companies looking to expand into south-east Asia and globally. Tech giants Alibaba, Tencent and PDD, as well as start-ups such as Shein, have set up offices in the city-state, where lower tax rates have convinced many Chinese workers to relocate.

China in recent years has increased efforts to collect tax revenue to fill government coffers, including demanding wealthy individuals and companies double-check for unpaid liabilities, amid a broad economic slowdown.

In 2019, Beijing revised its income tax rules to allow authorities to collect revenue from Chinese expats, similar to US rules on Americans living abroad, but it has not enforced them rigorously. Most Chinese citizens working abroad only need to report their taxable income on a voluntary basis, and Beijing has not outlined consequences for those who do not.

For higher-paid workers at ByteDance, the potential difference could be massive. The highest marginal tax rate in mainland China is 45 per cent, while the top rate in Singapore and Hong Kong, cities with significant Chinese expat populations, is 24 per cent and 15 per cent, respectively.

Many ByteDance employees receive part of their remuneration in restricted stock units that are typically vested over a number of years and then purchased by the company. A recent share buyback in November valued ByteDance at $300bn.

A person familiar with the matter said employees required to pay tax would need to show proof of payment to fully participate in the buyback, while any amount of tax owed would be held by the company in equivalent restricted stock units.

The person added that ByteDance would provide subsidies to affected employees for up to two years but did not specify if they would be enough to bridge the gap.

ByteDance did not immediately respond to a request for comment.



As tensions ratchet up between two of Malaysia’s biggest trading partners, the US and China, the south-east Asian nation is increasingly looking to hitch its wagon to its more successful neighbour, Singapore.

A special economic zone straddling the two countries — along with a raft of initiatives to build stronger ties — has been designed to help the pair withstand tougher global economic trading conditions.

“We are entering a new era where global tensions are here to stay,” warned Singapore’s Prime Minister Lawrence Wong this month at the signing of an agreement to create the Johor-Singapore Special Economic Zone. “The world is becoming a more dangerous and troubled place. This is not going to go away in the near term.”

Standing at his side, his Malaysian counterpart Anwar Ibrahim added: “We have to strengthen ourselves as a regional force to be able to withstand the unpredictable pressures from other areas or groups or regions.”

Malaysia’s closer ties to Singapore are part of a broader push by the former to use its chairmanship of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations this year to forge stronger links with its nearest neighbours, as global trade networks become increasingly balkanised.

“[Trade wars] could create opportunities for Asean,” Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Malaysia’s central bank governor, told the Financial Times, though he conceded that global growth would be harmed by increased protectionism.

The two countries have not always been close. It has been 60 years since Malaysia expelled Singapore from its federation, forcing the latter into independence as a city-state amid racial tensions and political clashes between both sides.

For most of the past six decades, the two countries have viewed each other with suspicion and been locked in a deep rivalry, one in which Singapore, Malaysia’s biggest trading partner, has been the clear victor. It has established itself as a global trading and finance hub, with GDP a head of $94,000 compared with Malaysia’s $14,400.

But Donald Trump’s return to the White House this week, his promise to implement a spate of tariffs and a slowing Chinese economy have made Malaysia and Singapore look to strengthen ties.

“Generations of Malaysian and Singaporean leaders had to manage [this rivalry] and that stopped us from doing what is common sense to everyone, which is to integrate Singapore and Johor better,” Malaysian economy minister Rafizi Ramli told the FT, referring to the Malaysian state bordering Singapore. “Operating as nearly an economic unit will offer investors the best of both worlds.”

Modelled on China’s Shenzhen special economic zone, which borders Hong Kong, but is twice its size, the JSSEZ is central to Malaysia’s ambitions to build on its 5 per cent economic growth last year.

Malaysia has already positioned its economy to play a key role in the global demand for artificial intelligence, from developing one of Asia’s biggest semiconductor hubs in the northern island of Penang over several decades, to more recently welcoming big tech companies to set up data centres in the south.

It has also benefited from “China plus one”, a strategy in which multinational companies complement their Chinese operations with investments in regional countries to diversify risk and lower costs.

The government hopes the JSSEZ will add $26bn a year to its economy by 2030, bringing in 20,000 skilled jobs and 50 new projects.

It has offered generous corporate tax rates of just 5 per cent for 15 years for companies investing in areas such as AI and quantum computing, as well as manufacturing high-end equipment. That compares with typical rates of 15-24 per cent in Malaysia and lows of 17 per cent in Singapore.

Johor has already been a critical engine for the Malaysian economy in recent years, thanks in part to its pro-business sultan becoming the country’s king a year ago.

The state has emerged as a global hub for data centres, drawing in more than $25bn of investment from the likes of Nvidia, Microsoft and TikTok owner ByteDance and creating 35,000 jobs.

While Johor provides plenty of cheap land, water, energy and labour to develop the projects, Singapore offers an entry point for investors.

“Conceptually [the special economic zone] has the ability to leverage Singapore’s global finance and logistics centre capabilities with Johor’s access to competitive land, labour and energy to deliver a differentiated proposition — especially for supply chains looking for alternatives to north Asia amid the US-China trade war,” said Maybank analyst Thilan Wickramasinghe.

But it is not just big tech companies the JSSEZ is aimed at attracting. Johor also hopes to draw everything from Singaporean banks setting up administrative offices to aerospace, electronics and pharmaceutical companies building manufacturing bases.

The two neighbours have talked about closer collaborations on a range of areas, including cross-border electricity trading, digitalisation, infrastructure projects and green energy. There are also plans to improve transport links across the strait separating the two countries, one of the busiest borders in the world.

“How does a small, non-aligned trading nation like Malaysia wade its way through trade wars and geopolitical tension?” said Rafizi. “There’s only one option for countries like ourselves and Singapore: we collaborate better with each other and harness our synergy.”



Welcome back. I had a terrific evening yesterday at a London production of Kyoto, a new play that brings to life the first decade of international climate negotiations — and the oil industry machinations that sought to undermine them. It’s a fast-paced, innovative staging that conveys the raw intensity of climate diplomacy, and the tremendously high stakes involved. Don’t take my word for it: here’s the lowdown from the FT’s theatre critic.

One of the key flashpoints in the play is the intense argument at the 1997 Kyoto summit over carbon offset trading. Almost three decades on, the controversy around carbon markets has only grown. But as we highlight in today’s newsletter, some investors are still seeing opportunities in the troubled sector.

Reports of the death of the voluntary carbon market may yet prove exaggerated. The $32mn funding round announced yesterday by London-based carbon credit rating agency BeZero Carbon would be seen as small beer in some industries. But for the carbon credit sector, battered over the past two years by a reputational crisis and a fundraising drought, it looks like a noteworthy shot in the arm.

BeZero’s fundraising provides fresh evidence of the outsized role that Singapore has taken in the carbon credit market. The lead investor is GenZero, launched in 2022 with $3.6bn of committed capital from Temasek, Singapore’s $288bn sovereign wealth fund.

From the start, GenZero has had a mandate to invest in promoting carbon market development as one of its three core focus areas — alongside the related field of nature-based projects, and broader climate technology. “We think the journey towards net zero will be impossible without effective carbon markets,” chief executive Frederick Teo told me.

Teo said the investment in BeZero reflected the need for transparent and reliable data that would allow buyers to identify high-quality credits and regain confidence in the market. Transaction value in the voluntary carbon market fell from $2.1bn in 2021 to $723mn in 2023, according to Ecosystem Marketplace. Separate data from MSCI shows that volumes and prices remained depressed last year. Corporate buyers have taken fright at media and academic allegations that many projects have hugely exaggerated their carbon benefits.

Tommy Ricketts, BeZero’s chief executive, said the company had about 150 clients for its credit ratings and broader market data, assembled by a full-time employee base that included 77 scientists. Ricketts added that, given BeZero’s leading role in ratings and the industry’s growing emphasis on transparency, an investment in BeZero amounted to “a leveraged play” on the future growth of the carbon market.

“It’s just about waiting for that inflection, that catalyst, whatever it may be,” Ricketts said.

Will that wait pay off? If this market does return to growth, Singapore will deserve a share of the credit. Singaporean companies can now use carbon credits to offset up to 5 per cent of their liabilities under its national carbon tax regime. That tax currently stands at about S$25 ($18.30) a tonne — a quarter of the price under the EU’s emissions trading scheme — but is set to rise significantly in the next few years.

This means that, unlike most other governments, Singapore has given its companies a real economic incentive to invest in carbon credits. It’s taken a fairly careful approach on which sorts of credits can be used, setting out minimum standards and forming agreements with individual countries on the use of projects in their jurisdictions.

All this, Ricketts argued, was part of a push by Singapore to become “the hub of carbon” — a bet that, despite its current travails, the carbon credit market could become one of real economic significance, and that this entrepreneurial city-state could become its global centre of gravity.

If that is indeed the strategy, GenZero appears to be its financial spearhead. The fund has made a series of investments in carbon credit companies — notably in Climate Impact X, a Singapore-based carbon marketplace. Other investments have included South Pole, one of the largest carbon credit consultancies, and Perennial, which uses machine learning and remote sensing to assess the carbon impact of soil projects.

All these companies have been affected by the headwinds assailing the sector — notably South Pole, which has been embroiled in some of the more high-profile controversies over project quality.

But Teo — along with GenZero’s financial backer, the Singaporean government — is betting that a turnaround in the market will come in due course. The integration of carbon credits in mandatory carbon pricing schemes, as pioneered by Singapore, is one potential driver of demand. Another is a major change in the international rules for airlines: from 2027, nearly all of them will be required to buy carbon credits unless they achieve big emission reductions.

Then there is the long-awaited international carbon trading mechanism that was promised in the text of the 2015 Paris Agreement. At November’s COP29 in Baku, a basic agreement on what credits could be used in this mechanism was hailed by some as a breakthrough, though there remains a huge amount of work to do before that system will be up and running.

All this may sound far too optimistic to the many who see the voluntary carbon market as a busted flush. And unless the market can address the serious concerns that have been raised around quality and integrity , it is highly questionable whether its growth will be beneficial to the global struggle against climate change.

But Singapore clearly thinks this sector is worth a punt, albeit a fairly modest one by the standards of the huge sums deployed by its sovereign investment funds. It’s also an opportunity to strengthen its ties with developing nations around the world, which are home to the bulk of carbon credit projects.

With the clear mandate and stable funding that he’s been given by the government, Teo is able to be far more patient than most investors in this space. “We’re taking a constructive view of carbon markets for the long term,” he told me. “It would be naive to imagine things will be hunky-dory in 2025 or 2026.”

New era How will sustainable investing survive the return of Donald Trump?

Expensive medicine EU pollution rules could force European carmakers to pay large sums to Chinese rivals for carbon credits.

Damage limitation Reinsurance companies may absorb less than 3 per cent of insured losses from the Los Angeles fires, having cut their risk exposure in recent years.



A British activist investor has appealed to Singapore’s markets regulator to intervene in the takeover of an insurer by the city-state’s second-biggest bank, calling the deal “gravely unfair” for shareholders.

The move by Palliser Capital, which has taken on several high-profile companies since its founders broke away from Elliott four years ago, is the latest in a wave of activist campaigns in Asia in the past year.

There were 57 campaigns against Asian companies in 2024, up from a previous record of 44 the year before, according to Lazard, with Japanese groups Sumitomo Corporation, SoftBank and Nissan all being targeted in the past six months.

Great Eastern is Singapore’s oldest and largest life insurer. Palliser, which has a stake in Great Eastern, has accused OCBC of treating minority shareholders unfairly in its attempted full takeover of the company.

In letters sent to the Monetary Authority of Singapore and SGX stock exchange, seen by the Financial Times, the activist accused the Great Eastern board of being “highly complacent” in recommending the offer.

It added that the insurer’s “corporate governance safeguards designed to protect the interests of minority shareholders were lacking or insufficiently robust”.

In response, the MAS and SGX told Palliser they were monitoring the case and engaging with both sides, according to communications seen by the FT.

Great Eastern, which has more than S$100bn (US$73bn) in assets and 16mn policyholders in Singapore and Malaysia, has been part-owned by OCBC since 1958. A minority of shares, about 6 per cent, are listed on Singapore’s stock exchange.

In 2008, OCBC increased its stake in the insurer to 87 per cent and announced a voluntary offer in May last year to take full control of the business for S$1.4bn, or S$25.60 a share, a 37 per cent premium on the share price at the time.

EY provided a valuation to the insurer, which put it at a range of S$28.87 to S$36.19 a share, though Palliser believes it should be higher.

The activist argued that senior Great Eastern executives and board members — several of whom are former OCBC executives — had conflicts of interest because they received a large proportion of their pay in the bank’s stock and therefore benefited from a lower offer price.

Palliser complained to the MAS about the Great Eastern board’s refusal to meet the activist investor over the issue.

“Great Eastern’s seeming unwillingness to engage with us in any meaningful sense has added to our sense of unease and frustration and made us determined to ensure that the interests of Great Eastern’s remaining minority shareholders are safeguarded,” the investor wrote.

Foreign activist forays are relatively rare in Singapore, which prides itself on being a business-friendly financial hub. But several recent cases have led to Swiss and Australian activists pushing for better deals for minority shareholders in takeover deals.

Many of the campaigns against Asian companies are focused on breaking up multi-industry conglomerates, with Asia-Pacific catching up with Europe as the second most active region behind the US.

Among Palliser’s recent campaigns are a move to force Rio Tinto to abandon its primary London listing and consolidate its Australian business, as well as pushing for change at a Japanese property company and a rail operator with a stake in Tokyo Disneyland’s owner.

Palliser, OCBC, the MAS and SGX declined to comment on the Great Eastern campaign. Great Eastern did not respond to a request for comment.

This article has been amended since publication to correct the percentage of listed shares in Great Eastern and to clarify that EY provided the valuation to the insurer, not to Palliser Capital



The number of companies listed on Singapore’s stock exchange has hit a two-decade low after just four companies went public this year and several delisted, with the city-state’s regulator investigating how to halt the equity market’s slide.

The number of companies on the Singapore Exchange fell to 617 in October, the lowest since September 2004. The figure has been in steady decline since hitting a high of 782 in 2013, with domestic companies attracted to overseas listings, especially in larger and more heavily traded markets such as the US.

“I surely hope that this year is a low point,” said Clifford Lee, head of the investment bank at DBS, south-east Asia’s biggest lender and Singapore’s most valuable public company. “It’s a result of various factors coming together.”

Shein, the Chinese fast-fashion business based in Singapore since 2022, is considering a London listing with a potential £50bn market valuation, which would make it one of the UK’s largest public companies. Several of Singapore’s best-known businesses, including superapp Grab and ecommerce group Sea, have opted for New York listings in recent years.

Singapore has benefited from a flood of private capital flowing into the city-state, which has coincided with a burgeoning family office sector, while the SGX has also built up strong bond trading, derivatives and real estate investment trust markets. But it has struggled to repeat that growth with initial public offerings.

Over the summer, the Monetary Authority of Singapore launched a review of the country’s equity markets, with a panel that included the heads of the SGX, monetary authority and Temasek, the state-owned investment company.

The group is due to report its findings next August and has so far discussed ways of attracting more fund managers to invest in the stock market in order to address demand issues, while relaxing some disclosure rules and investor safeguards to encourage more companies to list, according to a person involved in the talks.

“It’s a chicken and an egg situation,” the person said. “We have to make it attractive for good companies to list and see more fund managers in the market, and they will only be attracted by the prospect of investing in good companies.”

The regulator said in a statement: “Many ideas have been surfaced as the review group is engaging broadly with many groups of stakeholders and the review group discussions are still ongoing.”

Several investment bankers told the Financial Times that 2024 was likely to be the nadir for listings in Singapore due to the political uncertainty of general elections around the world. They said there was pent-up demand, and they were working on several IPOs for next year.

The four companies that went public with a primary listing on the SGX this year — all of which were on the junior Catalist market — had a combined IPO value of just $31mn and included a chain of karaoke bars and an operator of Japanese restaurants.

The largest company to list, the Singapore Institute of Advanced Medicine healthcare group, has shed 71 per cent of its market value since its March IPO after reporting heavy losses. Its auditor, PwC, raised questions about its ability to continue as a going concern over the summer.

Stock markets around the world — notably London — have struggled to attract listings in the face of fierce competition and high valuations in the US. The amount raised through IPOs across south-east Asia this year is the lowest in at least 10 years, according to Dealogic.

Even so, Malaysia has had 46 IPOs this year, compared with 39 in Indonesia and 28 in Thailand. While the Philippines had just three listings, their total value of $197mn far outpaced Singapore’s $31mn.

Most of the companies that listed in other south-east Asian markets were domestic, whereas Singapore is positioning itself as a global hub for international public companies.

“The strategic infrastructure is here, the liquidity available in the market to invest in new listings is here,” said DBS’s Lee, who is involved in the MAS review. “Now we need a good supply of companies choosing to list. We have a healthy pipeline for the year ahead. It’s like a well-oiled, sleek machine that hasn’t been used.”

One option often mooted is whether to allow Singapore’s compulsory savings system — the Central Provident Fund, typically used to finance retirement, healthcare and property purchases — to invest more in the domestic stock market.

“That would create new pools of money to help drive up multiples and would probably spark IPOs,” said Jayden Vantarakis, head of south-east Asian equities research at Macquarie, who covers the SGX.

But he doubts that such reforms will materialise and downgraded the SGX from “outperform” to “neutral” in November, partly on expectations that the MAS review would fail to prevent the decline in listings.

Additional reporting by Haohsiang Ko in Hong Kong



A flurry of new exchange traded funds are set to be added to the master-feeder scheme linking Singapore and Chinese exchanges that has seen slow take-up since its launch at the end of 2021.

Fund firms in the two markets have faced difficulties in agreeing commercial partnerships and China’s slumping markets have also slowed the product pipeline for the scheme, which allows investors access to ETFs cross-listed between the Singapore, Shenzhen and Shanghai bourses.

But while only seven ETFs have been launched on the scheme up to end-November, including partnerships between UOB Asset Management and Ping An Fund Management, and CSOP Asset Management and PineBridge Investments, a turnaround could be on the cards.

Earlier this month, the Monetary Authority of Singapore said it was in discussions with its Chinese counterpart to expand the number of ETFs on the cross-listing scheme.

Russell Wang, head of securitised products for global markets at the Singapore Exchange, said the expectation of further government reforms and a rebound in China’s onshore markets meant ETF issuers were now preparing more products to be rolled out next year.

“Before September, weak investor sentiment towards Chinese equities slowed down developments in the pipeline as issuers were less certain about demand for new ETF listings,” said Wang.

But since the Chinese stock market rallied in October, investors had been getting back into the market, showing greater appetite for investing offshore, and issuers were responding and preparing to meet this change in demand, Wang said.

Wang now expects three to four new ETFs to be added to the cross-link scheme in the first half of 2025.

This is in addition to a new emerging Asia ETF from Singapore’s Lion Global Investors and Shenzhen-based China Merchants Fund Management that will be listed on December 11.

Before the Lion Global and China Merchants ETF, the last fund to be launched as part of the scheme was a Phillip Capital and China Universal Asset Management ETF that was rolled out in March.

This boost in investor appetite has also translated to an uptick in flows for ETFs available on the Singapore-China link.

Assets in the scheme grew by S$24mn ($17.9mn) in September and October, accounting for nearly 80 per cent of total asset growth in the preceding 12 months, according to the SGX.

Chinese investors accounted for 70 per cent of total flows, indicating interest among onshore investors for Singapore-listed ETFs.

Wang expects that overall Chinese investor sentiment is likely to pick up if the Chinese government is more proactive in supporting the market in light of Donald Trump’s election victory in the US.

Wing Chan, head of manager research for Asia Pacific at Morningstar, said Chinese domestic investors still had untapped demand for wider offshore exposure, which the Singapore-China ETF link could provide.

Historically, much of the offshore access has been via Hong Kong channels and Hong Kong products, he said, but many of these actually still invest in Chinese assets.

In addition to market performance factors, misalignment between partner fund firms in the scheme, particularly around commercial terms, has been a key reason behind the heretofore slow uptake in the scheme.

“For many of the issuers, they have limited experience working on a partnership with a Chinese asset manager, and vice versa,” said SGX’s Wang.

The part that took up the most time was usually around the “bilateral discussion to agree on the commercial terms”, such as who would drive fundraising and flows, and the overall objective of the partnership, he noted.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



Opened in 1916 in a spectacular cast-iron structure near Plaza Mayor, this gourmet market is a celebration of the Spanish larder, with more than 30 stalls offering a range of produce, from Galicia’s famed fresh fish and seafood, to olives, cheese, cured meats and top-notch tapas. It’s worth popping in if only to perch at one of its wine bars with a glass of cava and a plate of boquerones. It’s chaos, but that is part of this mercado’s (and Madrid’s) charm. Niki Blasina

Founded during the Arab domination of Sicily, Mercato del Capo remains one of the more multicultural corners of the city. Here you can find Nigerian textile traders rubbing shoulders with burly fishmongers expertly filleting tunas, or sample myriad olives and cheeses from the island’s hinterland. My grandfather taught me to come early, and make a beeline for the cart selling steaming slices of sfincione (a focaccia-like bread served with oregano, anchovies and caciocavallo cheese). Ben Marino

Inspired by the designs of one of the city’s most famous sons, Gustave Eiffel, this Dijon market is a vaulted, ironwork theatre of Burgundian gastronomy. Four days a week, Les Halles hums with local producers selling Charolais beef for the classic bœuf à la bourguignonne, giant wheels of Comté cheese from the nearby Jura, as well as the wines, more cheeses, chickens, mushrooms, snails and mustards for which the region is famed. John Thornhill

Chapel Market is part of my life, my identity. It’s always felt under threat but never died – it really is the place where everyone knows your name. It is where you go for last glimpses of a mixed London community with some good veg and excellent chat. Now there is a farmers’ market too, but it’s the old-fashioned “normal” market that gives me the most joy and the avocados I can actually afford. Juliet Riddell

For more than a century, Grand Central Market in Los Angeles’s downtown historic district has celebrated the city’s many food cultures under one roof. While legacy vendors such as China Cafe (c1959), best known for its huge bowls of wonton soup and off-menu egg rolls, reign on, in recent years a host of new businesses has been welcomed into the fold, from Lucky Bird, the market’s first and only stall dedicated to fried chicken and its accoutrements (read: waffles dripping in syrup) to award-winning smashburgers at For The Win. Not to be missed: the all-day breakfast burritos at Jose Chiquito. Inès Cross

One of this famously gastronomic city’s largest markets opened in 1859 and was renamed after the late chef Paul Bocuse, a native son, in 2006 following a total renovation. Today it covers three floors with more than 13,500sq m, and is home to 54 stalls and restaurants. Don’t miss Mons fromager, one of the best cheesemongers in France; Patisserie Seve for a sticky pink tarte aux pralines; and Bobosse for Lyonnais charcuterie like plump pistachio-studded fresh sausage. Great eats on the spot include Baba La Grenouille for frogs’ legs en persillade and Chez Les Gones for local comfort food like quenelles de brochet (pike dumplings). Alexander Lobrano

At this, one of the biggest food markets in Europe, more than 1,200 stalls sell everything from fresh fruit, meat, cheese and live eels. Forage for a picnic lunch, admire the stained-glass windows or spend the afternoon sipping cold beer and eating a loin sandwich at Richard Camarena’s Central Bar. Sally Hickey

“Peaceful” is the last word most would use to describe Singapore’s hawker markets. That’s why locals often skip the more famous ones in the central area for East Coast Lagoon Food Village, in one of the city-state’s largest beach parks. There you can find food-market staples including satay, sugar-cane juice and Hainanese chicken rice, plus seafood specialities such as chilli crab and fried oysters, all served with ocean views. Taylor Nicole Rogers

Dubbed the chicest market in Paris by Le Figaro, this lively open-air market is popular with Parisian chefs for the exceptional quality of stands such as Le Bar à Patates, which specialises in potatoes, mushrooms and fresh herbs, and La Bergerie du Mesnil, run by Sandy Brown McKeen, an Irish farmer who lives in Normandy and produces exceptional yoghurt, cream, milk, and meat. La Maison Priolet is also renowned for its game and high-quality poultry. A variety of food stands serve food to eat on the hoof, such as grilled Lebanese bread and Breton crêpes, plus juicy rotisserie chickens that make for a great picnic or fast meal in a holiday flat. AL

Under the deep shade of century-old plane trees, dotted across the central town square, market traders from surrounding villages sell local produce. Bellows cheese made in an identical way since the 14th century, renowned Herzegovinian wine, honey, medicinal herbs and prosciutto are just a few of the delights on offer. After food tasting and shopping, visitors sit in the cafés on the square to cool down with a lemonade and enjoy people-watching. Tatjana Mitevska

Tsukiji has got everything, from unctuous otoro to the ethically questionable (but legal) whale skewers. Try a hearty bowl of beef intestine and miso stew at Kitsuneya. Then head to Iroha for mochi topped with giant strawberries, especially if the Amaou variety is in season. For post-prandial coffee, grab a cup of City Blend at John Lennon’s go-to shop Yonemoto. Kristine Ching

With more than 200 vendors selling everything from passion fruit to poke bowls, this indoor-outdoor market is a vibrant must-experience on Hawaii’s Big Island. With special sections for tropical plants (orchids and anthuriums are abundant), macadamia nuts and artisanal oils, as well as colourful sarongs and hand-carved wooden accessories, this is a one-stop-shop. Be sure to sample the fruits of the season – white pineapples, thimble berries, strawberry papayas, guavas – and the local Kona coffee, preferably on Wednesdays and Saturdays when the market is particularly popping. Christina Ohly Evans

The glass-walled market hall in the centre of town offers a taste of Copenhagen’s culinary prowess. Both a food market and an incubator for chefs, Torvehallerne is home to more than 60 restaurant stalls and purveyors of artisanal food and drink, flowers, plants and kitchen tools. Danish specialities are plenty: rows of smørrebrød with kaleidoscopic toppings, artfully folded pastries and dense rye breads. Cuisines from around the world are also well represented, from Spanish tapas to Mexican tacos to Chinese crêpes. Though on a cold day, it’s the fresh pasta at Il Mattarello that really makes my heart sing. NB

Nîmes’ elegant 19th-century glass-and-steel market pavilion was replaced by a modern cement structure in the 1970s, but this did nothing to dent the passion of the food-loving Nîmois. Visit Nadal, a century-old coffee roaster; Les Fromages de Sylvain, for his excellent selection of cheeses and wonderful sense of humour; and the new stall selling brandade de Nîmes, the creamy garlicky salt-cod preparation that’s the city’s best-known dish. Plan on lunch at La Pie Qui Couette, a counter-seating, lunch-only restaurant that’s hugely popular for its cuisine du marché menu, but get there early. AL

Tucked away in one corner of the old stone town, this small market offers an unusual mix of high-quality continental and Mediterranean food. Located at the entry of Montenegro Boka Bay, it is supplied by tropical fruit grown in villages on the coast, such as fortunela, oranges, pomegranate, lemons and kiwis, as well as fresh seafood. Farmers from villages in the mountains surrounding the town bring traditional authentic produce such as the renowned prosciutto from Njeguši, potatoes from Kruševice, goat’s cheese, wild asparagus and wild garlic. TM

This is in my hometown, and it certainly beats more renowned markets like La Boqueria. It’s a combination of great food stalls, particularly Asian, veggie shopping for the ordinary person and lot of foodie-type stalls. It’s a tale of a market that can provide a focus for a city and enrich it – and a tale of the integration of the various tides of immigrants from Italy and Greece in the postwar period, Vietnamese, Cambodians and Lebanese in the 1970s and ’80s and Chinese and Indians more recently. Tony Tassell

West Philadelphia converges with Pennsylvania’s yeoman tradition at the Clark Park Farmers’ Market. Every Saturday, Amish farmers hawk their produce across from West Philly and East Kensington businesses selling pound cakes or seafood. One can enjoy new Philadelphia favourites Nilaa Coffee, Aaji’s Kitchen or Lost Bread or just as easily buy preserves and cheese from a family-owned farm, in a space that is testament to Philadelphia’s shifting yet venerable culinary scene. Aiden Reiter

This is the largest and cheapest market in the city, with its home in the garden of the Gundulić summer villa. Locals come early in the morning to buy fresh fish straight off the boats from the Elafiti islands. Farmers from Dubrovnik’s Konavle suburb sell a wide selection of their organic produce here throughout the day. Traditional local delicacies such as dried figs, candied orange peel, extra-virgin olive oil and quince jelly are also available as souvenirs for visitors. TM

This is the most popular and the best-stocked food market in the Serbian capital. Located in Vračar in the heart of the city, it is named after Vlajko Kalenić, who donated the land on which it was built almost a century ago. A vast variety of produce, from home-distilled brandy rakija, kaymak cheese and fruit and vegetables to cured meats and spices, is on display on stalls where sellers and buyers haggle, joke and even sing. Many locals tell me they change their walking routes just to enjoy the splendid site of colourful stalls full of fragrant produce. TM

Described by the preeminent Breton chef Olivier Roellinger as “the best larder in Brittany”, the second-largest food market in France was founded in 1622. Some 300 stalls sell everything from seafood landed only hours earlier to Roscoff onions, big snowy cauliflowers, dozens of apple varieties, honey and other foods that comprise what Roellinger describes as “the Celtic diet”. Treat yourself to a grilled pork sausage rolled up in a hot buckwheat galette, the city’s favourite market snack, to fortify yourself before shopping. AL

The largest market of its kind in the southern hemisphere is a cornerstone of Australia’s gourmet tourist trade, with a vast array of fresh fish and seafood on show – including oddities like blood cockles and Moreton Bay Bugs – and sushi, oysters, fish and chips and lobsters served on site. The famous blue-coloured market building, located in Pyrmont to the west of the centre of the city, is set to move next year but only by a few hundred metres into a new purpose-built facility. Nic Fildes

Every Saturday in Athens, the historic anarchist district of Exarchia hosts a farmers’ market, which runs along Kallidromiou under the famous graffitied steps. Musicians play traditional Greek music as sellers flaunt their wares: olive oil, honey and an assortment of fresh fish, herbs and vegetables. While Exarchia has been gentrified over the past few decades, and police tensions have amplified since the building of a new metro station nearby, the market remains a touchstone in the neighbourhood: a place where students, anarchists, artists and academics meld with tourists. Lucinda Smyth

This bustling Old Delhi bazaar is a maze of streets and narrow alleys, with the iconic Red Fort at its eastern end. Enormous piles of cardamom and cloves, dried fruit and nuts, Kashmiri saffron and every imaginable street food – curries, roti, samosas and kebabs – send smells wafting through the thick air. Of special note are the stalls offering sweets including mango-stuffed kulfi, crispy fried jalebi and Karachi halwa. COE

A favourite of Mexico City chefs, Mercado San Juan is packed with every ingredient you might need, and plenty you don’t. Stalls in the downtown market sell everything from pitaya, clams and cacao fruit to dozens of varieties of chilies. It’s also a frequent stop for food-tour groups ogling a selection of more exotic choices, including an array of protein-packed scorpions and crocodile meat. For the less adventurous, there are plenty of wine and cheese options. Christine Murray

The aroma of frying doughnuts and brewing coffee wafts over the market as tourists and locals alike pick through acres of fresh fruit and vegetable stands. The bustling meat, seafood and cheese halls are chock-a-block with people trying tastes of Australian and farther-flung specialities. Officially opened in 1878, the “Queen Vic” draws 10 million visitors annually. More than 600 food and non-food stalls are open five days a week, and there’s a weekly night market focusing on street food, live entertainment and crafts. Brooke Masters

The 1890s Liberty-style market of the Tuscan port city of Livorno is a vibrant and down-to-earth place to savour torta di ceci (chickpea flour flatbread), fresh oysters shucked on the spot or acciughe alla povera (fresh marinated anchovies). Visit speciality food shops (one is devoted entirely to prized Livornese hens’ eggs), then ogle the stalls showing off the Ligurian Sea’s bounty while you plan dinner – the earlier you arrive, the better. Emiko Davies

For anyone with a serious sweet tooth, this sprawling, sugar-filled mega-market is worth a detour. Start a market tour with the local delicacy ate (ah-tay) – slow-cooked guava, pear and quince that are served in jellied, chilli-powder-dusted cubes and chunks of crystallised pineapple and pumpkin. Morelianas, one of the most iconic candies, are rich caramel discs that are found next to chocolate balls and jars of cajeta, a favoured spread for breads or served over ice cream. COE

The Ningxia Night Market is relatively small compared to the island’s other sprawling competitors, but it is mighty. Its oyster omelette shop is famous and well worth a visit, but if you want to avoid the queues, there are plenty of other treats to indulge in. Seek out the deep-fried taro balls, stinky tofu and the unsung hero of desserts: the ice-cream wrap with peanut candy shavings and coriander. Go hungry, leave full. Eleanor Olcott

Thousands of eateries comprise this sprawling soul-food mecca, offering everything from kimchi dumplings to steaming bowls of bibimbap and noodles that are perfect for slurping, grilled meat and mung-bean pancakes. Pull up a plastic stool in the food court and absorb the energy of the many hawkers – and a sea of voracious eaters savouring local delicacies. The market features an area dedicated to clothing and home goods as well, and it’s the ideal place to buy an exquisite silk hanbok (traditional Korean dress). COE

A highlight of the New York summer is the Queens Night Market, a nocturnal festival attracting more than 60 independent food and art vendors. Located in Flushing, it begins in April, and continues until October. From early evening until midnight, visitors can sample street food from across the globe, and unlike many glossy food-stall markets, the food vendor prices are capped at $6. Check out the Trinidadian bake and shark from Caribbean Street Eats or curry crab at Trini Treats, or the arepa sampler at Arepalicious. Madison Darbyshire

A stroll down the Mercado 20 de Noviembre’s “smoke corridor” is an immersive experience. The market itself is famed for stalls selling tlayudas – giant, crispy tortillas with beans, local cheese, and other toppings. In its dark, sweltering smoke passage, sellers display an assortment of meats they will chargrill and put into a tortilla for you. A word of warning: you might take the smell with you. CM



After a series of scandals at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, Singapore’s efforts to rein in its commodity trading sector have culminated in a lengthy prison sentence for a former oil trader now in his 80s.

Lim Oon Kuin — known as OK Lim, and once one of Singapore’s richest men — was found guilty in May of defrauding HSBC and abetting forgery. The 82-year-old was sentenced in November to 17 and a half years in jail in a ruling the judge said was designed to act as a “deterrent”. Lim’s defence lawyer has appealed, citing his wheelchair-bound client’s age and poor health.

The tough sentencing exemplifies how Singapore has tried to crack down on dodgy dealing in its commodities market. It has launched initiatives aimed at digitising the documentation that is the backbone of the commodities market, while encouraging wider information sharing among market players to prevent fraud.

“Singapore has realised they need to step up and rebuild some credibility,” said Jean-François Lambert, founding partner of Lambert Commodities, a consultancy. “They are taking these scandals more seriously.”

Singapore owes its reputation as a global commodities hub to its position on sea lanes that connect China with global markets, along with its government’s business-friendly approach.

Global trading houses including Trafigura, Vitol Group, Gunvor and Mercuria all have bases in the city, which is Asia’s largest oil trading hub and one of the largest in the world for trading agricultural commodities. The city state has also set its sights on becoming a hub for rapidly growing carbon trading.

Its need to set itself apart has become more acute after Dubai’s rapid rise as a commodities trading hub, especially for Russian goods under sanctions by western governments.

“The long arc of global history is full of stories of ports that have flourished and thrived for decades, only to decline amidst changing circumstances,” said Prime Minister Lawrence Wong during an event at Singapore’s mega Tuas Port project in October. “The lesson is that we cannot be complacent.”

The Lim case, along with several others in Singapore, came to light in 2020, when commodity prices slumped at the outbreak of the pandemic. Lim’s company, Hin Leong, collapsed in April 2020 and he admitted hiding $800mn in losses from creditors, which included some of the world’s biggest banks.

His was the largest of several trading houses in the city state that imploded that year. Others included the oil dealer ZenRock and Agritrade International, a trader accused of fraud by its lenders. Hontop Energy, the trading arm of a Shandong-based refiner, went into receivership and was accused by its biggest lender of “suspicious transactions”.

A common theme of the scandals was dubious paperwork, used to secure credit from financial institutions in order to hide losses and make leveraged bets on commodity prices. Banks were willing to lend to the traders in expectation of chunky fees.

“Paper documents have always been the Achilles heel of international trade,” said Baldev Bhinder, managing director of Blackstone & Gold, a specialist energy and commodities law firm in Singapore.

Lim was found guilty of encouraging his executives to forge two documents that purported to be oil sales contracts, which led to HSBC disbursing nearly $112mn to the company.

At the time of its collapse, Hin Leong owed $3.85bn. HSBC had the biggest exposure at $600mn, followed by ABN Amro at $300mn, while French lender Société Générale had lent the company $240mn. Singaporean banks — DBS Group, OCBC Bank and United Overseas Bank — had exposures worth $680mn.

HSBC also lent $49mn to ZenRock, but reported the collapsed trader to Singaporean police over what it described as “dishonest practices”.

Agritrade was found to have been granted $1.5bn of credit from 26 lenders. Its creditors accused the business of fraud through issuing duplicate bills of lading — the legal documents issued by transportation companies to shippers — to multiple banks as security against loans.

“Prosecutors are taking a more proactive approach,” said Kit Smith, a UK-based lawyer specialising in global fraud and trade disputes at Keidan Harrison. “There is a push to be more stringent on big-ticket frauds and make examples of the perpetrators.”

Enterprise Singapore, the government agency charged with promoting business, said there was “zero tolerance for fraudulent activities in Singapore”.

“The fraud cases seen in the commodities trading sector in the past have been attributed to weak disclosure practices and internal controls among a minority of the trading companies,” it said in a statement to the Financial Times.

“When Singapore authorities discover financial fraud in the trading sector, we will take immediate action to bring perpetrators to task as seen in the case of Hin Leong.”

The government has also launched a series of initiatives in recent years aimed at impeding fraudsters’ ability to rip-off creditors.

Among them is a trade finance registry to prevent the same asset being pledged as a security for more than one loan to different institutions. The government has also tried to encourage traders to move away from paper documentation, instead exchanging digital records on a public blockchain to reduce forgeries.

While Lambert said Singapore was “raising the stakes in terms of compliance and regulatory requirements”, he added that regulators should have been firmer in previous accounting scandals.

The scandals have also forced banks to take a much more stringent approach to lending to commodity traders. Several lenders announced they were pulling out of the market in 2020.

“Banks are approaching their customers with a great deal more vigilance now, which is a good thing, but it has meant smaller traders are finding it harder to attract financing,” said Bhinder.

“Lim’s sentencing closes a chapter for Singapore and the commodities trading market — it has been a learning experience for everyone.”



An octogenarian oil trader has been given a 17-and-a-half-year jail sentence in Singapore for defrauding HSBC, in a long-running case that sent shockwaves through the city-state’s commodity trading sector.

Lim Oon Kuin, known as OK Lim and once one of Singapore’s richest men, was sentenced on Monday after being convicted in May of “cheating” HSBC and abetting forgery. The 82-year-old founder of Hin Leong Trading was accused of encouraging a company executive to forge documents that tricked the bank into disbursing nearly $112mn.

Judge Toh Han Li of Singapore’s State Courts said the length of Lim’s sentence was designed to act as a “deterrent”. Prosecutors had sought a jail term of up to 20 years; Lim’s defence lawyer Davinder Singh argued for seven years, given his age and poor health. Lim attended court hearings in a wheelchair.

Bloomberg reported that Singh had appealed on behalf of his client and Lim would not begin his sentence until after the appeal hearing.

The case had centred on allegations that Hin Leong had been hiding losses from trading in futures markets and selling off oil inventories already pledged as collateral for loans.

Lim was originally charged in 2020 after confessing to hiding $800mn in losses from creditors — including HSBC and Singapore’s biggest lender DBS — and directing the company’s finance department not to disclose the losses.

He was initially hit with 130 criminal charges involving hundreds of millions of dollars, but was eventually tried on just three.

Singapore’s pivotal position on global shipping lanes connecting China with global markets, as well as its stability and low corporate tax rates, have made it one of the most important global hubs for commodities trading.

But a spate of scandals in the market throughout the 2010s raised questions about Singapore’s ability to rein in its trading houses. Several cases centred around fraud and forged documents. Paper trails make up the backbone of the industry.

With a single delivery truck, Lim founded Hin Leong in 1963 as an oil distributor. Over the decades, the family business grew to become Singapore’s largest independent oil trader and a major supplier of shipping fuel.

But the collapse in the oil market in 2020 sent his empire into a tailspin. Lim filed for bankruptcy last month and agreed to pay S$4.5bn (US$3.3bn) to liquidators and creditor HSBC to settle long-running civil lawsuits.



The Financial Times’ Future of AI summit opened on November 6 with Josephine Teo, Singapore’s minister for digital development and information, talking to the FT’s analysis editor Geoff Dyer about Singapore’s AI strategy. They discussed how the country is navigating the technology’s promise and risks, and the implications of Donald Trump’s election to a second presidential term in the White House.



Hello, this is Kenji. I am writing this week’s newsletter from Bangkok, where I am attending an annual meeting with colleagues from across the region.

I was posted here as an editor about a decade ago, and it’s always a pleasure to come back, but the positioning of Thailand — and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as a whole — has shifted significantly, especially since tensions between the US and China started to heat up around 2018.

Getting caught between great power rivals like this is something smaller nations seek to avoid, and members of Asean are no exception. But even when countries do get drawn into these power plays, it is not always in a negative way, such as Vietnam attracting substantial investments and emerging as a major manufacturing hub of various tech products during this period.

As we feature in this edition of the newsletter, Singapore has enjoyed a sharp rise up the global ranking of start-up ecosystems, as investment in so-called deep tech surged against a backdrop of Sino-American tensions. Cambodia, meanwhile, is becoming a battleground between China and Japan, a key US ally, in terms of telecom infrastructure building, which could turn into a positive for local users as increased competition brings better services at lower prices.

Of course, anyone can find themselves in the crossfire of the US-China rivalry, as our Taipei colleagues remind us with their scoop this week about Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co (TSMC) halting shipments to certain customers to avoid inadvertently violating US export controls on China.

No matter who is elected president in the US next week — Kamala Harris or Donald Trump — other countries will continue having to navigate the Washington-Beijing rivalry with all its various consequences.

TSMC, the largest semiconductor manufacturer in the world, has stopped shipping to at least two chip developers over suspicions they were trying to circumvent US export controls on China’s Huawei Technologies, Nikkei Asia’s tech correspondents Cheng Ting-Fang and Lauly Li reported in this exclusive story from Taipei.

The two developers placed orders for chips made with 7-nanometre process technology, which TSMC has been using for mass production since 2018. Washington has been restricting chipmaking equipment containing American technology from being used to make chips of 14nm or better for China without an export license. TSMC’s most advanced commercial products are the 3-nm processor chips used for Apple’s iPhone 16 series.

Enforcing Washington’s export controls is far from straightforward, as chip developers could use layers of non-Chinese shell companies to camouflage their orders, according to sources.

TSMC reiterated to Nikkei Asia that it has not supplied Huawei since mid-September 2020 in compliance with the US export restrictions.

Samsung Electronics is struggling to hold on to its crown as the world’s top-selling smartphone maker, write the Financial Times’ Song Jung-a and Christian Davies.

The South Korean tech giant was the only one of the top five global smartphone makers to experience falling shipments in the third quarter of this year, losing market share to US rival Apple and Chinese contenders offering slick new foldable devices.

Research group TechInsights expects Apple’s new generative artificial intelligence features to help power the US company past Samsung next year.

Samsung once pioneered foldable devices but ceded the top spot earlier this year to Chinese rival Huawei, which had a 27.5 per cent share of the foldables market in the second quarter, compared with Samsung’s 16.4 per cent, according to IDC.

The company’s smartphone struggles come at a critical point. It has been hit by a series of failures at its semiconductor division, which accounts for 60 per cent of Samsung’s operating profit.

“Deep tech” endeavours in Singapore are getting a boost amid the ever-intensifying Sino-American tech tensions. Nikkei Asia’s Tsubasa Suruga reports that investment in this field — which is based on scientific research with potentially large social impacts like chips, robotics and medicine — was up 31 per cent by volume last year, even as overall start-up investment dropped 20 per cent.

Based on data by DealStreetAsia and Enterprise Singapore, deep tech accounted for 25 per cent of the total deal value, up from 17 per cent in 2022.

The boost in deep tech investment helped push the city-state’s global start-up ecosystem ranking to seventh this year, up from 18th just two years ago, and leapfrogging all other Asian hubs, including Beijing, Seoul and Tokyo, according to US-based research company Startup Genome.

Investors — who are mostly local or American, but also from Taiwan, Japan, France and Malaysia — say deep tech tends to remain under the radar due to the complex technology and expertise involved, but it is gaining importance amid the US-China trade war and supply chain shifts.

A Japanese tech consortium, with help from government subsidies, is challenging the Chinese dominance in the 5G market. The initial battleground is Cambodia, an ostensibly neutral country that has shown itself to be a staunch ally to Beijing, according to an exclusive report by Nikkei’s Kiu Sugano, Shiho Miyajima and Kyoko Hariya.

Orex Sai, a joint venture between NTT DoCoMo and NEC, will build a 4G network at a large commercial complex in the south-east Asian country by March, which will serve as a platform for transitioning to 5G in the future.

Cambodia’s telecom network, like many around the world, is reliant on equipment from Huawei Technologies. The Chinese company and its compatriot ZTE together control more than 40 per cent of the global market for 5G base stations, British research company Omdia says. Japanese players as a whole hold about 3 per cent.

For this Cambodia project, Tokyo is applying a new aid policy that applies government assistance proactively rather than waiting for a request from a recipient country. The development co-operation charter revised last year, which stresses Japanese aid money “does not involve debt traps or economic coercion, and that does not undermine the independence and sustainability of developing countries”, will also be applied to the project.



Addison Lee, the UK-based private-hire taxi and courier company, has agreed to be bought by Singapore-listed transport conglomerate ComfortDelGro in a deal valuing the business at £269.1mn.

ComfortDelGro, a multinational company with operations ranging from taxis to rail and London buses, is buying Addison Lee from a consortium led by chief executive Liam Griffin and Cheyne Capital.

On Wednesday ComfortDelGro said the acquisition, to be done through its UK subsidiary CityFleet Networks, would enable it to expand into the “premium mobility segment” and help its shift towards clean energy vehicles.

The combined group’s taxi and private hire network will consist of more than 34,000 vehicles globally upon completion of the deal.

The transaction marks the third change of ownership in just over a decade for Addison Lee, as the London taxi market has been disrupted by ride-hailing apps such as Uber, as well as the Covid-19 pandemic.

Private equity group Carlyle bought the business from the Griffin family, Addison Lee’s founders, for £300mn in 2013. The purchase came just as ride-hailing apps were beginning to shake up the London market.

Griffin, the son of Addison Lee’s founder, bought the business back in 2020 “at a significant discount” to the £300mn as part of a consortium of investors led by Cheyne Capital.

The owners restructured the business and refocused it on London’s premium and corporate customers.

“We have sat in this premium niche we think people are prepared to pay for,” Griffin told the Financial Times in March. He will remain as chief executive of the company, which returned to profit in 2023 following the pandemic.

On Wednesday, Griffin said ComfortDelGro had “a clear understanding of our customers’ and drivers’ needs” and would bring “significant international industry expertise to the business”.

The acquisition increases the Singaporean group’s presence in the UK, where it already operates services including the Megabus inter-city coach service and nearly a fifth of the London bus network through its Metroline business.

It said Addison Lee would also complement CityFleet’s existing operations in north-west England and Scotland.

“Beyond expanding our footprint in the UK, this acquisition will enable us to use Addison Lee’s expertise to deepen and scale our premium point-to-point capability globally,” said ComfortDelGro’s chief executive Cheng Siak Kian.

ComfortDelGro’s international operations include its French unit, which will begin operating part of the Paris Métro Line 15 by the end of 2025.

It is the largest taxi operator in Singapore, where it also operates a fleet of more than 3,000 buses and 83km of rail network.



The son of the late Lee Kuan Yew, the modern-day founder of Singapore, has quietly been granted political asylum in Britain, in an implicit condemnation of the civil liberties offered by the city-state.

Lee Hsien Yang, together with his wife, Lee Suet Fern, a lawyer, have overcome objections from the UK’s Home Office to win refugee status in Britain, having successfully argued they would face persecution if they were to return to Singapore.

The couple have been in self-imposed exile in London since 2022 following a criminal investigation by the Singaporean authorities and an accompanying threat of being charged with perjury.

A dynastic feud burst into public view after the death of Lee Kuan Yew in 2015, with Lee Hsien Yang and his sister, Lee Wei Ling, battling their elder brother, Lee Hsien Loong, who spent 20 years as prime minister, over the future of the famous family home in Singapore, at 38 Oxley Road.

That dispute is likely to flare once more after Lee Wei Ling’s death earlier this month, at the age of 69, following a long illness, because she lived at the house. During his lifetime, Lee Kuan Yew had repeatedly stated that once his children had moved out of the family home, the property should be demolished to avoid it becoming a shrine to himself. Lee Hsien Yang wanted his wishes enforced, but other family members disagreed.

In response to inquiries over the asylum move this week, the Singapore authorities released a 5,000-word statement, repeating claims that Lee Suet Fern had tampered with the final draft of Lee Kuan Yew’s will in order to reinstate a “demolition clause” regarding 38 Oxley Road and also carve out a larger portion of the estate for her husband.

Lee Wei Ling, an accomplished doctor who established the National Neuroscience Institute in the former British colony, diagnosed herself with progressive supranuclear palsy in 2020.

Her death was announced by Lee Hsien Yang on Facebook, with her younger brother immediately calling afresh for the demolition of 38 Oxley Road.

Lee Hsien Loong, who stepped aside as prime minister earlier this year but who remains a senior minister, responded on Facebook, saying: “I held nothing against Ling, and continued to do whatever I could to ensure her welfare,” adding that she was “fiercely loyal to friends, sympathised instinctively with the underdog, and would mobilise actively to do something when she saw unfairness, or suspected wrongdoing”.

In seeking political asylum in Britain, Lee Hsien Yang and Lee Suet Fern are understood to have successfully argued that their brother Lee Hsien Loong has used the organs of state against their wing of the family to block any chance that their son, Li Shengwu, might enter politics in Singapore and one day rise to the position of prime minister.

Li Shengwu, an economist who has adopted a different English spelling of the family name, was recently granted tenure at Harvard University, where he is a professor. He has denied having any interest in pursuing a political career, but nevertheless considers himself to be exiled from the city-state.

Singapore’s legal system, particularly its libel laws frequently used by Lee Kuan Yew and his successors, has long made life difficult for the political opponents of the Singapore government and for the media.

In its statement, the Singapore government insisted Lee Hsien Yang and Lee Suet Fern, along with their son, “are and have always been free to return to Singapore”, adding that the city state’s judiciary is impartial and makes decisions independently.

It added: “As the government has stated on many occasions, in parliament and elsewhere, senior minister Lee Hsien Loong has long recused himself on all matters relating to 38 Oxley Road,” adding that while Lee Kuan Yew “preferred demolition, he was also willing to consider other options such as refurbishing and redesigning the interior”.

Posting on Facebook, Lee Hsien Yang said: “In 2017, my sister Wei Ling and I declared, ‘We do not trust Hsien Loong as a brother or as a leader.’ We stated that we feared the abuse of the organs of the Singapore state against us and against my family. Because of that risk, I was unable to attend Wei Ling’s funeral.”

He said the Singapore government’s attacks against him were a matter of public record. “On the basis of these facts, the UK has determined that I face a well-founded risk of persecution, and cannot safely return to Singapore.”

While the figures are low compared with more troubled parts of the world, data from the UN refugee agency UNHCR shows a marked rise in the number of Singapore nationals seeking asylum elsewhere, a trend that Singapore’s critics put down to the authoritarian nature of the city-state’s government.



The VSOE is the fantasy progenitor, five-star sleeper of dreams. The vintage cars, all restored down to the last hand-enamelled panel, date from between 1926 and 1949 — with the notable exception of one very fabulous addition this year: L’Observatoire, a brand-new full-car suite complete with “secret” tearoom and library, designed by the French artist JR (it’s now taking bookings for travel from March 2025, for an extremely bucket list-y £80,000 per trip).

Thanks to an assertive 2021 expansion, the VSOE now calls in at more destinations than ever: Prague, Lyon, Florence, Vienna, Budapest, Istanbul, Rome. It can also be booked in exclusivity for milestone events, which allows for customised itineraries should you and your fellow revellers wish to call in at, say, Chiavari or Ancona. (Not that the standard one-night Paris-to-Venice route won’t give you all the feels, treats and Alpine views you need.)

Chef Jean Imbert does haute table all the way — turbot in champagne sauce, lamb loin, mignardises to finish — across the VSOE’s three dining cars. Breakfast can be delivered in your cabin, and the top-level suites are provisioned with free-flowing Petrossian and champagne. In the never-actually-closes bar car there’s a baby grand piano for (mostly) unironic after-midnight singalongs.

Toeing the fantasy line means throwback elegance during the day. Black tie is expressly encouraged come evening; likewise, the laying on of sequins, beads, fancy baubles and generally the sartorial shimmer and shake that confers extra sex appeal. When in doubt, go with Le Smoking — Tom Ford for him, Saint Laurent for her (perhaps with a bejewelled choker. And nothing under the jacket).

The name is a shortening of the original Afghan Express, so-called for the Afghan cameleers who mapped the train’s north-south route from Darwin to Adelaide in the late 19th century, traversing some of Australia’s most severe and spectacular interior landscapes. This being Outback Oz, the experience is low-key without skimping. In the new Gold Premium suites, walnut cabinetry and brass are complemented by Indigenous prints; Gold twin or single cabins are cosier berths. Picture windows are uniformly huge, regardless of travel class.

The full four-day, three-night, 3,000km experience stops in historic Katherine and Alice Springs in the Northern Territory before passing through the dead centre of the country en route to the mining town of Coober Pedy and on to Adelaide. Excursions include bushwalks, visits to Indigenous art galleries and alfresco lantern-lit dinners; an extra spend gets you helicopter tours and a private visit to Uluru.

Straightforward, modern Australian, including excellent wines, craft beers and spirits, though Platinum travellers have the Bollinger on free-flow. They also have their own restaurant car, whose chefs privilege local-to-the-route providores. But the charm seems concentrated in the Queen Adelaide restaurant, where ricotta hotcakes à la Granger & Co are a breakfast highlight. Everything, down to that last midnight glass of Seppeltsfield Para Tawny, is included in the price.

The Orient Express this is not: nice trousers and linen shirts will see you through supper. Far more important is having your bush- whacking best — the right shoes, layers, hats and sunscreen — for the vagaries of light and temperature on the excursions. Basically you can’t go wrong with breathe-tech Slowear and an old pair of Blundies.

This opulent Belmond overnighter — which used to connect Singapore and Bangkok via Kuala Lumpur and Penang — was relaunched at the start of 2024. The refurbished cars gleam with tropical-hardwood marquetry, brass details, gold-threaded passementerie and a diffuse Victorian-splendour ambience. There’s an observation car, with walls of windows and simple settee seating, and a bar with a rotating host of crooners and the odd roving magician. A very Belmond bonus: the onboard Dior Spa (a carriage with two treatment rooms).

Belmond has teased that Bangkok will be back on the agenda by next year; meanwhile, the E&OE traces two itineraries in and out of Singapore. “Wild Malaysia” takes you variously hiking, e-biking, caving and tiger-spotting (if you’re lucky) in Merapoh and Taman Negara National Park. “Essence of Malaysia” is about street-food tasting, art tours of George Town (the bustling ex-colonial capital of Penang), and speed-boating off the beaches of Langkawi.

Some of us think the most exciting aspect of the E&OE reboot is resident chef André Chiang, whose eponymous restaurant in Singapore racked up multiple Michelin stars and best-in-Asia accolades before closing in 2018. Onboard, he marries and reinterprets French and south-east Asian traditions: think steaming bowls of laksa bouillabaisse and spicy cacao ganache.

Jungle-trekking and sea spray by day don’t preclude de rigueur evening gloss. Along with The Organic Pharmacy’s bug repellent, sturdy-soled walkers and loose cotton-linen (with full-length sleeves), bring a couple of Dodo Bar Or or Anine Bing silk slip dresses. For him, chinos and a travel jacket from Connolly or De Bonne Facture.

Powered by a venture between hospitality behemoth Accor (owner of the Orient Express brand name), luxury property fund Arsenale and three Italian train companies, La Dolce Vita aims to give the VSOE a run for its Italy money by making the journey as much about the destinations and way-stops as the trains themselves. Not that those will be anything to sneeze at, designed by Milanese darlings Dimore Studio with mirrored walls, groovy ’60s- and ’70s-inspired textiles and scads of Gio Ponti, Osvaldo Borsani and Gae Aulenti-inspired flourishes everywhere.

The premium is on place, connecting destinations previously unserviced by luxury sleeper train, from Montalcino in southern Tuscany to Maratea and Matera in Basilicata, Monferrato in Piedmont (for truffles and Nebbiolo), and even Sicily. The excursions will include tastings, private palazzi, world heritage sites and aperitivi in five-star partner hotels, such as Maratea’s lovely Santavenere, along the way.

A waves-making name was needed, and they sure tapped one: Heinz Beck, the thrice Michelin-starred founder of the Order of The Knights of Italian Cuisine, whose La Pergola in Rome remains one of Italy’s premier gourmet destinations. La Dolce Vita has also partnered with Vinitaly to have exclusive access to award-winning vintages, representing northern, central and southern Italy and personally selected by Beck, on the carte.

High Italian glamour: from floor-length La DoubleJ printed frocks to wide-lapelled jackets from Giuliva Heritage or Cifonelli. Plus Capri sandals and navy and black velvet furlane for both sexes. Launches spring 2025

Since its launch in 2010 (first covered in HTSI’s pages), the Maharajas’ has been touted as the closest thing there is to a palace on wheels, from the dedicated butler-per-client ratio to the generous size of the suites, with their separate lounging and sleeping quarters (and, in some cases, full-sized tubs in the bathrooms); its 23 carriages measure almost half a mile. Red carpets, fuchsia silk canopies and musicians and dancers greet guests at arrival stations. There are two restaurants, a bar and games lounge, and even a boutique. Palette- and materials-wise, more is more is always more, with just a bit extra for good measure.

The various three- to six-night itineraries are multi-state journeys that connect all-star destinations in northern and central India; the train trundles along old state-railway lines by night, calling in by day at Mehrangarh Fort, Orchha, Ranthambore (whence India’s most famous tiger safaris), the Taj Mahal or the temples at Khajuraho. Caravans and the occasional vintage limousine ferry guests to and from sites, or to cocktails and dinner at heritage palace hotels along the route.

Generally good, if with less wow factor than on comparable trains elsewhere (perhaps it’s time for state owners IRCTC to consider luring a Garima Arora or Gaggan Anand aboard?). Traditional Indian — including a daily regional thali and rustic Mewari dishes — alternates with standard continental and international fare; both restaurants, Mayur Mahal and Rang Mahal, cater to carnivores and vegetarians.

Your best kani weave pashmina from Kashmir Loom or Andraab — good for elegant onboard suppers and for covering shoulders at holy sites both Hindu and Muslim.



The rich have always been welcomed in Switzerland. To spend, but more importantly to hoard. Across the country, in secretive locations, banks operate underground vaults and storage facilities — often converted military bunkers that have been hewn from mountain rock. Some have no roads nearby and can only be accessed by air.

At one facility 40km south of Lucerne, storage company Brünig Mega Safe is carving into an imposing mountain and plans to offer “professional and secure storage of assets in underground caverns” for anything from gold bars and stock certificates to artworks and classic cars. Prices start at $500,000 for a 25 sqm vault.

For three centuries, the country has also offered the rich reliable, specialist advice on managing and investing their money. In times of war, political turmoil and rising taxes, the country’s stability and geopolitical neutrality — combined with its strict adherence to banking discretion — supported a thriving and world-leading wealth management industry.

But, in recent years, those foundations have begun to crack — and its rivals in Asia are looking on. Under international pressure, Switzerland has been chipping away at its banking secrecy laws that restrict banks from passing on details about their clients to governments. And the country’s decision to sanction Russian oligarchs following Moscow’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine nearly three years ago has dented its reputation for international neutrality.

Meanwhile, the collapse last year of Credit Suisse — the country’s second-biggest bank, trusted by millions of wealthy clients globally — has cast a shadow over Switzerland’s claim to be a stable nation with a sturdy financial services sector. The remainder of the Swiss banking sector is aware of what this means. “Singapore and Hong Kong are going to be more and more important competitors to Switzerland as global hubs,” says Giorgio Pradelli, chief executive of Swiss private bank EFG, which operates in all three countries and is increasingly focused on Asia.

In fact, Hong Kong is set to overtake Switzerland as the world’s biggest offshore wealth hub by 2028, with Singapore not far behind. Hong Kong would then account for $3.2tn out of the total $17.1tn in global offshore wealth assets, compared with $3.1tn for Switzerland and $2.5tn for Singapore, according to Boston Consulting Group estimates.

In the five years to 2028, Hong Kong’s cross-border wealth market is on track to grow by 6 per cent a year in terms of assets, compared with 3.6 per cent in Switzerland and 8.5 per cent in Singapore.

“Switzerland will always be our competitor, but we are not afraid,” says Jason Fong, a 27-year banking and asset management veteran who has been tasked by the Hong Kong government with attracting family offices to the Chinese territory. “They are crumbling and we are in a very advantageous situation.”

Much has changed since the early 18th century, when France’s Catholic kings tapped the banks of Geneva for funds, but tried to conceal their dealings with the city’s Huguenot financiers, fearing a sectarian backlash at home. An edict from the Great Council of Geneva in 1713 prohibited bankers from sharing client registers with the authorities.

Geneva’s commitment to banking discretion helped elevate it into a European financial powerhouse and drew in Swiss mercenary soldiers who were looking to safeguard their money made from fighting abroad. “The Swiss laid the foundation for today’s global wealth management model,” says Iqbal Khan, co-head of wealth management at UBS. “Its heritage comes from the duty of care for others’ property and the principle of self-control.”

Secrecy became enshrined in Swiss legislation with a 1934 banking law, which set out that bankers who disclosed client information could be jailed. Initially, European Jews fleeing persecution set up Swiss bank accounts to protect their valuables, but later such accounts were favoured by Nazis to store their looted wealth. A Swiss bank account soon became the financial product of choice for the rich who did not want too much attention on their fortunes’ sources.

This commitment to clandestine banking attracted despots and oligarchs throughout the 20th century, while tax-evading lawyers and country doctors from neighbouring European countries made up a large proportion of Swiss private banks’ clients. It was in the middle of the 20th century that Swiss bankers attracted the nickname of the “gnomes of Zurich” from British politicians for their ability to hoard heaps of gold in underground vaults. It was soon regarded as a badge of honour. Swiss bankers took to answering calls from British colleagues by saying: “Hello, gnome speaking.”

More recently, though, under pressure from tax authorities around the world following a series of high-profile scandals over the flows of illicit money, Switzerland has acquiesced to demands for greater transparency around its banking sector.

In 2017, it signed up to the international automatic exchange of information standard, which requires Swiss financial institutions to share details on their clients with the countries where they are tax resident. More than 100 countries are signed up to the same standard, which has all but killed off Switzerland’s allure for tax evaders.

The final blow for Swiss banking discretion came two years ago with the Suisse Secrets scandal, where documents detailing the accounts of 30,000 Credit Suisse clients were leaked to a consortium of international media outlets. Among those named in the cache of documents — which dated back to the 1940s — were war criminals, autocrats, oligarchs, drug smugglers and human traffickers.

The collapse of Credit Suisse prompted the Swiss government to devise a series of proposals to bolster the banking system, including giving more power to the domestic financial regulator and potentially increasing UBS’s capital requirements. Executives in Zurich fear that if the new measures are too draconian, they could ultimately put their banks at a disadvantage to their foreign rivals.

“Financial centres like Hong Kong, Singapore and the US are aggressively competing, and making great progress, for the offshore wealth management crown that Switzerland holds today,” UBS chief executive Sergio Ermotti said in June. “Foreign financial centres would benefit if Switzerland were to restrict its ability to maintain a leading presence abroad.”

Switzerland’s reputation for neutrality on the world stage has proved enticing over the decades for the global and mobile rich, especially in times of rising geopolitical tension. Yet this, too, is being tested. The decision by Switzerland following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine to sign up to the US and EU sanctions regimes has led to questions from clients about whether the country is still an impartial player.

A recent report from the Swiss Bankers Association lobby group identified Switzerland’s adherence to international sanctions regimes as the top geopolitical risk facing the country’s wealth managers. The immediate effect of implementing sanctions was Swiss banks pulling out of Russia and jettisoning Russian clients, many of whom switched their offshore bank accounts to the Middle East.

Jimmy Lee, head of Asia-Pacific at Julius Baer, has run several western banks’ Singapore and Hong Kong operations over the past three decades. He says he is often asked by clients whether Switzerland is still neutral. “We explain to them that Ukraine is at the doorstep of Switzerland and they are taking a stance,” he says. “If your neighbour’s house is on fire, you cannot stay neutral.”

The Ukraine war has brought Switzerland closer to Nato, with a recent paper commissioned by the country’s defence ministry suggesting Swiss troops could co-operate in military manoeuvres with other states for the first time since 1515.

As Switzerland grapples with its five-century-old commitment to neutrality, rival wealth management hubs have sought to project their own credentials as non-partisan places to do business. “Some of these Asian wealth hubs played their hand extremely well,” says a Swiss bank executive. “They managed to position themselves as neutral, although they all adopted the US sanctions just like we did.”

The story of how Asia’s two main financial entrepôts copied the Swiss white-glove model of wealth management and ended up outpacing their European rival could be seen as a historical quirk — a byproduct of the supercharged growth in Asian wealth in the 21st century. But, in Singapore’s case, it was more by design. It was on a trip to Zurich in 1967, two years after Singapore’s independence from Malaysia, that Lee Kuan Yew set upon the idea of transforming the nation he had founded into Asia’s financial hub. Lee, the country’s first prime minister, had seen the way Switzerland, a small country with few natural resources and surrounded by powerful neighbours, had established itself over several centuries as the global centre of offshore banking and wealth management.

Singapore’s government followed Switzerland’s lead in designing its tax system to attract rich foreigners looking for a base to park their wealth, while also encouraging Swiss private banks to set up shop. “We have . . . deliberately encouraged the development of Singapore as a financial centre,” Lee said on a subsequent trip to Zurich in 1971 while speaking at a reception at the Union Bank of Switzerland. “Singapore sets out to be to south-east Asia what Switzerland is to Europe — a money and gold market.”

Part of the reason for the rise of Hong Kong and Singapore as offshore wealth hubs is down to demographics and how quickly a wealthy upper class has emerged in Asia in recent decades. Mainland China is now home to 6mn millionaires, the second-highest number behind the US. This weight of money funnelling into Hong Kong from mainland China, which accounts for just under half of the cross-border money flowing into Hong Kong’s wealth managers, according to McKinsey, has driven its rapid growth — even as that of Switzerland and Singapore, to a lesser extent, has slowed.

This proximity is one of the main reasons UBS recently announced it would move its local headquarters to a tower sitting on top of the West Kowloon train terminus. The new development is designed to connect Hong Kong by high-speed rail to the surrounding Greater Bay Area, the largest and most populated urban area in the world.

By contrast, Singapore acts more like an entry point for global investors into south-east, and increasingly, north Asia. China is expected to account for about 30 per cent of wealth inflows into the city state over the next five years, with Hong Kong and Taiwan the next biggest markets.

A sign of Hong Kong and Singapore’s growing importance as offshore wealth hubs is the booming market for family offices. These small, private companies are set up to manage the wealth of one or maybe a handful of wealthy families, providing a full suite of services, from tax and succession planning to investing and philanthropy. Both Hong Kong and Singapore are on course to report record numbers of launches this year. There were 50 family offices operating in Singapore in 2018, but that has ballooned to 1,650 today. Hong Kong, meanwhile, has more than 2,700.

The new launches are typically serving families in other Asian countries looking to diversify where their wealth is managed, transferring a large chunk from their domestic market to meet their global interests or give them options if things get uncomfortable at home. Singapore, in particular, is attracting family office branches from further afield. “Some are coming from the Middle East and Europe,” says Jin Yee Young, co-head of Asia-Pacific wealth management at UBS, who runs the Singapore business. “They see Singapore as a window to the region. They are very established, some are even multigenerational family offices, and they are looking to tap into investments in the region.”

When Hong Kong and Singapore were starting to establish their wealth management sectors, they looked to the Swiss model for inspiration. Yet for a long time, the clients had vastly different needs. “When I started in private banking in the 1990s, it was about the private individual and their needs,” says Amy Lo, the other co-head of UBS’s Apac wealth business, who runs the Hong Kong operation. “As things have globalised, 70 per cent of our clients are entrepreneurs and now it is much more about succession planning, looking after their businesses, philanthropy and doing good for society.”

The authorities in Singapore and Hong Kong are working on ways to improve the local talent pools to ensure they can meet evolving client needs. “Whenever I go to the Asian international financial centres, the general discussion is always on how to increase the number of people who are interested in working in wealth management,” says Pradelli of EFG. “Talent is very important. While we traditionally have a strong talent base for our industry in Switzerland, the pipeline of talent in Asian financial centres is strong and improving, but still quite scarce.”

Singapore has had an influx of money from China and Hong Kong in recent years, as rich individuals moved their wealth from what they regard as an increasingly authoritarian Chinese state. But those inflows culminated in a S$3bn ($2.34bn) scandal last year, in which 10 Chinese nationals were convicted of money laundering following Singapore’s biggest investigation into online gambling in Asia. It involved island-wide raids and the seizure of gold bars, expensive wines, crypto assets, designer handbags and luxury cars. Banks in Singapore have responded by heightening scrutiny of foreign customers and intensifying efforts to identify sources of wealth, leading to delays in onboarding new customers.

While some critics have suggested the episode highlighted lax controls in Singapore’s burgeoning family office sector, Marco Pagliara, head of emerging markets at Deutsche Bank’s private bank, attributes it more to growing pains that the local regulator responded to.

“There was a phase where there was a significant flow coming from north Asia — on the back of that there was correction that needed to be implemented. They did it quite swiftly,” says Pagliara. “Singapore is focused on running a very tight and organised ship with the way they manage their financial centre.”

This month, the Singaporean government published a package of recommendations to tighten anti-money-laundering rules in the city state, including improving information sharing between departments and giving prosecutors stronger powers. “We continually engage the industry and stakeholders to ensure that our framework remains robust against illegitimate wealth and welcoming of legitimate businesses and investors,” said the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the country’s financial regulator.

Though their home market has been losing ground, Switzerland’s wealth managers are seeking to capitalise on the growth in Asia by building on the cachet associated with being a Swiss bank. “Swissness stands for high quality, trust and credibility,” says UBS’s Khan, who recently relocated to Hong Kong to run the bank’s Asia-Pacific business. “But that’s not enough in today’s world. You need to have cultural heritage as well.”

Khan, who will split his time between Hong Kong and Singapore, had previously been the sole head of UBS’s wealth management business and was based in Zurich. But he is one of several senior executives at European wealth managers who have relocated to Asia as they target the region for growth. Asia’s biggest banks were mostly late to prioritise developing their own wealth management businesses and trail far behind their longer established competitors from Europe and the US. But they are starting to catch up.

The Swiss banks have recognised that although their country’s reputation as the world’s centre for wealth management has taken a hit in recent years, they can still dominate in rival financial hubs.

This article is part of FT Wealth, a section providing in-depth coverage of philanthropy, entrepreneurs, family offices, as well as alternative and impact investment



Singapore has charged billionaire property tycoon Ong Beng Seng with abetting a minister as part of a corruption scandal that has tainted the city-state’s reputation for clean governance.

Ong, 78, was charged with two offences of abetting former transport minister S Iswaran to obtain gifts and obstruct justice, the Attorney-General’s Chambers said on Friday. Ong did not enter a plea, local media reported.

The indictment against Ong comes one day after Iswaran was sentenced to a one-year jail term for accepting gifts valued at more than $300,000 and obstructing justice. He became the first Singaporean minister to be imprisoned in nearly 50 years.

Iswaran was accused of accepting gifts from Ong, who owns the rights to the Singapore Grand Prix, at a time when he had official dealings with the tycoon. As transport minister, Iswaran was the most senior government official negotiating with Ong’s company on matters related to the Formula One race in Singapore.

Iswaran pleaded guilty last month to five charges, including four counts of obtaining valuable items and one of obstruction of justice. He resigned as transport minister earlier this year after he was formally charged.

The charges against Ong correspond to two of the charges to which Iswaran pleaded guilty, the AGC said.

Iswaran had initially faced 35 charges, though prosecutors proceeded with only five at the start of the trial. Most of the charges related to gifts from Ong, including tickets to English Premier League football matches, the Singapore F1 race, and plays including Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, Hamilton and Kinky Boots as well as a business-class flight from Doha to Singapore in 2022.

Ong, a Malaysian citizen, was first arrested in July 2023 and released on bail. He is the majority owner of Singapore GP Pte, the promoter for the F1 race in Singapore. He is also the founder of Hotel Properties, which has brands including the Four Seasons and InterContinental in its property portfolio.

The Ong family also has a majority stake in the British luxury handbag maker Mulberry.

Iswaran was also charged with receiving gifts, including whisky and a Brompton T Line bicycle, from another businessman, Lum Kok Seng. Lum is the managing director of Lum Chang Holdings, a construction firm. He will not be charged, the AGC said on Friday.

A lawyer for Ong declined to comment.

The scandal has come at a sensitive time for Singapore, which prides itself on its reputation for clean governance and transparency. Ministers in the Asian financial hub are among the highest paid in the world, earning about S$1mn (US$771,000) a year in part to discourage corruption.

Singapore is set to hold elections next year, the first under new Prime Minister Lawrence Wong, who took office in May. The ruling People’s Action party — which has governed the city-state since independence in 1965 — is expected to win, but its reputation has taken a hit from a series of scandals, including the corruption allegations against Iswaran.

In a statement following Iswaran’s sentencing this week, Wong said he and his team would uphold the highest standards of integrity. “Our system ensures that our public officers are accountable, and no one is beyond scrutiny or above the law,” he said.



In a quiet street opposite Singapore’s Peranakan Museum, in a white art deco building, is the boutique of Singapore jeweller State Property. The business is owned by husband-and-wife team Afzal Imram, an industrial designer, and Central Saint Martins-trained jeweller Ruiyin Lin. They founded it as a local fine-jewellery brand, and it is one of the few with an international profile, thanks to expansion into North America.

Across town, in a high-rise block, is the very discreet showroom of Simone Jewels, which was established 18 years ago by Malaysian-born Simone Ng. In 2020, she became the first Singapore jeweller to be stocked in London department store Harrods and has retail clients in Paris and the US.

She is better known in Singapore and around the region, though, for her one-of-a-kind artistic high jewellery. Her colourful masterpieces are inspired by her love of history and architecture — currently the palaces of Istanbul — and, last year, she debuted a gender-neutral collection called Tattoo with symbol-shaped pendants and cocktail rings.

And what they all show is that Singapore has no shortage of creativity or high-spending clients to support a local jewellery industry — even though the island state is not a big manufacturer, like Hong Kong or Bangkok.

“Most things in Asia are generally mass-produced and creating one-in-the-world pieces is one of the reasons why we started the brand,” says Ng. “In Singapore, customers are well-versed and sophisticated in their jewellery purchases.”

The island may be small, but there are different types of jewellery markets, Ng explains. “Some like [their jewellery] simple, some like it large and luxurious, and others would only buy into luxury brands,” she says.

The city is the major shopping destination for the region, with many international luxury brands in the malls lining Orchard Road. Ng estimates 45 per cent of clients for her artistic masterpieces and bespoke designs are from elsewhere in south-east Asia, while 50 per cent are Singaporean and 5 per cent are from the rest of the world.

Self-purchasing women are the core clientele for most of the city’s jewellers. “We’ve got quite a number of bankers, doctors, and we’ve noticed recently more C-suite ladies and entrepreneur clients, [including] some from the cryptocurrency world,” says State Property’s Imram. The majority are Singaporean, but customers fly in from Indonesia and the Philippines, he adds. Local clients are quite brand-driven, so they start their collections with Cartier, Tiffany & Co and Bulgari, Imram says. “But we’ve seen a growing acceptance of local, independent labels, like State Property,” he notes.

As a brand that now has around a dozen retailers in North America alone, State Property has learnt to tailor its approach to diverse tastes. “The different lifestyles, spending habits, weather, even . . . the different sizes of people, this makes us pay closer attention to the nuances of each of our clients across markets,” Imram says. It allows the brand to break out of a narrow creative perspective and “helps us design better”, he adds.

State Property’s modern art deco aesthetic is inspired by the blueprints of historic gardens. It combines gold, emeralds, diamonds and black enamel for bangles, earrings, pendants, a three-finger-spanning ring, and — always — signet rings (a favourite with clients). The majority of its American clients have slightly different tastes to those in Singapore, however. “One thing we hear from everyone is how the quality of our products is top-notch, which is something I have to thank our discerning Singaporean clientele for,” says Imram.

The relatively small society of an island state has given rise to a tradition for bespoke design, from restyling jade and family heirlooms to making something exclusive and unique. In Chinatown there is Madly (which has satellite boutiques in Munich and Dubai) where clients choose from colourful gemstones and commission bespoke designs, mostly rings.

In the gentrified Tiong Bahru enclave is Calla Lily. Founded five years ago by Emily Tan, who previously worked with Jimmy Choo and Marni before graduating from the Gemological Institute of America, it creates vibrant, contemporary bespoke jewels. “Bespoke has always been a natural inclination for me as it allows me to explore different looks and styles,” Tan says of designs that are inspired by the personalities and dreams of her clients.

“The local market highly values one-of-a-kind pieces, giving us a competitive edge, and the rarity of certain gemstones also makes large-scale production difficult.”

Budgets vary wildly, she says, “from S$2,000 to S$5,000 [$1,500-$3,000], but they can go up to S$100,000 and more, depending on the gemstones we source”. Singaporean women feel very safe moving around the city wearing thousands of dollars’ worth of jewellery, Tan notes, so they can enjoy their jewellery without having to wait for a special occasion — which “often leads them to return for more unique designs”.

While Singapore attracts big luxury brands, it has also been a draw for independent jewellery designers. Two years ago, Nadine Ghosn relocated to Singapore, having lived between Paris and London. “I wanted the experience of living in a new place that has great positive energy and [2022] was the time to do it,” she says. “I love Asia, the speed, the safety and the family vibes of Singapore.”

She has found a ready market for her quirky jewels inspired by everyday items such as Lego, crayons and bicycle chains. “I’ve found locals and new Indonesian and Thai clients open to something different, colourful, fun and customised to their preferences,” Ghosn says, citing her gold Pencil and Crayon bangles and rings, and the stackable Veggie Burger rings, as bestsellers. “I think they appreciate the tongue-in-cheek and unexpectedness of my designs.” Clients start with one piece and return for more. “It has definitely been my most rewarding move so far,” she says.



Singapore’s former transport minister S Iswaran has been sentenced to one year in prison for accepting more than $300,000 in gifts as a public servant and obstructing justice, local media reported, in a rare graft case involving a government official in the Asian financial hub.

The jail term handed down on Thursday was longer than the six to seven months sought by prosecutors for Iswaran, who was instrumental in bringing the Formula One Grand Prix to Singapore.

Iswaran, 62, has been asked to surrender himself on October 7 to begin his jail term, Singapore’s Channel News Asia and The Straits Times reported.

He had pleaded guilty last month to four charges of obtaining valuable items and one charge of obstruction of justice, despite previously denying wrongdoing and vowing to clear his name.

Singapore prides itself on its reputation for clean governance and transparency, and ministers in the city-state are among the highest paid in the world, earning about S$1mn (US$772,000) a year, in part to discourage corruption.

Iswaran’s sentence marks the first time in nearly 50 years that a former minister has been jailed in Singapore. In 1975, Wee Toon Boon was sentenced to four-and-a-half years in prison for accepting gifts from a businessman. His sentence was reduced on appeal to 18 months.

Another cabinet minister, Teh Cheang Wan, was investigated for accepting bribes in 1986 but died before any charges were brought.

Iswaran was accused of obtaining gifts worth S$403,297.92 from two local businessmen during his tenure as minister. He has returned S$380,305.95 to the government.

The gifts allegedly included tickets to English Premier League football matches, Formula One races and plays including Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, Hamilton and Kinky Boots, as well as a business-class flight from Doha to Singapore in 2022, prosecutors have said.

Singapore authorities also seized wine, whisky, golf clubs and a Brompton T Line bicycle as part of the investigation.

Singapore is set to hold elections next year after Prime Minister Lawrence Wong took office in May as the city-state’s fourth leader and only its second from outside the founding Lee family.

The ruling People’s Action party — which has governed the city-state since independence in 1965 — is expected to win, but its reputation has taken a hit from a series of scandals, including the corruption allegations against Iswaran.



Bacha Coffee has grown across Asia by establishing itself in some of the region’s wealthiest districts and airports. Now the Singapore-based coffee brand is embarking on an aggressive expansion as it launches a store on the Champs-Elysées in Paris and other locations across Europe.

The Paris shop is expected to open by the end of the year and is part of a plan to establish more than 150 stores worldwide within three years. The company is also planning to open stores in China, one of Asia’s most competitive coffee markets, where Starbucks is coming under increasing pressure.

Taha Bouqdib, chief executive and president of V3 Gourmet, the food and beverage group that owns Bacha Coffee and TWG Tea, told the Financial Times he wanted to be in “all the major cities of the world”.

Bacha’s global expansion comes as coffee consumption is rising across Asia. In China, homegrown companies such as Manner Coffee and Luckin Coffee are fighting Starbucks and Tim Hortons for market share, while in south-east Asia, the Philippines’ Jollibee Foods and Indonesia’s Kopi Kenangan are battling for dominance.

Bacha, which launched in 2019, differentiates itself with glittering shops and ornate packaging inspired by the Dar el Bacha palace in Marrakech.

Bouqdib said the chain, which turned a profit last year of S$2.2mn (US$1.7mn) with revenues of S$95.5mn, was on track to double both of those figures this year and that there were no plans to list the company or to raise private equity funding.

The company does not have a store in China but sells its merchandise online through Alibaba’s Tmall. “We saw the demand for coffee gifting is just unbelievable. And next year, definitely, we are opening,” said Bouqdib.

In China, Bacha plans to open a sit-down café and retail outlet in Shanghai and a retail and takeaway store in Beijing, said Bouqdib, adding that “affordable luxury concepts have huge potential”, even in developing markets such as Indonesia.

Analysts said the expansion appeared rapid for a premium brand. “Opening 50 company-operated stores in one year is no easy task for any brand,” said Bernie Gao, China food and drink analyst at market research company Mintel. “There is an inherent contradiction between high-end refinement and rapid expansion.”

Premium stores often focus on perfecting details around the product, service and culture of stores, said Gao, adding that Bacha would confront steep competition in China.

“The dominance of foreign chain brands has ceased to exist,” he said, citing “the rise in national pride among Chinese consumers along with increased trust in domestic brands”.

Bouqdib’s coffee venture comes after building TWG Tea, a luxury tea brand in Asia modelled after a French teahouse. Bouqdib formerly worked at Mariage Frères, a French gourmet tea company.



Singapore’s former transport minister has pleaded guilty to charges of obtaining gifts as a public servant and obstruction of justice, in a rare graft case in the city-state that prides itself on transparency and clean governance.

S Iswaran, who was instrumental in bringing the Formula One Grand Prix to Singapore as transport minister, had initially denied any wrongdoing and vowed to clear his name after he was hit with 35 charges this year.

But in an unexpected move on Tuesday, prosecutors proceeded with only five charges at the start of the trial, and Iswaran pleaded guilty to all of them.

The charges include four counts of obtaining valuable items and one of obstruction of justice. The remaining 30 charges will be taken into consideration for sentencing, prosecutors said.

Iswaran, 62, is accused of obtaining gifts with a total value of S$403,297.92 (US$312,494.20) from two local businessmen during his tenure as minister.

Prosecutors have sought a jail term of six to seven months. Iswaran’s lawyers are asking for no more than eight weeks, according to Singaporean media Channel News Asia and the Straits Times.

Sentencing has been set for October 3, according to local media.

The corruption case against Iswaran is the first involving a Singaporean minister since 1986. Singapore prides itself on being one of the world’s least corrupt countries, and its ministers are among the highest paid — earning about S$1mn a year — in part to discourage corruption.

The case comes at a sensitive time for the ruling People’s Action party, which has ruled Singapore since independence in 1965.

Lawrence Wong was sworn in as Singapore’s fourth prime minister in May, becoming only the city-state’s second leader from outside the founding Lee family.

The Asian financial hub is set to hold elections in 2025, and while the PAP is expected to win again, its reputation has taken a hit from a recent series of scandals, including the corruption allegations against Iswaran.

Iswaran resigned this year after he was charged by authorities. He has said he will return his salary and allowances received since the beginning of the investigation in July last year.

According to a January charge sheet seen by the Financial Times, the kickbacks allegedly included tickets to English Premier League football matches, Formula One races and plays including Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, Hamilton and Kinky Boots, as well as a business-class flight from Doha to Singapore in 2022.

Singapore’s Attorney-General’s Chambers said in a statement that the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau had seized items in its investigation including wine, whisky, golf clubs and a Brompton T Line bicycle. It added that Iswaran had forfeited S$380,305.95 to the government to account for the value of gifts including event tickets and alcohol.

The CPIB has said Iswaran received some of the alleged bribes from Ong Beng Seng, one of the city-state’s most high-profile property tycoons, for “advancing (his) business interests”.

Ong has not been charged. He is the founder of Hotel Properties, which has brands such as the Four Seasons and InterContinental in its property portfolio.

The company has previously said Ong is providing details of his dealings with Iswaran to the watchdog.



Nine months after Singapore regulators approved the listing of active exchange traded funds, the city-state has seen just one product launch, with managers waiting for clearer signs of investor interest.

The more conservative investing habits of local investors, as well as unresolved gaps in Singapore’s ETF ecosystem and infrastructure, have also damped enthusiasm for the funds, according to industry participants.

Frank Koudelka, Boston-based global ETF product specialist at State Street, said that trying to sell active ETFs in Singapore was likely to be a “grind” at this stage. But as in many other markets new to active ETFs, asset managers were still “testing the waters” to see if the products would gain traction.

“It’s just in its infancy now, and firms are trying to figure out what’s my entry point, how much do I have to invest to get in there, who am I selling to, and are we seeing success with the existing products that are out there,” Koudelka said.

The Singapore Exchange gave the go-ahead for the listing of active ETFs last December, bringing the city-state into line with other jurisdictions in the region such as Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea, Indonesia and Japan.

Singapore fund house Lion Global Investors subsequently launched the first such product in January in partnership with Japanese manager Nomura Asset Management, raising initial assets of S$37mn ($28.3mn). The Lion Global ETF has seen its assets inch up to S$49.2mn.

Since then, however, there have been no further active ETF launches in the city-state, and no other products in the pipeline, the Monetary Authority of Singapore website shows.

Rival Asian funds hub Hong Kong has 28 active ETFs, with the first such product listing in June 2019, according to the Hong Kong stock exchange’s website.

Chen Wang, Hong Kong-based deputy chief operating officer at CSOP Asset Management, said asset managers in Singapore were still studying regulatory requirements as well as gauging market appetite.

CSOP AM has a presence across the Singapore and Hong Kong ETF markets, with five ETFs listed in the former and 40 ETFs in the latter. This includes three actively managed money market products in Hong Kong.

One critical challenge with investors in Singapore is their lack of familiarity with active ETFs.

“Local investors in Singapore, they still need a lot more time to understand what’s going on because the Singapore market is a relatively smaller market compared to the US or China or even Hong Kong, and investors tend to be relatively conservative in terms of their investment appetite,” Wang said.

There was still “a lot” of investor education that was needed to show them the difference between active and passive, and then also the benefits of buying an active ETF versus investing in a mutual fund, she added.

Wang did not say whether CSOP AM had any active ETFs in the pipeline for Singapore.

If there was a “clear interest in a certain type of ETF” from investors, CSOP AM could “move very fast to launch”, she noted.

“We’re looking at new opportunities in the Singapore market all the time,” she added.

Evonne Gan, Singapore-based engagement manager for asset management advisory at Broadridge, pointed out that investors in the city-state could access offshore active ETFs via private banking or online securities channels, so just looking at locally listed products did not give the full picture on investor appetite.

Locally listed ETFs in Singapore recorded the highest outflows among all Asia Pacific markets between January and May this year, with cumulative outflows of $278.5mn.

But Gan was still optimistic that domestic interest in active ETFs would grow.

The Singapore bourse was “actively engaging” with issuers who had “strong capabilities in originating mutual funds to utilise ETFs as another conduit to reach a wider audience through a listed vehicle”, an SGX Group spokesperson said.

“Active ETFs are a relatively new concept in Singapore, reflecting the evolving nature of the investment landscape here,” the spokesperson added.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



One day in 2000, Leonard Ng realised that banking was not his calling. Fifteen years as a proprietary trader at Singapore-based United Overseas Bank seemed more than enough. “There’s a shelf life to trading,” he says. “There’s really nothing much to show for your effort except the plus and minus of an accounts book.”

He looked around for inspiration. He had enjoyed spending time with an architect while commissioning a property in his native Singapore, and kept thinking of the Canadian prairies, where he had spent time as an undergraduate in Saskatchewan. A combination of nature and design felt alluring. So he changed tack and qualified as a landscape architect, taking courses at night while working at the bank. “One day I was head of the prop desk for bonds trading, and literally the next day I was an intern at the National Parks Board.”

The transition was tough, but his commitment paid off. Last year Ng was named Singapore’s President’s Design Award “designer of the year” — having previously won four “design of the year” titles. Collectively they recognise 16 years of involvement in making Singapore become a garden city, one of the greenest in the world.

It’s no surprise then, that we meet in the garden of Ng’s home, a light-filled two-storey house designed by local architects RT+Q, in Singapore’s Leedon Estate, a hilly pocket of luxury gated houses.

There is a deliberate lack of order to his garden: “I wanted to feel like you’re in a natural forest,” he says. “There are no straight lines here. The leaf litter is left on the ground and the trees are unevenly spread.” The garden is multi-layered, just like a rainforest: Borneo Kauri, Malayan Crape Myrtle and Umbrella trees create a canopy, epiphytes grow from the boughs at mid-level and Chinese Fan Palms dot the ground.

Partly, this is a practical matter: “I wanted it to be a self-sustaining low-maintenance landscape. Being a landscape architect, I’m kind of picky, but I don’t really have a lot of time.”

Ng points out that the garden is grass-free — remarkably, this award-winning landscape specialist doesn’t own a lawnmower — and instead Ng has harvested and cultivated a tough and drought-tolerant local weed, and repurposed it into a resemblance of a lawn, flowing like a waterfall over a step.

The house itself is custom-designed to combine two dwellings, one for himself and his wife and children (15, 17 and 19), and one for his in-laws, separated by a central lift. Everything is open, with nature invited in: the big open-plan kitchen flows directly to the front garden in one direction and a pool area in the other. Hornbills are frequent visitors; so too are squirrels, who have a habit of stealing their fruit. The garden seems like an extra room, intrinsic to the home.

A heavy wooden dining table is as curved as the garden, shaped to keep the natural characteristics of the tree it came from. A corridor is repurposed as a sort of unhidden shed; tools and a chainsaw hanging in neat order on the wall.

Ng has a passion for collecting antique searchlights sourced from old warships, admiring “the combination of industrial aesthetics, function of communication and illumination . . . and the history”. They stand in corners of rooms, adding to the industrial feel. His in-laws’ collection of life-sized bronze figures from the Qin and Han dynasties, by Chinese artist Cai Zhisong, also populate the house, reclining by a spiral staircase, standing like sentries near the entrance.

Upstairs, in his home office, past a large master bedroom with a wooden ceiling fan more often seen in Singapore’s older, colonial-era homes, another passion is indulged: minerals and crystals, an interest Ng shares with one of his daughters. The crystals bloom from small boxes on shelves. Smaller plants thrive here under the attention of photographic lights of sufficient sophistication to impress the FT’s photographer. Ng works beneath a road sign saying Frankel Walk, a memory of his previous home on Singapore’s east coast; his family bought it in an auction when the signs were renewed.

As we wander through the house, Ng’s attention constantly turns to the plants within and around it. On the roof of the home gym, by the swimming pool, Ng points out hanging plants meshed into fabric on the roof; they reduce heat and the need for air conditioning. By the pool are Australian weeping tea trees, and in a separate Japanese-style garden area in his in-laws’ wing of the home, koi carp drift in a pond angled (by Ng) to create a sense of lengthened perspective. There are Swamp Sheoaks (casuarina glaucas — playfully known as Cousin Itt for their resemblance to the Addams Family character) draped on the ground like a carpet. Herbs grow in pots. Ng can name every plant in its Latin form; if we go that way, I tell him, the story is going to require quite the fact check.

A series of pools leads visitors to the entrance and garden. This feels right, because from the very outset, water has characterised Ng’s approach to landscape design.

Singapore has a close relationship with water, and not just because it is an island nation. As one of his first acts as leader, founding prime minister Lee Kuan Yew elevated water to a national security issue; he recalled only too well the British surrender of Singapore in February 1942, forced, more than anything else, by the fact that the Japanese army had taken the reservoirs. “In most countries, water is a need, not national security,” Ng says. “But for us, it’s existential.”

“It’s not like we have a large hinterland where we can collect water and supply ourselves. If there’s not enough water on the island, we are beholden to someone else.”

Singapore has the best drainage in south-east Asia, to avoid floods when the tropical rains fall, and sophisticated mechanisms to ensure water supply. But to Ng, there is a greater possibility in water. Collecting water is only part of the challenge, he says. “Next we need to make sure [that] water becomes cleaner. And you do that by trying to change people’s mindset and their relationship with water.”

Ng first trialled this while working on the Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park project, his first assignment for the German landscaping firm Atelier Dreiseitl — later known as Ramboll Studio Dreiseitl — after joining in 2008 (the firm was rebranded Henning Larsen in 2023, where Ng is country market director). This was a pilot initiative to combine rainfall collection, recycling, and the animation of public spaces. “And then hopefully the public will engage with these spaces, build a sense of ownership, and be less inclined to pollute the water source,” Ng says. That means cleaner water, less energy for recycling, “and it all comes together. It’s really not about designing the river so much as it is redesigning our relationship with water.”

This is particularly fitting in Singapore, he says, “where every square metre of land is really valuable to us. We cannot afford to have mono-functional uses.” A canal, say, cannot be just for drainage, but also supply and recreation. “So instead of having one function, now there’s three functions. That’s why we design in layers.”

Bishan was, and remains, enormously important to Ng. “When I’m out in Bishan park and see people playing and laughing and having a good time, chasing the butterflies and really appreciating it, that really validates the effort.”

This thinking is visible in many of his later projects: the water play areas at Jurong Lake Garden; the multipurpose model of the Kampung Admiralty building, where the community is bonded through a multi-tiered roof garden filled with local plants. It will be central to his next major assignment, creating mixed-use shared spaces above a 21.5km tunnel network called the North-South Corridor.

All of these principles are clear in Ng’s home: the interplay of physical structures and nature, the idea that a house and the gardens around it are one and the same. There is a symbiosis here: his work as a landscape architect informs the place he lives, and his home in turn informs his work.

“This is my sanctuary,” Ng says. “After a day of stress you come back and you feel energised. You go out to the greenery and you get inspired to come up with new ideas.”

And those ideas are informed by the plants around him. “Nature is inherently beautiful,” he says. “Nature doesn’t require design, and the best we can do is learn from it. But even if we can only produce a poor facsimile of nature, how do we do that in an authentic and faithful manner? That’s what I strive to do as a designer.”

Chris Wright is a contributing reporter for the FT, Singapore

Singapore Design Week runs from September 26 to October 6

This article has been amended. Ng has two daughters and a son

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @ft_houseandhome on Instagram



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to Singapore

In workaholic Singapore, late dinners are common practice with people putting in extra hours. And even if you have burnt through your three meals a day, a final round of food and drinks with friends is always popular, especially given the plethora of eateries that remain open well into the evening.

Typically, supper fare here is likely to be fried, toasted or grilled over a hot stove. Dishes range from a plate of crispy roti prata — an Indian-style pancake served with a side of fish curry, which is offered by many late-night food stalls — or a serving of Chinese-style noodles flash-fried in a wok and dripping with gravy.

I lean on the side of living dangerously and prefer to risk putting on a few extra pounds if it means I can dig into a plate of prata, topped with generous amounts of sugar and soaked in curry. So if you are in Singapore, here are some places where you can get your fix if hunger pangs suddenly strike at odd hours. Beyond the food itself, some of them are also interesting spots in which to greet the early hours.

Above this supper spot, there used to be a neon sign for “Rolex Mee Master Tan Kue Kim”. Mee is a term that locals use to refer to noodles, and Master Tan, the late patron of Kim’s Famous Fried Hokkien Prawn Mee, was often seen at night frying up wok-fried delights for his customers. Tan, who died this year, was known for dishing plate after plate of fried noodles in the Chinese Hokkien style. His capable assistants have since taken over the kitchen.

While one may question the wisdom of donning a luxury timepiece worth thousands of dollars in a greasy kitchen, but the charismatic Tan made it his calling card, as you can see in the articles about the restaurant plastered proudly across the walls.

The noodles are a calorie-laden adventure, coated in a savoury prawn-infused seafood stock, with shredded egg, squid, shrimp, deep-fried cubes of pork lard and sambal (chilli paste), accompanied by sliced lime on the side. The way to do it is to mix the noodles with the paste and squeeze out all the juice from the lime. For foodies looking for a late-night meal with some heat, this is a fine spot. Those not in the mood for noodles will find plenty of alternatives, from fried mussels to steamed fish head and crabs cooked a variety of ways.

Orchard Road, the city-state’s main shopping street, is usually on the list of places to visit in Singapore. Café de Muse, situated on two floors of the Shaw House mall, is a useful pit-stop for those on a night-time buying spree. Shops typically close around 9pm, but this place remains open round the clock.

The café offers Korean-inspired Asian fusion food, with dishes such as bulgogi pasta — spaghetti cooked with slices of beef in a tangy-sweet sauce — and kimchi fried rice. Western fare is also available, from duck confit to chicken roulade, as well as lighter dishes such as Caesar salad and a range of teas and coffees.

This café occupies a strategic location at the intersection of busy streets in Singapore’s Muslim quarter. It has some alfresco seating, which makes for a pleasant supper on a clear balmy night.

Kampong Glam Café specialises in Singaporean Malay comfort food such as nasi goreng pattaya daging, or fried rice with beef, hidden under a thin egg omelette drizzled with sweet chilli sauce, and nasi lemak — coconut-flavoured rice paired with fried chicken, egg, cucumber, deep-fried crispy fingernail-length anchovies and a glob of sambal.

Try a cup of hot or iced teh cino, which is an extremely sweet tea and milk drink loosely based on cappuccino. For something more refreshing, go for teh o limau, sugary black tea infused with chunks of lime.

If you pick the right seat, you can have a fabulous view of the golden dome of the Sultan Mosque, the centrepiece of the Muslim quarter. This is a popular tourist spot, so it is maybe not the place for a relaxed meal.

Those with a passion for motoring will probably find this supper spot right up their street. The Fujiwara Tofu Concept Shop is modelled after the Japanese street-racing manga series Initial D, which has an avid following and was made into an Asian action flick in 2005.

Its façade looks as if it has come straight out of the comic, bearing the same name as the tofu store operated by Bunta Fujiwara, the father of Takumi Fujiwara, who is the main protagonist of the series.

No visit is complete without ordering a side of the titular Fujiwara tofu, deep-fried and topped with mildly spicy chilli. The store mainly serves finger food, from Japanese scallop sashimi to skewers of barbecue-glazed yakitori chicken thigh — ideally paired with a pint of Sapporo beer, or rounds of soju and sake.

Fans of Japanese-style izakaya dining are likely to feel at home here. But the real attraction is the cars that pull up to this eatery on a regular basis — the type of exotic motors often seen in posters on young petrolheads’ bedroom walls. Their drivers like to live out their Initial D fantasies by using the café as a backdrop for photos, although ironically parking spaces are limited.

Simpang Bedok is a legendary location for late-night food in eastern Singapore. It is not one restaurant, but a collection of places concentrated in one area offering a range of different cuisines.

Here you will find the Bedok Market Place, sited above a supermarket, where a variety of stalls serve up quick eats showcasing Singapore’s street- food culture. These are fine for dinner, but the market largely closes after 9pm. Surrounding the supermarket is a cluster of eateries where locals head for real supper food. These close later, after midnight, while some are open around the clock. One of the latter is the Indian-Muslim New Mahamoodiya Restaurant, located across the street from the Bedok Market complex. It has a seemingly endless menu of roti prata — Indian-style pancakes, prepared in a variety of ways. Roti prata paired with curry is a favourite supper dish with locals, and you can choose between sweet or savoury, stuffed with anything from egg to cheese to mushroom, or just on their own with the curry.

Roti prata is a crispier version of naan flatbread, and New Mahamoodiya’s creations are known to pack a crunch. One of the crunchiest is “tissue prata”, thin fried dough twisted into a shape resembling a wizard’s hat, and coated in sauces from caramel to honey and condensed milk.

Wash it all down with “Milo dino”, a cloyingly sweet chocolate-based drink topped with cocoa powder and sprinkles. Food at Simpang Bedok is greasy, sugary, spicy heaven.

Where do you go for late-night food in Singapore? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



I was born in Finland but, when I was three, my dad’s job transferred the family to Singapore, where I spent my childhood and grew up. My parents were both very interested in tennis, which was quite a big and relatively accessible sport in Singapore. I started playing when I was about six years old and, quite quickly, I noticed that, “OK, this is something that I’m actually quite good at.” Tennis became a full-time job on the side of school — I travelled all around Asia, playing in tournaments.

It is quite a hectic and stressful lifestyle. Most days would be packed with morning training, then I’d go to school and then, in the evening, training again. On weekends, I’d play tournaments. It was a lot of work. You sacrifice a lot; you don’t grow up as a normal kid. It’s not possible to go to late-night events or hang out with friends, because there is training the next morning, or travel for a tournament. But you also get a lot of opportunities.

After I graduated from high school, I got a full athletic scholarship to play division one college tennis, for the University of Wisconsin in Madison. I studied economics and my days continued being similar, filled with training, but, on the weekends, I would travel to different universities. It was fun — tennis was what I loved.

When the time came to look for a masters, I started thinking about leaving the US. I had been able to study there because of my scholarship, which paid not only my tuition but accommodation. Without it . . . university studies in the US are just so expensive. At the same time, I had started thinking about going back to my roots. I wanted to feel the Finnish side of me, as I had never really lived there.

I knew I wanted an international university, where I could study in English. Then I saw that the masters in business and management at Hanken School of Economics offered a specialisation in marketing, which was a perfect fit for how I pictured my future.

The programme was two years long, with a mix of many different courses and a thesis at the end. It was a very international group and a good mix of those who had come straight from the bachelors degree, versus some who had already worked and came back to do their masters. Hanken was smaller than the average US university, which I liked, as it meant students felt part of a community. The classes, being smaller, meant there was plenty of space for group work and interaction with classmates and professors.

There were also a lot of chances to get involved in activities and clubs, so I co-founded the Hanken tennis club. I was part of the masters committee, which organised events and workshops for masters students, and the sports committee, which planned activities for students. There were a lot of opportunities to feel part of the community.

Many of my favourite classes were marketing-related, but I also took a lot of finance and accounting classes to broaden my knowledge. Most interesting were probably strategic marketing and marketing communications, where we learn how to market across cultures. They helped give me a sense of which kind of marketing I wanted to do.

Many people think marketing is essentially advertising, but there’s so much more behind it. For example: how can you grow an audience for a sport? How can you make the experience better for the fans? That’s essentially what I do now. I work for a company called Two Circles, in Bern, in Switzerland. We grow the value of sports, backed by data. We use data to understand sports fans to, for example, grow audiences, increase engagement or improve ticketing strategies. It combines my passion for sports with what I learnt at Hanken on the marketing side.

The main things I took with me from Hanken were soft skills from group projects and presentations that the small class sizes enabled us to have. I learnt how to work with people, to listen and learn from others — how to ask constructive questions and maintain a solution mindset. A lot of those skills came from being active in student unions.

I want to keep working in the sports industry — I really enjoy it. And, one day, I think, I will want to return to Finland. My time at Hanken gave me time to get to know the country, and now Helsinki feels like home. I made a lot of friends there. I built a good base for when, in the future, at some point, I’ll want to move back.



India announced tax breaks for the middle classes and measures meant to improve the ease of doing business as Narendra Modi’s government unveiled its first full-year budget since an economic slowdown that followed his re-election last year.

The sweeteners for middle-income Indians, as well as small and mid-size businesses, came alongside steps aimed at reinvigorating the world’s fifth-biggest economy and reviving demand among urban consumers, a core political base for Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party.

Nirmala Sitharaman, finance minister, on Saturday announced an increase in the personal income tax threshold below which taxpayers owe no tax to Rs1.2mn ($13,842), up from Rs700,000, as well as an uplift in brackets for the rates levied on taxable income. She said that the government would introduce a new income tax bill next week.

The finance minister added that the new rates would “substantially reduce the taxes of the middle class and leave more money in their hands, boosting household consumption, savings and investment”, as ruling coalition MPs chanted “Modi, Modi”.

Among measures meant to make doing business easier, Sitharaman said a high-level committee for regulatory reforms that would review India’s rules, certifications, licences, and permissions governing business as well as the creation of an investment friendliness index of states, would be launched this year.

“A light touch regulatory framework based on principles and trust will unleash productivity and employment,” Sitharaman said.

Business groups have long urged India to reduce onerous paperwork and compliance burdens and reform the rules governing labour and land markets to stimulate investment and create jobs.

“The focus of the budget has, basically, come in consumption via taxation cuts to support lower income and middle income segments of society, because that’s where the pain point has been very visible,” said Madhavi Arora, chief economist at Emkay Global Financial Services in Mumbai.

India has bounced back since the Covid-19 pandemic and remains the world’s fastest-growing big economy, but GDP growth in the second fiscal quarter that ended in September was 5.4 per cent, the slowest in nearly two years.

Despite strong infrastructure spending by the state, private investment has been sluggish and job creation weak. Inflation has been trending near the top of the Reserve Bank of India’s mandated band of 4-6 per cent, limiting its scope to cut lending rates.

Vijayaraghavan Swaminathan, head of research at Avendus Spark Institutional Equities in Chennai, said the government’s intent in announcing the tax cuts was “very clear” and that they would give middle-class households “a breather”.

In a special trading session on Saturday, India’s benchmark Nifty 50 blue-chip index fell 0.5 per cent, though consumer stocks were buoyed by Sitharaman’s moves to lower income tax pressures.

“The market is confused as of now,” said Swaminathan. “A lot of numbers remain to be seen, including how the government is going to accommodate this tax collection hit.”

In India’s annual Economic Survey, published by the government on Friday, the finance ministry painted a stark picture of the challenges faced by the youth and the economy. These included a reliance on China for supply chains serving critical industries such as solar power, advanced batteries and electric vehicles.

The report, authored by Modi’s chief economic adviser V Anantha Nageswaran, also urged India’s central and state governments to “get out of the way” and deregulate the economy or face a “high risk of economic growth stagnation, if not economic stagnation”.

The report forecast real GDP growth of 6.4 per cent for the current fiscal year, down from 8.2 per cent in 2023-4. The government is forecasting growth of 6.3 to 6.8 per cent in the coming 2025-6 fiscal year.



Bimla Bissell, the social secretary to US ambassadors to India and legendary hostess, whose personal history tracked the country’s, has died aged 92. Outside of India, Bissell is best known as the animating force behind Fabindia, the textile and clothing brand founded by her American husband John Bissell.

Tributes since her death in January have used words like “catalyst”, “connector”, and “saloniste” to capture the place she occupied for decades in Delhi at a time when India’s traditionalist society and protected economy were opening to the wider world.

Some remember how Bissell dressed — elegant saris, bespoke outfits tailored from cotton kurta cloth, silver bangles — or the food she served. From the 1960s, the Bissells hosted a Christmas brunch attended by as many as 300-400 people that featured western breakfast meats like bacon and sausage alongside southern Indian vegetarian fare like dosas and idli.

“Bim was a quintessential Punjabi who had to feed you,” says Poonam Muttreja, a friend. Around the Bissells’ table at their house — first in South Delhi’s New Friends Colony, then later in Panchsheel Park — you would find artists and writers seated alongside politicians, diplomats with leftist nongovernmental activists — a curated but eclectic crowd engaged in sparky debate about India, sometimes for the benefit of prominent foreign visitors passing through town, from architect Buckminster Fuller and John F Kennedy Jr to Jordan’s Princess Firyal.

At these dinners, Bissell kept two tables at opposite ends of the room, strategically swapping guests between them when the conversation got too hot — “like putting control rods into a nuclear reactor” says William Bissell, Bimla’s son and managing director of Fabindia, when recalling his mother’s “two-table policy”.

Bimla Nanda Bissell — known to friends as Bim — was born in Quetta, British India, in 1932 (now Pakistan’s Balochistan province) to a father who was a veterinarian. She studied at Sacred Heart Convent School and Kinnaird College in Lahore before her family relocated to Pune and then Delhi in the months before Partition tore apart the subcontinent, when her father became the newly independent India’s husbandry commissioner.

Bissell had a brief and unhappy arranged marriage to a government aide. When it failed, she separated from him and went to the US to pursue a masters in education from the University of Michigan — an unusually independent move for an Indian woman at the time.

After returning to India in 1957, Bissell took over a nursery school her sister had founded in Delhi, transforming it into one of the city’s first Montessori schools. She also helped to develop the crafts base at the Central Cottage Industries Corp, a clearing house for traditional handicrafts and handloom textiles. The following year she met John Bissell, who was advising Indian craftspeople on a grant from the Ford Foundation. In a 2011 interview with The Hindu Business Line, she recalls her colleague saying to her, “He won’t last long, will you please give [him] your room for the time being?”

The couple wed five years later in the backyard of then-US ambassador Chester Bowles, a friend of John’s parents. By then, Bimla was working as a social secretary for US envoys, having first taken the role for Bowles’ predecessor John Kenneth Galbraith in 1961. (She would work for four, including Daniel Patrick Moynihan.) That same year, her husband founded Fabindia, though Bimla was crucial in forging contacts with artisans.

The brand found a market with its traditional saris, Nehru jackets and kurta pyjamas, bringing traditional styles and homespun fabrics into the present with bright colours and modern marketing.

In her role at Delhi’s US embassy, Bissell was key in shaping the ambassadors’ understanding of India at a time when the country leaned heavily toward the Soviet Union — Washington and Delhi had frequently testy ties. She played a similar role at the World Bank as external affairs officer for 21 years from 1975, helping the organisation’s expat staffers to navigate India but also introducing Indians to a multilateral institution they viewed with suspicion. “She was good at brokering — not having things escalate by bringing people to the table for dialogue,” her daughter Monsoon Bissell remembers.

John Bissell died in 1998, but Bimla remained a mentor to some, connector of many, and informal gatekeeper for prominent visitors to India. At one dinner in the mid-2010s, after the publication of The Blood Telegram, Gary J Bass’ book about the 1971 birth of Bangladesh which presented Richard Nixon’s India policy in a deeply unflattering light, Bissell’s children remember Henry Kissinger being grilled bluntly by other guests, but gamely fielding the questions.

According to Monsoon, when someone once approached her mother about writing a memoir, she replied: “That I can’t do because these stories belong to other people”. Her parents, she says, “had a front row seat on a changing world where they were both committed to making it easier for everyone around them”. “My mother showed up, always, no matter the circumstances, and never said no if she could help someone out,” Monsoon says. “That’s a dying art.”



Cauliflower plants stand in orderly rows across a patch of freshly tilled soil. Not yet in bloom, the garden is bordered by colourful tarpaulins, as if to shield the buds from wandering cattle. On one end, a low concrete boundary has been built, a subtle assertion of ownership. A water container rests serenely on a stone platform. Beyond the polyester divider, a bamboo hut peeks into view, its slanting roof also padded with tarpaulin. Perhaps it’s the home of the person who owns the vegetable patch.

Looking at this photograph, one might imagine it was taken deep in India’s hinterlands, where bamboo huts remain a familiar sight and growing vegetables is a way of life. But this hut and the garden were located not in a village but on a major road leading to Delhi.

Photographer Gauri Gill’s The Village on the Highway is a visual homage to an extraordinary feat of imagination, one that sprung from a year-long stand-off between the Indian state and the people who till the land. Its roots lie in three controversial laws passed in 2020 to reform the agricultural sector, which employs about half of the population, most of them earning woefully little. Prime Minister Narendra Modi claimed ownership of the reforms, asserting they granted farmers autonomy. Freed from socialist-era price regulations and local middlemen’s diktats, farmers were now ostensibly free to sell their crops to the highest bidder, whether state-owned companies or global supply chains.

The intended beneficiaries did not see it that way. Already strained by rising costs, recurrent droughts and mounting debts, many farmers feared they would be thrust into an unequal marketplace, putting their livelihoods at the mercy of powerful corporations.

Initially, groups of farmers staged protests in their regions. Two months later, frustrated by the government’s refusal to listen, some of them marched en masse towards Delhi. That November, hundreds of thousands of farmers, many of them Sikh, set off on foot and in farming vehicles — tractors, tempos, truck trailers — from Punjab and Haryana, north India’s agrarian heartlands.

But the convoy could not enter the capital. At the Singhu border, police and paramilitary personnel stood behind tall metal barricades armed with batons, water cannons and tear gas. The farmers refused to back off. Instead they decided to lay siege to the border, blocking the highway.

Setting up a temporary base required enormous creativity and resourcefulness, efforts that caught Gill’s attention when she visited the Singhu border. “They began to repurpose the very vehicles that they had arrived on, or the farming equipment that they used daily and knew intimately, into uniquely habitable homes,” she tells me over email. Uncertain how long they would stay, the farmers created spaces where they could sleep, cook and bathe. Where an empty road had stood, there were suddenly bedrooms, storerooms and living rooms. Communal spaces such as libraries, medical camps, small shops and round-the-clock kitchens manifested as if out of thin air.

As a photographer, Gill was drawn to this “handmade and homegrown architecture of resistance”, as she calls it, which was built on the farmers’ ability to evoke beauty using the barest of objects and materials. “Doors appeared through tarpaulin, walls arose from bamboo and thermocol, and string and tape held together wood,” she recalls.

Each makeshift structure carried a spark of individuality, a touch of quirkiness. Some featured plain jute curtains, others synthetic ones adorned with bold floral patterns. Doors ranged from plain cloth nailed to the backs of trucks to solid bamboo constructions complete with windows, frames and latches.

As with much of her previous work, Gill’s focus was on highlighting “the beauty and generosity in places of profound precarity and acute injustice”. The absence of people in these photographs — a deliberate choice to protect their identities — does not diminish their centrality. Each domestic object, a pot on a stove or a bucket of bathing water, conveys their presence.

The farmers stayed for four seasons. In summer, ­khus- (vetiver) infused air coolers were installed. In colder months, thick blankets padded the walls. In the monsoons, mosquito nets shrouded the sleeping areas.

Some of these items arrived with friends and relatives from villages hundreds of miles away, along with fresh food supplies grown in the farms to sustain the langars, or communal kitchens, a cornerstone of the Sikh way of life. The langars fed not only the protesters and their allies but also the police officers posted at the border. Yet, despite their efforts to persevere, hundreds of protesters died, succumbing to harsh weather conditions, age-related complications, dengue fever, accidents and illnesses.

In November 2021, the government passed a motion to repeal the laws. With their mission accomplished, the farmers dismantled their temporary homes, bid farewell to friends and comrades, and began their journeys home.

The Indian farmers’ protest of 2020—21 is remembered as one of the longest non-violent protests in contemporary history. It is also a rare instance of ordinary citizens triumphing over an unyielding state. Yet it was marked by countless moments when it seemed that the lights were about to go out.

“The stand-off had gone on so long, it seemed nothing might ever change,” Gill recalls. “Farmers were dying. I felt down, even as a visitor.” Yet their spirits did not waver. “I remember doughty elders saying to me, ‘One day the tide will turn.’”

Gill reflects on the Sikh phrase Chardi Kala, which means choosing optimism even when you can see the difficulties that lie ahead, indeed because of those difficulties. She could feel the farmers drawing strength from it. “I saw that spirit,” she says.

“The Village on the Highway” is at Vadehra Art Gallery, New Delhi, from February 4 to March 4

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend Magazine on X and FT Weekend on Instagram



Good morning. Journalists all over the world have worn down the “A” and “I” keys on their computers this week and I am no exception. Media companies owned by India’s richest people — Mukesh Ambani and Gautam Adani — have joined a copyright infringement lawsuit against OpenAI in the Delhi high court. This is the first big case that could determine some critical issues around training rules for generative AI.

But first, let’s set the scene for tomorrow. Just another Saturday for the world. But Budget Day for India.

I will confess that over the past few years my interest in the Union Budget waned. It was becoming a noisy event with little impact on on-the-ground realities. There would be some bickering about this or that tax for a few days and then we would all go back to our regular lives. But tomorrow when finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman presents her budget proposals in parliament, I’ll be paying close attention. This (financial) year India has been caught in a deadlock of a falling growth rate, high inflation, high interest rates and high unemployment, and Sitharaman’s proposals have the power to determine the course of the economy.

My guess is that the minister will rely on public spending on infrastructure to boost growth. This will spread public money more widely in the economy and drive up job numbers. Besides, this has been a cornerstone of the Modi government; great roads are also a good talking point during elections. But Sitharaman will have to keep an eye on the fiscal deficit, which the government has targeted at 4.9 per cent of GDP for the year ending March, and so the amount of money she can allocate to infrastructure development will be restricted.

One perennial budget demand is for a cut in income taxes for the salaried middle-class in India. This year, though, the frustration of this segment — which pays taxes but does not access some public services like government-run schools or hospitals — is particularly intense. There is all kinds of speculation about proposed changes, but the most persistent one is that a fourth tax bracket might be introduced. According to local media reports, the government is working on a new income tax act to replace the current law and has been consulting experts for feedback and suggestions. My guess is that it will be unveiled at a later date (perhaps with a complicated Hindi name like the Indian Penal Code, or Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, was in 2024) and the big changes in the tax structure will come then.

The one thing I feel certain about is that there will be some AI-related announcements. The budget speech has, in recent years, become an exercise in signalling intent by the government. This week there has been a lot of angst about India’s inability to develop an innovative AI product like China’s DeepSeek. The government will use the budget to announce an initiative or two to get on the AI bandwagon. However, these kinds of programmes have had limited success in the past. Schemes like Start up India, Skill India and Digital India, which were announced with much fanfare, have seen their budget outlays shrink every year.

Sitharaman’s budget speeches have got shorter over the years. In 2020, she spoke for two hours and 40 minutes, but in 2023 wrapped it up in 87 minutes. (I’m ignoring 2024 because it was an election year and there were two mini-budgets). I only hope she keeps it crisp this year and focuses on the larger, more important points that will help move the needle on the economy and not get bogged down with detailed explanations about minor initiatives. It’s a Saturday, after all.

Do you have any questions about the Budget? Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply and we’ll answer them next week.

On the off chance that I haven’t typed AI enough times today, here’s some more. OpenAI is having a terrible week. Globally, it was rattled by the emergence of a scrappier competitor, DeepSeek, and in India, large media companies joined publishers in a lawsuit against the US company. As chronicled by Indian media, the original case was filed by the Indian newswire service, Asian News International (ANI), in November 2024 in the Delhi high court. ANI alleged that OpenAI was training ChatGPT using copyrighted content without authorisation. In early January, the Federation of Indian Publishers joined the case and this week, the Digital News Publishers Association — whose members include media houses owned by Ambani and Adani — filed interventions in the case too. OpenAI has questioned the jurisdiction of the court and is contesting the addition of the two new groups since the key issues raised by them are different from those being contested with ANI. (Book publishers, for example, contend that ChatGPT publishes summaries and extracts, but OpenAI’s view is that it picks up the information from publicly available sources and therefore there is no infringement of copyright.)

The case will be keenly watched as it is grapples with critical questions about copyright in the age of generative artificial intelligence. Most significantly, the court could determine that use of copyrighted data qualifies as “fair use” for AI developers. If OpenAI is able to convince the court of this, it will open up an enormous trove of material to train its software on. (The company is facing similar lawsuits in other countries too.) Detailed hearings are scheduled to begin on February 21. I’ll keep you posted.

Tragedy struck at the Kumbh Mela this week when a stampede broke out early on Wednesday morning. Here’s what we know, so far.

It’s a working weekend for me, alas, and I will be spending most of it in front of a screen. If I can manage to find some time, I hope to get started on the gritty sequel of Paatal Lok on Amazon Prime. I know I’m way behind most people on this, but I have been watching Black Warrant on Netflix and it fulfils my weekly quota for gruesome content, thank you very much. As a palate cleanser between episodes, I watched this lovely Thai film, How to Make Millions before Grandma Dies (also on Netflix). I highly recommend it.

It’s been a very busy work week and my reading, too, is suffering. I have been dipping into Nina Stibbe’s memoir Went to London, Took the Dog for a few minutes before bed every night. It’s hilarious and wholesome.

I’m afraid I don’t have any strong recommendations for anything else this weekend (or next, actually). Send me yours.

What is Nato trying to prevent by deploying drones, submarines, ships and aircraft in the Baltic Sea?

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

On Tuesday, we asked: Do you think the Indian stock market will bounce back after the budget? It’s a close one, here are the results.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited today by Mure Dickie. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



India’s billionaire Ambani family has won the bidding battle for a stake in the first of eight English cricket teams being put up for auction by the sport’s governing body as it seeks to raise hundreds of millions of pounds.The family saw off competition from private equity firm CVC Capital Partners as it emerged victorious in the the fight for the Oval Invincibles, according to three people familiar with the matter.

The London-based franchise on Thursday became the first from The Hundred — a short-form contest that takes place each summer in England — to open up to outside investment in an online bidding process for a 49 per cent stake in each entity. CVC declined to comment.

A stake in Birmingham Phoenix was also on the block, with bidding for stakes in the remaining teams set for the coming days, as the opportunity to buy into English cricket attracts a range of international investors.

The England and Wales Cricket Board, which is selling the team stakes, has pitched The Hundred auction as a rare chance to buy into a closed league in one of the sport’s biggest markets. It hopes to emulate the success of the Indian Premier League, one of the world’s richest sports properties with multibillion-dollar TV deals. However, The Hundred is still in its infancy and brings in just £40mn a year from broadcast rights.

The Glazer family, which controls the Manchester United football team, and a consortium that includes Chelsea Football Club co-owner Todd Boehly, are among potential suitors who have shown interest in buying stakes in the franchises. Owners of several teams in the lucrative Indian Premier League are also expected to bid.

Victory for the Ambanis means they have exclusivity and are set to finalise documentation in the coming weeks, according to one of the people. Taking the stake in Oval Invincibles would add to their global cricket interests, which include teams in South Africa, the US and the United Arab Emirates.

The Ambanis, majority owners of Reliance Industries, are among India’s richest and most influential families, with their business interests extending from energy to telecommunications.

The family also has interests in entertainment and sport, including ownership of the Mumbai Indians cricket franchise, five-time winners of the lucrative IPL. At last year’s Paris Olympics, Nita Ambani, who is married to tycoon Mukesh Ambani, campaigned for India to host a future Games.

The sale of the eight teams that compete in The Hundred is a pivotal moment for the future of the game. The ECB initially aimed to raise £500mn from the auction process but has recently discussed a figure of £350mn.

That money has been earmarked to help professional cricket clubs invest in infrastructure upgrades and new revenue sources, such as building hotels or conference facilities at their stadiums. It will also help some clubs reduce their debts.

The ECB hopes the arrival of professional investors into The Hundred will boost the competition’s appeal both at home and abroad by bringing in fresh expertise in areas such as marketing and fan engagement.

The new owners will also enable the ECB to increase some of the spending caps in the contest so that it can compete for top cricket talent against the many other short-form competitions that have sprung up across the world.

Bringing in deep-pocketed investors will also help The Hundred to attract top cricketers to play in the competition, at a time when star talent can command seven-figure sums to participate in the IPL.

However, the competition itself has proved controversial with long-standing cricket fans, with critics complaining that the format is simply a gimmick designed for children and casual viewers.



India’s government is under pressure to turn around a slowing economy but with little room to manoeuvre as it prepares to present one of the most consequential budgets since Prime Minister Narendra Modi came to power more than a decade ago.

Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman is facing expectations to announce tax cuts, new capital expenditure and reforms to India’s regulatory regime when she unveils the first full budget of Modi’s third term on Saturday.

But her ability to revive an economy mired in a broad slowdown — and allay discontent among the ruling Bharatiya Janata party’s middle- and upper-class political base — may be limited.

India’s pace of growth, while still the fastest among large economies, is heading for a post-pandemic low, dragged down by weaker urban consumption, persistent food inflation, stagnant wage and job growth and sluggish private sector investment.

Second-quarter fiscal year growth, the most recent reported, was 5.4 per cent, the slowest pace in nearly two years, and the central bank downgraded growth forecasts for the 2024-25 fiscal year.

“There are a lot of pressures — there has been a cyclical slowdown,” said Shumita Deveshwar, chief India economist with GlobalData.TSLombard. “We have to see whether they will stick with that fiscal discipline they have exhibited over the past few years”, or “do more on welfare spending”.

New Delhi recently named Sanjay Malhotra, a former revenue secretary, as Reserve Bank of India governor, a move markets saw as both a changing of the guard and a commitment to the government’s recent record of stronger growth and fiscal rectitude.

India’s fiscal deficit is below 5 per cent of GDP and falling, and the government resisted the temptation to unleash populist spending measures in last year’s post-election budget plan, which followed a nationwide poll in which the BJP lost its parliamentary majority.

“This is a finance ministry that values prudence,” said Shilan Shah, deputy chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, which expects weaker growth in the first half of this year before a gradual recovery. “A big stimulus package looks unlikely.”

However, Shah added that boosting spending on infrastructure — a hallmark of Modi’s tenure — “would help to support economic activity in the near term while also lifting the economy’s medium-term supply potential”.

Spending is already rising in some states, including Maharashtra and Karnataka, where the BJP and opposition rivals are vying to outdo one another with politically driven, open-ended welfare spending promises, pushing the country’s consolidated budget deficit close to 8 per cent of GDP. Local elections are also looming this year in Delhi and Bihar, India’s third-largest state.

Working in India’s favour, economists expect the country’s inward-focused economy to avoid the brunt of Donald Trump’s expected barrage of tariffs on countries such as China. In a call this week, the US president urged his Indian counterpart to buy more American-made weapons, and Trump later said Modi would probably visit the White House in February.

The finance minister’s budget address will be followed less than a week later by the RBI’s first monetary policy decision under Malhotra, who replaced the more hawkish Shaktikanta Das.

Malhotra has been facing calls to cut rates from powerful Modi allies, including finance minister Sitharaman and commerce minister Piyush Goyal, who favour lower borrowing costs to support growth, despite inflation that remains close to the top of the central bank’s 4-6 per cent target band.

Many economists expect the RBI to begin easing rates from its current 6.5 per cent level, particularly after it announced measures this week amounting to a near $18bn liquidity infusion in the cash-starved banking sector.

But Kunal Kundu, India economist at Société Générale, cautioned that the economic vulnerabilities were structural, rather than transitory. He said fundamental shifts, including a focus on education and healthcare investment, were needed for India to create more formal jobs for its huge and under-skilled labour force.

“Employment and wages remain at the heart of the slowdown,” said Kundu. “What’s required is not rocket science: basically, you have to have policies that eventually enable more job generation.”



Police have said 30 people died in a crush at a Hindu festival in northern India, where millions have gathered for what is considered to be the world’s largest religious event.

Vaibhav Krishna, the deputy inspector general of police for the festival, told a press conference that a further 60 people were injured in the stampede at the Kumbh Mela in Uttar Pradesh state in the early hours of Wednesday morning.

Krishna said “three or four” barriers leading to the confluence of the Yamuna and Ganges rivers had collapsed and that many of the devotees who were killed had been sleeping before they were trampled on.

Emergency services were deployed to the scene and injured pilgrims were taken to nearby hospitals for treatment. Local media broadcast images from the scene showed what appeared to be bodies being taken away. Many of those injured were reported to be in critical condition.

“We were a group of 10 people, but now only two of us women are left,” one witness told domestic news channel ABP News. “One person was trampled to death right in front of us. As for the others, we have no idea what happened to them.”

The 45-day festival is a major cultural and spiritual event for India’s more than 1bn Hindus, who believe bathing in the sacred rivers during the Kumbh Mela washes away their sins.

Officials expect about 450mn people to attend this year’s festival, which has been described as the largest single gathering in the world.

It is also a prestige event for Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has promoted domestic religious tourism during his decade in power, including the inauguration of the Ram temple last year on the site of a razed mosque in Ayodhya, also in Uttar Pradesh.

At a briefing in New Delhi this month, officials from the state, which is governed by Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party, said they had invested heavily in infrastructure for the Kumbh Mela and cited a report by investment bank Jefferies that forecast it would generate Rs2tn ($23bn) for the economy.

While local authorities touted their careful preparations ahead of the event, its sheer scale poses challenges for crowd control and safety. Fatalities have occurred in previous years.

Speaking at a public rally in Delhi, Modi described the accident as “a tragedy”.

“We have lost some pious souls, many have been injured. I express my condolences to the affected families,” the prime minister said. “There was some disruption in the bathing but now for many hours, pilgrims have been bathing smoothly.”

Yogi Adityanath, Uttar Pradesh’s chief minister, advised pilgrims to bathe in the Ganges at the ghat, or waterfront stairs, that were closest to them, and to avoid the river confluence where the stampede occurred.

“Bathing is taking place peacefully,” Adityanath, a Hindu cleric and powerful ally of the prime minister, wrote on social media site X. In a later statement, the chief minister said the state government had decided there should be a judicial inquiry into the incident.



US President Donald Trump has pushed India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi to buy more American-made weapons, as he called for the countries to rebalance their trade relationship in a call late on Monday.

Trump emphasised that India should be increasing its “procurement of American-made security equipment and moving towards a fair bilateral trading relationship”, according to a White House statement issued after the call between the leaders, which the US called “productive”.

Trump and Modi cultivated a close relationship during the US president’s first term, and New Delhi has been a strategic partner in Washington’s efforts to counter an increasingly assertive Beijing.

But Trump also called India a “very big abuser” on trade during his re-election campaign last year, and analysts pointed to areas of friction between the countries, such as their trade deficit, Indian imports of Russian oil and the flow of Indian immigrants to the US.

“The bilateral relationship is very likely to remain a strong one under Trump 2.0, yet transactional, in which President Trump will also require some concessions from India,” said Rani Mullen, a senior visiting fellow at the Centre for Policy Research in New Delhi.

The US is India’s second-largest trading partner, narrowly trailing China, and New Delhi recorded a $35bn trade surplus with Washington between January and November 2024, according to the latest data from India’s commerce ministry. Trump has threatened to impose tariffs on Brics countries, a grouping of major emerging economies that includes India.

In a social media post late on Monday, Modi called Trump a “dear friend” and said they were “committed to a mutually beneficial and trusted partnership” in several areas, including security.

Trump later told reporters that Modi would visit the White House “probably in February”, which would make the Indian leader among the first foreign dignitaries to visit since the US president’s inauguration.

Trump’s requests came as India, long the world’s largest arms importer, has been seeking to diversify its weapons suppliers beyond Russia. It has leaned on the US, along with other countries such as France, to close a gap in military technology and preparedness with regional rival China.

Modi has also pushed India’s military to support domestic arms manufacturers, part of his ambition for the defence and aviation industries to help make the country a global manufacturing power. Modi has set a target of $35bn for domestic defence production by the end of the decade, up from nearly $20bn last year.

New Delhi needs to upgrade its military capabilities if it is to match those of nuclear-armed neighbour China, according to analysts, including in fighter jets, submarines, tanks, helicopters and even assault rifles. While some domestic arms makers have such capabilities, India lacks critical knowhow for technologies such as military jet engines.

Trump and Modi also discussed expanding security co-operation in the Indo-Pacific region and reiterated their commitment to the Quad — a strategic grouping that also includes Japan and Australia — according to the White House. India is set to host the group’s leaders this year.

The call coincided with a visit by India’s foreign secretary Vikram Misri to Beijing on Tuesday, during which the countries agreed in principle to resume direct passenger flights for the first time in five years. The routes were initially suspended during the Covid pandemic, and remained so after deadly border clashes in 2020 soured relations.

Trump said he and Modi also discussed immigration, a priority for the new US administration, adding that the Indian prime minister would “do what’s right” in terms of accepting the return of illegal Indian nationals from the US.

Indians made up the third-largest group of unauthorised immigrants in the US in 2022 after Mexico and El Salvador, according to the Pew Research Center.



On a sunny early January afternoon, two thousand fishermen, farmers and activists gathered on the dry river bed outside Kotri Barrage in Pakistan, the final dam before the waters of the Indus flow into the Arabian Sea.

“Send this message to Islamabad, send this message to Pindi: we will not drink your gutter water!” shouted one activist, referring to Rawalpindi, where the army is headquartered. “We reject the canal!” roared the crowd.

The protests were against a Rs200bn ($720mn) project to build canals that would divert water upstream to eastern Pakistan. There, an agricultural company led by the military, Green Pakistan, hopes to turn a large swath of desert into fertile farmland that will guarantee a steady supply of grain and attract investment from Gulf states.

The canal project is being directed by the government, but led by the Special Investment Facilitation Council, an investment body co-led by Asim Munir, Pakistan’s army chief of staff. Other SIFC initiatives, led mostly by serving and retired officers, include plans to renovate hotels at the foot of the snowcapped peaks in Pakistan’s north and schemes to exploit mineral and natural gas riches in the mountainous frontier with Afghanistan.

Proponents say the army’s role is crucial in projects like this: as well as cutting through red tape and settling the squabbles that have prevented Pakistan from developing export and tourism sectors, it can draw in much-needed foreign investment and reshape one of Asia’s most troubled economies.

The army has always had an outsized role in Pakistani politics. No fewer than four military dictators have ruled the country since independence in 1947 — most recently Pervez Musharraf, who was ejected from power in 2008. Even when civilian governments have been in power, there is widespread evidence that army chiefs have held considerable sway.

Analysts and officials say that the military’s influence over the country’s civilian government is at its highest level since Musharraf’s resignation.

But in recent years especially, the tentacles of the military have extended even further, deep into Pakistan’s economy. A 2021 UN report described military-linked businesses as the “largest conglomerate in Pakistan”. And at the launch of Pakistan’s new five-year economic plan on New Year’s eve, Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif publicly thanked chief of staff Munir for helping save the country from the brink of default in June 2023.

“I must tell you, without any fear of any kind of exaggeration, that I . . . never experienced this kind of co-operation which I’ve received from the army chief and the institution,” he told the audience.

Critics warn that the military’s ever-expanding economic footprint raises the risk that it will favour its own interests over others. There are also concerns that its involvement in politics and the economy is distracting it from counterterrorism work, increasing societal unrest and deterring foreign investment.

The military’s presence also offers acute challenges for the political factions that govern this country of 240mn people. The Pakistan People’s party is the third-largest party in Islamabad and the ruling party in Sindh — a province of 50mn people where there is widespread opposition to the canal project.

The party can either resist “or sell out, letting other, more violent and nationalist forces step in”, says Naveed Qamar, one of its senior members of the national parliament. “We could see our support completely collapse in Sindh.”

Munir has leaned into the army’s “saviour complex”, says Madiha Afzal, a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington. The military has come to believe “that it alone can fix Pakistan, that it alone can guarantee the political stability needed for economic progress and can ensure that the economic ship is righted,” she adds.

Pakistan’s military leaders began ramping up their involvement in economic matters around the time of Imran Khan’s ascent to power in 2018. Amid an economic slowdown and the accelerating growth of its great rival, India, the military played a prominent role in Khan’s rise.

But the former prime minister fell out with the top brass, and generals grew more sceptical that electoral democracy could deliver growth, enable Pakistan to compete with India or serve the army’s own widespread political and business interests, analysts and former officials say.

The need for a rethink became more acute as Pakistan’s importance to the outside world waned. “Ten years ago, the US was in Afghanistan, so Pakistan’s geopolitical position was secure,” says Stefan Dercon, a professor at Oxford who has advised Sharif on economic reform. “They could expect to be seen as too big to fail.”

Counting on waivers and bailouts from friendly countries worried that its collapse might put nuclear weapons within the reach of Islamist terror groups, Pakistan put off serious structural reforms. “It was an overdraft without ever needing to be called in,” says Dercon. “That’s changed now.”

When Munir became chief of the army staff in November 2022, seven months after Khan was ousted and replaced by Sharif, the country was still haemorrhaging dollar reserves, inflation was rocketing and insurgencies were starting to flare up along the Afghanistan border.

Since then, the general has made saving the economy a core part of his public image. Last November, he told a group of businessmen in Karachi that “all indicators of Pakistan’s economy are positive”, according to a report by the state news agency. “Where are the people now who spread disappointment and talked about default?” he added.

Munir has secured an extension to his term, potentially allowing him to stay in office for 10 years rather than the usual maximum of six.

Pakistan’s elected government now comprises an alliance of parties whose leaders have all fallen foul of the army in the past, but have united to prevent Khan — whose allies won the most votes in last February’s contested election — from returning to power.

With Khan in prison, the government wants to use its time in power to pursue ambitious reforms that ministers say will transform Pakistan’s boom-and-bust economy.

Their close ties to the army, they say, insulate them from the feuds and public backlashes that have prevented past prime ministers from completing full terms.

“There is a broad understanding between all pillars of state that any political uncertainty and political instability would be suicidal for Pakistan,” says planning minister Ahsan Iqbal. “There is very good positive synergy . . . between the establishment [a common euphemism for the military] and the government to take this economic recovery path together,” he tells the Financial Times.

In addition to Munir sitting atop the SIFC, alongside the prime minister, serving generals also run Pakistan’s national population registry, its anti-corruption watchdog and task forces pursuing tax reform and the renegotiation of energy contracts.

Munir also directed a 2023 operation against currency smuggling, while admirers also cite his ties to the Gulf monarchies that Pakistan depends upon for financing.

One senior government official acknowledges that “there has definitely been mission creep”, but blames politicians: “We failed to take the steps we should have taken before to fix the economy.”

“[The army] acts as a nudge to get us to tax our voter bank, or right-size the government,” the official adds. “They see themselves as guardrails for the economic reform journey.”

In the 18 months since Pakistan’s near-default, the country has returned to a semblance of economic stability. In September, it secured a $7bn IMF bailout and inflation fell to 4.1 per cent in December — having peaked at 38 per cent in June 2023. The central bank has cut interest rates and has enough dollar reserves to cover over two months of imports.

To shore up its finances and retain IMF support, Pakistan’s government raised taxes on salaried workers, removed popular energy subsidies and promised to introduce taxes on the politically sensitive agriculture and real estate sectors. It has also said it would slash trade tariffs by a third over three years.

But the country’s economy is still growing more slowly than its population, with a million more people entering the workforce each year than there are formal jobs. “Growth is still very low,” says Hasnain Malik, head of equity and investment strategy at emerging and frontier market research company Tellimer.

“The huge devaluation of the currency has left its scars on consumption power without yet triggering an export boom, and external debt refinancing needs are still very high.”

In mid-January, a group of Pakistani wind energy executives sat down in a conference room in a military base in Rawalpindi.

According to two of those present, a team of bureaucrats flanked by half a dozen uniformed army officers demanded that they revise the state-backed contracts they had signed years before — changes the government says would bring down electricity prices for ordinary people.

One of the executives says they were informed by a bureaucrat that “if you do not want to work with us, we will let the right people get in touch” — meaning one of the officers behind him.

“The message was clear,” says the executive, who asked to remain anonymous. “We will probably need to shut down our wind farm in Sindh to avoid going into default now.”

The episode was the one of several negotiations with power producers that Pakistani authorities, with the support of the security services, have undertaken since August.

Nadeem Anjum, the then head of Inter-Services Intelligence, Pakistan’s foreign spy agency, also met energy executives towards the end of 2024 to discuss renegotiating power contracts.

A decade ago, Pakistan attracted heavy foreign investment in its power sector by promising dollar-indexed, state-guaranteed returns. But the recent surge in electricity prices has turned such investors into public villains.

Sharif has celebrated these renegotiations as proof that his government will take bold steps to bring down power bills. But they have unnerved the business community and foreign investors, according to seven energy sector executives who shared details with the Financial Times.

“We can’t lawyer up and go to arbitration — we have to live and do business in this country,” complains another energy executive who had his contract terminated last year.

A Ministry of Power spokesperson says the ongoing renegotiations “will be according to law and with mutual agreement as in the past”.

A letter sent by the German embassy to Munir in October, and seen by the FT, questioned the “unusual manner” in which negotiations over Rousch Power, a company in which a unit of German engineering giant Siemens held a significant stake, were being conducted. It went on to warn that the affair was “already damaging the trust of German enterprises and investors”.

Siemens confirmed that Pakistan’s government had asked to renegotiate the power contracts but did not comment on the contents of the letter. Germany’s foreign ministry offered no comment either.

Critics say that these disputes are hindering Islamabad’s efforts to pursue other reforms, such as the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines. One businessman, who also asked for anonymity, says that having his company’s power contract terminated had forced him to pull out of talks about the airline.

Two other investors say their participation in a second round of bidding for PIA will depend on the government protecting their stakes in the airline. They also say that they plan to reach out to Fauji Foundation, a conglomerate linked to the military, to join their consortium “as an insurance policy”.

While a loss of external investment could yet create an incentive for reform, Ahmed Pirzada, a senior lecturer at the University of Bristol, says there is also “a risk that the country’s elites will respond by consolidating their control over resources, effectively grabbing a larger share of a shrinking economic pie to maintain their lifestyles”.

Azeema Cheema, a director at Verso Consulting, adds that the government’s unpopularity incentivises it “to stick to the few friends it has left, instead of governing for the public at large”.

Last year’s budget was peppered with pork-barrel spending and tax breaks, with legislators, bureaucrats and serving and retired military officers among the main beneficiaries. “The whole idea becomes spend, spend, spend on initiatives that . . . serve only to appease their household guards,” adds Cheema.

Pakistan’s military has also launched a broad-based crackdown against political opponents. Thousands of members of Khan’s Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party have been taken to anti-terrorism and military courts, while many senior leaders have gone into hiding.

The detentions have drawn criticism from abroad, with the EU warning in late December that military trials for civilians were inconsistent with commitments Pakistan had made to gain access to a preferential trade agreement that has been a lifeline to its textile sector.

Since last year, protests like those in Sindh have erupted throughout the country. Demonstrators calling for Khan’s release clashed with police in Islamabad and others in Balochistan and Pakistan-administered Kashmir staged sit-ins and strikes over crackdowns on civil rights.

Government and military officials say a muscular approach is needed to defeat terrorism and ensure the political stability necessary for investors to feel safe. But they have denied that their actions violate Pakistan’s constitution, and insist the military does not participate in politics.

The Pakistan Armed Forces and SIFC did not reply to repeated requests for comment.

Meanwhile, critics warn that public disaffection with the government is only increasing. They point to increasingly brutal insurgencies that last year led to more than 2,000 deaths in the western provinces where Pakistan is keen on tapping into mineral and gas reserves.

In Balochistan, “it is hard to find a single family that does not have someone missing or killed”, says Mahvish Ahmad, a professor in human rights and politics at the London School of Economics. The province is home to a Chinese-backed port, Gwadar, and Pakistan hopes to develop a giant copper mine there.

Sharif’s coalition has also sought to tighten its grip over the internet and social media, claiming that misinformation is undermining public faith in the government and the armed forces.

Kalsoom Lakhani, the co-founder of i2i Ventures, a Pakistan-focused venture capital firm, says throttling the internet “acts as a ceiling on the Pakistani start-up space and commerce as a whole”.

“The arbitrariness of all of it also adds to overall uncertainty,” she adds, scaring investors away from an industry that contributed over $3bn in export earnings last year.

Afzal, of the Brookings Institution, says the military “sees political repression as generating political stability, which is needed for economic stability”.

“But that political stability comes via cementing its own hold on power, with a politically subservient civilian government nominally in charge,” she adds. “Pakistan’s democracy looks worse now than at any point since 2008.”

Additional reporting by Chris Kay in Mumbai and Patricia Nilsson in Frankfurt

Data visualisation by Janina Conboye



Good morning. India’s stock markets started yet another week in deep red, as quarterly results of big companies provided little cheer. Saturday’s budget announcements will determine where the markets go next.

In today’s newsletter, we take a look at the performance of the banking sector and what that says about the economy. Plus, India is alarmed by China’s plans to build the world’s largest dam in Tibet.

India’s banking sector is having a difficult year, with rising bad debts and a weak outlook for credit growth. The quarterly earnings of major private banks, which were announced this month, show a larger number of customers defaulting on the interest payment of their loans. These defaults are highest in the unsecured loans category — credit cards and personal loans.

Amitabh Chaudhry, chief executive of Axis Bank, said it was a “tough environment” and expected both deposit and credit growth to be subdued until 2026. HDFC Bank, the country’s largest private lender by market capitalisation, reported a 17 per cent rise in provisions (money set aside to cover potential bad loans), a sign it is preparing for higher defaults in the future. ICICI Bank, which announced its results on Friday, offered better news overall but it, too, saw its provisions rise.

Together with the results of consumer goods companies, which are witnessing slowing demand especially in urban areas, these numbers illustrate the real troubles in the economy. Rising inflation has forced the Reserve Bank of India to keep interest rates high, leading to significant slowdowns in consumption and credit growth. The government this month revised down its GDP growth forecast for the year starting in April to 6.4 per cent.

In a surprise move yesterday, the central bank announced three measures to inject liquidity into the banking system. These included open market purchase auctions of government securities, a variable rate repo auction (where the central bank allows banks to borrow at a variable interest rate, which is determined through an auction), and a foreign exchange swap where the RBI buys US dollars from banks and strikes a deal to sell them at a later date.

This sets the scene for Saturday, when finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman is scheduled to announce her budget proposals in parliament. My hope is that she will produce some more magic to break the deadlock of high interest rates and weaker GDP growth that has lately plagued the economy.

Have questions about the budget? Send them to us and we’ll answer them next week. Hit reply or email indiabrief@ft.com.

India is alarmed about China’s plans to build the world’s biggest dam in Tibet. The 60-gigawatt project is three times the size of China’s Three Gorges, which is currently the world’s largest hydropower facility, and could cost $137bn. The proposed dam is on the Yarlung Tsangpo river, the Tibetan name for the Brahmaputra, and lies close to Arunachal Pradesh. India’s worries are related to security as well the ecological repercussions of this construction. The dam will give China the power to control water supply to Arunachal Pradesh, including the ability to flood parts of the state. It will also probably change the flow of the river and have an impact on the availability of water downstream even during peacetime.

India’s concerns also underline the uneasy relationship between the two large neighbours. After four years of tensions along the Line of Actual Control, in October 2024 the two countries reached a deal to de-escalate the military stand-off. Subsequently, Prime Minister Narendra Modi met China’s President Xi Jinping on the sidelines of the Brics summit in Russia for their first bilateral meeting in five years. Both countries have since withdrawn tens of thousands of troops from the region.

But the dam sets up the prospect of intensifying competition over water resources between the two nations. India has announced plans to build what would be the subcontinent’s largest dam, the Siang Upper Multipurpose Project, in Arunachal Pradesh. (Caught between the two is the smaller Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, which too has built several medium-sized dams on the same river.) That there will be a significant ecological impact from this is a given, even if China is promoting it as an environmentally-friendly sustainable source of electricity. India is right to be concerned about the strategic edge the dam gives China, but it has limited options to counter the threat.

Global investors made the best use of booming secondary markets and offloaded a record amount of private equity stakes in 2024

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Do you think the Indian stock market will bounce back next week after the budget? Take part in our poll here.

On Friday we asked: Which company has secured a deal to restore the Amazon rainforest and offset its AI emissions?

The answer is . . . Microsoft, which acquired carbon credits worth about $200mn, for energy usage surges due to generative artificial intelligence.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited today by Mure Dickie. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



India is the world’s most populous nation, and since the 1990s it has maintained almost Chinese levels of rapid economic growth. Prime Minister Narendra Modi aims to make India a high income country and, by implication, an economic superpower by 2047. But is that achievable? This week’s guest, Arvind Subramanian, is a former chief economic adviser to Modi’s government. He is sceptical that the necessary growth rate can be sustained. Instead, he tells Martin Wolf how he thinks the government has scared off the necessary business investment, and how a serious miscalculation by the country’s central bank may be about to plunge India into a currency crisis.

Martin Wolf is chief economics commentator at the Financial Times. You can find his column here

Subscribe to The Economics Show on Apple, Spotify, Pocket Casts or wherever you listen.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



India has voiced concern about Beijing’s plan to build a dam in Tibet that is three times larger than China’s Three Gorges, currently the world’s largest hydropower facility.

The hydropower project in the lower reaches of the Yarlung Tsangpo river, announced last month, is part of a network of dams being built across Tibet as China aims to increase the renewable energy share of its power consumption to 33 per cent this year from 28.8 per cent in 2020.

“It is a mega project with a lot of ecological disturbances and it does not take into account the interests of the lower riparian states,” said Randhir Jaiswal, spokesperson for India’s foreign ministry, this month.

The row comes as the two sides attempt to repair relations following deadly border clashes in 2020. Last October, New Delhi and Beijing reached a deal to resolve a military stand-off and agreed to military patrols along their disputed Himalayan border.

India fears that the dam, located in seismic Tibet, could spur floods and water scarcity downstream, while giving China the upper hand in any potential stand-off between the nuclear-armed neighbours, analysts said.

“There are fears of all kinds,” said Shivshankar Menon, India’s former national security adviser and chair of the Ashoka Centre for China Studies. “The geopolitics don’t help, obviously, because nobody trusts anybody in this.”

Tibet has a third of China’s hydroelectric power potential. The Yarlung Tsangpo — the world’s highest major waterway — is Tibet’s longest river, and is called Brahmaputra in India before it turns into the Jamuna in Bangladesh.

The 60-gigawatt dam on the Tibetan plateau’s rim lies near the border with the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, the eastern tip of India over which Beijing claims sovereignty and the two sides fought a war in 1962.

“India and Bangladesh are concerned that the dam would change the river’s natural flow, which could disrupt access to water for agriculture, drinking and other essential human needs,” said Neeraj Singh Manhas, an expert on transboundary rivers and water security in south Asia.

Barry Sautman, a political scientist at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, said China could argue, however, that Tibet was not the main source of water for the Brahmaputra. “Somewhere between 7 per cent and 30 per cent of the water comes from Tibet. The rest comes from rainfall [downstream],” said Sautman.

When it formally announced the dam on Christmas Day, Beijing said it would “bring more sense of gain, happiness and security to the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet”.

Chinese officials have dismissed concerns about the impact on environmental or downriver water supplies. “The project will not have a negative impact on the ecological environment, geological conditions and the rights and interests related to water resources of downstream countries,” said China’s foreign ministry’s spokesperson Guo Jiakun.

Activists allege that the 193 hydropower projects built in Tibet since 2000 have led to serious environmental and human rights violations. China’s extensive dam-building projects in Tibet have previously attracted fierce opposition, such as around the Kamtok, or Gangtuo, hydroelectric power plant on the eastern Jinsha river.

“We are anticipating there would be a huge negative impact,” said Malik Fida Khan, executive director of Bangladesh’s Center for Environmental and Geographic Information Services, a government research centre.

India is also planning to build what would be the subcontinent’s largest dam, the Siang Upper Multipurpose Project, with an output capacity of 11GW in Arunachal Pradesh.

Pema Khandu, chief minister of Arunachal Pradesh, told Indian news agency PTI that this dam was aimed at “mitigating potential flood risks from water releases” because China was “unpredictable and can do anything”.

India’s dam project has also ignited opposition from local populations and concerns in Bangladesh.

Additional reporting by Nian Liu in Beijing, cartography by Steven Bernard and data visualisation by Bob Haslett



The writer is a biomedical systems engineer and author of ‘Wicked Problems: How to Engineer a Better World’

Ancient India’s greatest engineering achievement wasn’t a monument but a metamorphosis. When Emperor Ashoka, who ruled most of the Indian subcontinent in the third century BCE, saw the carnage he wrought in the Kalinga war — over 100,000 dead — he redirected his empire’s technical prowess from combat to community. Modern conflict zones everywhere, from Sudan to Myanmar, Gaza to Ukraine, await a similar transformation.

Ashoka’s infrastructure once forged dominance over an area that spanned Afghanistan and Bangladesh. Siege engines demolished defences, roads propelled armies, fortifications constrained movement and ports dictated trade. After his moral awakening, however, military roads became pilgrimage paths dotted with wells and rest houses; barriers transformed into trading posts. His edicts, carved into mountainsides, proclaimed a radical vision: infrastructure should be a tool for social cohesion rather than control.

This vision resonates in modern history. The postwar reconstruction Marshall Plan rewove western Europe’s fractured landscape through roads, power grids and industries, fostering social recovery. Japan’s bullet train Shinkansen was more than a railway — it marked a shift from wartime priorities to economic integration and national connectivity. Post-cold war Germany turned former checkpoints like Berlin’s Potsdamer Platz into social hubs of reunification. Northern Ireland’s Peace Bridge spanned decades of sectarian divide, symbolising reconciliation. In Rwanda and Sri Lanka, community centres and reopened highways like the A-9 mended societies torn apart by genocide and civil war. These examples affirm Ashoka’s insight: infrastructure can unite or divide, depending on its design.

But centring peace in engineering also confronts stark realities. Billions of dollars flow into military machinery while peace-building efforts scrape by. Businesses prioritise proxies of power — price and speed — over reducing conflict risks. Harmony and stability can feel like unaffordable luxuries.

Reconstruction is sometimes less about materials available than about power — who controls, who benefits, and whose version of history prevails. Technical neutrality is a profitable — and pernicious — myth. These constraints expose a deeper predicament. Defence contracts offer clean metrics and measurable outcomes but peace resists such quantification. Like public health or preventive maintenance, its benefits can be hard to evaluate. Without ways to review and reward it, even visionary engineers may find it difficult to justify spending money.

There is also the need to find agreed upon standards — each tied to clear metrics and mandates. Safety engineering progressed through structural load limits and fire codes, giving tangible form to abstract risks. Environmental engineering advanced through emissions standards and related safeguards, making invisible threats visible. Peace engineering requires similar discipline — methods to gauge the results of infrastructure choices.

In Iraq’s 2003 reconstruction, standard technical metrics showed restored infrastructure exceeding prewar electrical capacity. But this masked a more complicated reality. Years of conflict and sanctions had cultivated decentralised networks. Unreliable central grids had taught Baghdad’s residents to rely on local generators — adaptive solutions that persisted even after centralised systems returned. This divergence between technical success and lived experience underscores a critical insight: successful infrastructure requires an understanding of those who will use it. Designing infrastructure like transportation networks isn’t simply solving technical puzzles — it determines how communities interact long into the future. This requires evaluation conducted with the same rigour as structural integrity or environmental protection.

In peacetime, engineering firms already balance complex risks and competing priorities. Analysing infrastructure’s social effects as well isn’t mission creep — it’s essential wisdom. This is an important lesson to remember as Ukraine works to rebuild its power grids and Gaza reconstructs its water systems.

Engineering shaped Ashoka’s empire twice: first as an instrument of conquest, then as a foundation for peace. Two millennia later, his transformation highlights an elemental truth: peace isn’t an ideal to contemplate but a structure to make and maintain.



When Viren Bhagat announced plans to set up shop in London, he joined a growing number of Indian jewellers expanding into western markets, where the vast majority of the country’s diaspora live.

Bhagat started to increase his exposure outside India through his participation in Tefaf, the European Fine Art Foundation fair held annually in Maastricht and New York. Most recently, his work gained attention when Nita Ambani (pictured above), the wife of Asia’s richest tycoon Mukesh Ambani, wore a striking set of his jewellery — comprising a headpiece, necklace, armlet, two cuffs and a ring, all adorned with larger-than-life emeralds — at the highly publicised and lavish wedding of her son, Anant Ambani.

India has a long-standing tradition of crafting jewellery and cutting and polishing gemstones — 90 per cent of the world’s rough diamonds are processed in the country.

Idiosyncratic cultural practices also set the country apart. For instance, engagement and wedding ceremonies involve exchanging gold jewellery, including a “mangalsutra” necklace for the bride and a bracelet for the groom; although the giving of an engagement ring ahead of a ceremony is rare. On festive occasions, jewellery sets are worn, and deemed incomplete without headpieces, armlets and anklets.

While such traditions have historically hindered the expansion of western jewellers in India, they have contributed to the growth of local talents and supported their expansion abroad — as Indians living outside the country seek to uphold their customs.

“At first, the Indian diaspora made up a significant portion of our clientele, as they already knew the brand and trusted its quality,” recalls Sabyasachi Mukherjee, founder of Sabyasachi, one of the first Indian luxury brands to establish a retail presence at department stores Bergdorf Goodman and Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, in 2020.

In 2023, the brand then brought its jewellery to a British audience by showcasing pieces at London’s Lancaster House and participating in the charitable Animal Ball, organised by wildlife charity Elephant Family and indigenous peoples initiative the Tintra Foundation. The event was attended by King Charles and Queen Camilla, who both wore traditional Shola masks designed by Sabyasachi.

“Branching out into the west was a natural progression in our quest to become India’s first global luxury brand,” says Mukherjee. “The understanding and consumption of jewellery is universal — it is the most accessible category to introduce India’s traditions of craft, quality and authenticity. The west has always admired the richness of our culture, and I saw a unique opportunity to introduce an Indian voice to the global luxury market.”

The growing global interest in Bollywood cinema and its stars, such as Deepika Padukone and Priyanka Chopra — brand ambassadors for Cartier and Bvlgari, respectively — has drawn the attention of western audiences. Also, global luxury brands, such as Cartier, organise ad hoc events to celebrate the Indian Diwali festival, underscoring the growing influence of Indian creativity abroad.

“Over time, our customer base has diversified,” says Mukherjee. “Today, our western clients include individuals who value cultural authenticity, unique designs, and impeccable craftsmanship. Our jewellery resonates with collectors, art enthusiasts, and fashion lovers who appreciate the story behind each piece. Hollywood celebrities and international stylists have also embraced our work, helping us reach audiences far beyond the diaspora.”

While Sabyasachi’s designs remain distinctively Indian, a new wave of Indian creators have purposefully expanded abroad to break free from traditional aesthetics. They are targeting a public receptive to new motifs that, while informed by Indian heritage, are not immediately attributable to that particular culture.

This has been the case for Ananya Malhotra, founder of Ananya, who, by opening a showroom in London in 2022, has found a suitable audience and accelerated her brand’s growth. Ananya’s use of colourful gemstones and designs that reinterpret Indian traditions, such as the chakra bracelet, with a refreshing contemporary twist has gained favour with an international clientele, even beyond the UK. “London is a melting pot for so many cultures; it really offers a unique, wholesome exposure for a brand,” she says.

This sentiment is echoed by Karina Choudhrie, who opened her first office in the UK in 2010 and an atelier seven years ago. Choudhrie has seen her business grow rapidly, attracting clients beyond the millions of Indians forming the diaspora and local British buyers. “We have had clients from Brazil, [North] America, Europe, and Asia,” she says. “London has been the perfect base for us and we have seen the business progress organically, largely by word of mouth.”

Outposts in Dubai and New Delhi have allowed her to navigate the challenges posed by Brexit and the removal of VAT refunds for tourists. “We manufacture in Valenza, Italy, and Jaipur, India, and have offices in Dubai, London, and New Delhi,” Choudhrie explains. “Before Brexit, we could get deliveries much faster. However, since Brexit, the process has become significantly slower.”

“Additionally, the inability of tourists to claim back the 20 per cent VAT has had a noticeable effect on our business in London. That said, having offices in both Dubai and London has helped us adapt to these challenges.”

Valery Demure — founder of an agency representing jewellers and a regular exhibitor at PAD, the London design and art fair — says that, despite issues linked to Brexit and VAT, London remains a vital window for international jewellers. Prestigious art fairs, such as Frieze, that attract wealthy clients, and a lively sporting and social calendar — including events such as Royal Ascot and Wimbledon, attended by royal family members — all contribute to London’s enduring appeal.

At last year’s PAD, Demure showcased Studio Renn, by Mumbai-based couple Rahul and Roshni Jhaveri, which created a series of rings made from unconventional materials, including concrete. It made a strong statement that, whether by honouring traditions, updating them or breaking them entirely, Indian jewellers remain committed to changing perceptions, and expanding beyond their national borders.



Good morning. Has it only been four days since Trump’s inauguration? It’s going to take me a while to get used to waking up to a whole bunch of head-spinning new developments every day.

Closer to home, Saturday February 1 is Budget day. Do you have any questions? Send them to us and we’ll answer them the week after finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman announces her plans for the year.

In today’s newsletter, we look at Hindustan Unilever’s acquisition of homegrown skincare brand Minimalist, a mouthwatering prospect for other direct-to-customer brands. But first, the big fight. It’s restaurants versus Swiggy and Zomato.

The delivery person is taking over the kitchen. The already uneasy relationship between restaurants and food delivery apps has now taken a turn for the worse, with the launch of Swiggy’s Snacc and Zomato-owned Blinkit’s Bistro. These standalone apps from the two popular delivery platforms promise to deliver meals, snacks and beverages in under 15 minutes. How is it different from regular Swiggy and Zomato, you ask? The platforms have effectively taken restaurants out of the equation; the food is sourced from so-called “dark” kitchens.

The association of restaurant owners is up in arms. They are evaluating legal options, as well as adding this to a complaint they have already registered with the competition commission. Their contention is that Swiggy and Zomato have access to all the data and this can be used to predict customer preferences and run a more efficient operation, putting traditional eateries at a disadvantage. The new apps will also be able to dynamically price their samosas and biryani.

Their angst is understandable. Restaurants are in a tough position — they can neither live with Swiggy and Zomato nor can they live without them. The food delivery companies’ massive fleets give restaurants access to a much larger base of customers but cut into their margins, charging platform fees and placing tremendous pressure on restaurants to extend offers and discounts. Even if a restaurant invests in its own delivery service, customers are now so comfortable with these platforms that it is difficult to get them to change their behaviour and order directly. What was seen as a blessing for the industry during the pandemic has now become an existential threat.

Paradoxically, food delivery platforms, too, are finding it tough going. Zomato, which announced its quarterly results earlier this week, reported a slowdown in the gross order value of its food delivery business. This is the total value of all orders before cancellations, refunds etc. Its stock has fallen nearly 20 per cent since, and shares in rival Swiggy have dropped 9 per cent this week too.

In a letter to restaurant partners last week, Zomato founder Deepinder Goyal wrote that his goal for Bistro was to find a workable model that the restaurant industry can replicate. I am not sure what comfort restaurants can take in this. There is no denying that Swiggy and Zomato have had significant impact in changing urban lives (not to mention the ubiquitous presence of orange and red riders on our streets), but much of this was fuelled by venture capitalist money racing for customer acquisition. Now that the discounts are drying up, customers are going back to the simpler (and healthier) pleasures of home-cooked meals.

Have you cut down on Swiggy/Zomato orders? (I have). Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Hindustan Unilever’s Rs30bn ($345mn) acquisition of skincare brand Minimalist is a shot in the arm for homegrown brands started mostly by young entrepreneurs who use the power of social media to sell directly to customers. Minimalist was founded five years ago by two brothers, Rahul and Mohit Yadav. The Jaipur-based duo launched a series of serums to help alleviate skincare concerns, but they ran a tight ship and managed to get a valuation of Rs1bn in less than a year. The brothers, who get to take home more than Rs18bn from this deal, will continue to work in the business for the next two years.

Instagram has been a breeding ground of sorts for several homegrown brands in the skincare and beauty segment. Sugar Cosmetics, Lovechild, and Dot & Key are some of the more popular names. The Meta ecosystem helps these brands circumvent the big traditional operating costs involved in running consumer businesses. Their advertisements are Instagram reels, often featuring the founders themselves or their friends and family. Orders are placed through the same platform and customer communication is on WhatsApp. The logistics model for product delivery is also easy to access, cheap and well-established by now.

Competition is high but brands that manage to keep costs low and run a tight operation have seen valuations gallop. To me, the most significant aspect of this acquisition is that it signals the coming of age of Gen Z, which has now started entering the workforce. It is imperative for Hindustan Unilever, the grand doyen of the consumer business, to understand the ways of this new creature, their customers of the future.

Sunday is India’s 76th Republic Day, and this year is special because it marks 75 years of the Indian Constitution. Here is a look at what you can expect in the parade this year.

My favourite activity when I left home for college was going to the post office and sending my parents telegram messages by picking a random greeting code (Kids, I don’t have the time to explain this to you now). Here’s wishing you code 19: “Sincere Greetings for the Republic Day. Long Live the Republic!”

There is always some cricket to count on to keep us entertained. England’s tour of India is in full swing, and Saturday’s T20 match is coming from the MA Chidambaram Stadium in Chennai.

This is the season for literature festivals and already my social media timeline is full of writer friends flexing about all the venues they are speaking at (not to mention posing for photographs with a Nobel laureate or two). The Kolkata literary meet has sessions with William Dalrymple, Esther Duflo and Upamanyu Chatterjee, among others this weekend.

Since I am not speaking anywhere this year, I have decided to put that time to good use and resume my running after a break of a few months. I am working my way through Nike Run Club’s eight-week 10K programme. I have finished only three runs and you can hear my knees clicking from a mile away. Send me your workout tips and tricks.

Which company has secured a deal to restore the Amazon rainforest and offset its AI emissions?

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

On Tuesday, we asked: Will a Trump Presidency benefit India? Here are the results: 54% of you seem to think it will.

Here is what a global poll showed:

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



A sharp slowdown in credit growth — more than a year after India’s central bank intervened to control “exuberant” retail lending — has dented banking sector earnings, with analysts expecting bad debts and credit costs to rise further this year, aggravated by an economic downturn.On Wednesday, HDFC Bank — India’s largest private lender by market capitalisation — reported a 17 per cent rise from the previous quarter in funds set aside to cover potential bad loans, while its non-performing assets ratio rose to 1.42 per cent from 1.36 per cent.RBL Bank on Monday reported an 86 per cent slump in year-on-year net profit for its latest quarter as provisions more than doubled.

Axis Bank kicked off the results season for the industry last week. The fourth-largest private sector bank by market value announced a $729mn net profit for its December quarter, missing analyst expectations and sending its shares 8 per cent lower since.

Its retail lending book grew by 11 per cent in the fourth quarter, compared with 27 per cent growth for the same period in 2023. The bank said it had also more than doubled its cover for potential bad loans to $249mn.

Chief executive Amitabh Chaudhry described it as “a tough environment” and said rising delinquencies, especially in unsecured products, had been fuelled by “credit hungriness and over-leverage”. “Slippages are mainly in our retail unsecured book, largely in cards and personal loans,” he added. “Given the heightened delinquency levels in the industry, we continue to remain cautious in our outlook towards unsecured.”

Analysts had projected similar results for other banks. Across the industry, “there is genuine concern [that] credit growth will drop to single digits”, said Rahul Arora, chief executive of Nirmal Bang Institutional Equities in Mumbai.

The RBI, which launched its crackdown on unsecured lending after millions of Indian households loaded up on easily available credit, said in its financial stability report at the end of December that its measures to curb risky lending were “fructifying”. The sector’s annual retail lending growth was down from a compound annual growth rate of 26.9 per cent between September 2021 and September 2023 to 13 per cent in September 2024.

“An area of concern, however, is the sharp rise in write-offs, especially among private sector banks, which could be partly masking worsening asset quality in this segment and dilution in underwriting standards,” the central bank noted. In late 2023, the RBI raised the minimum amount of capital that must be held for personal loans from 100 per cent to 125 per cent, to decrease risks.

Concerns about slowing credit — a drag on the economy with the government downgrading expected growth to 6.4 per cent this fiscal year compared to previous estimates of 8.2 per cent — have also made investors wary about the industry.

Some large Indian lenders’ earnings have been more robust. Kotak Mahindra Bank’s shares jumped more than 9 per cent on Monday after it posted a 10 per cent rise in quarterly profit, even as money set aside for potential bad loans increased 37 per cent.

But across the sector, S&P Global Market Intelligence said the market capitalisation of India’s top banks fell in the fourth quarter as “investor sentiment turned sour amid lacklustre credit growth and shrinking margins”. Of the 20 largest banks, 15 lost value compared to the previous quarter.

The Nifty Banking Index, which tracks the stock performance of India’s largest lenders, has dropped 5.3 per cent over the past month — deeper than a 2.3 per cent fall in the country’s blue-chip benchmark Nifty 50 over the same period.

Loan growth had been mainly driven by the non-corporate segment, and business lending had yet to resume, according to Ashish Gupta, chief investment officer at Axis Mutual Fund.

“There are certainly pockets that were overheated and needed to be clamped down on,” he said. “But the other thing is that we should allow some degree of accidents to happen, there has to be some degree of risk-taking in lending.”

The pressures on the industry’s loan book come as India’s banking sector also struggles with tight liquidity, with the RBI ramping up dollar sales to defend the country’s currency. Along with tax outflows, this “magnified the squeeze in recent weeks”, said DBS Bank economist Radhika Rao.

On January 15, the central bank announced it would start conducting daily variable rate repo auctions after the banking system liquidity deficit rose past Rs2tn ($23bn) last week. Those actions were “likely to at least neutralise the draining impact of regular intervention, in the face of global pressure points”, Rao said.



For decades, farmers had tilled the land outside the town of Nandgaon in western India, growing crops including corn and millet.

But in late 2022, Tata Power, one of the country’s largest energy producers, announced it would begin setting up hundreds of glinting photovoltaic panels stretching out across that sun-drenched patch of countryside in the state of Maharashtra.

The 100-megawatt solar development by the arm of the vast Indian conglomerate, which aims to supply clean electricity to domestic steel producer Viraj Profiles, alarmed the local community. Many see the solar plant as a corporate land grab of a slice of state-owned territory that their families had been granted permission to cultivate over multiple generations.

“We want the land to be ours again,” declares Malik Jhela Hire, a weather-beaten 75-year-old farmer. “We want justice.”

As construction began on the solar park, a group of farmers mounted protests and hunger strikes outside the offices of top local government officials, claiming their rights were being ignored.

Taking note, Maharashtra’s forest department, which claims purview over the land, ordered action against the Tata project. Codenamed “Operation Solar”, a morning raid in late March 2023 saw about 100 law enforcement officers descend on the site and seal it up.

The situation typifies the complexities India is facing as it embarks on its green energy revolution. In India, the third-biggest carbon polluter globally, billions of dollars are being poured into projects to meet a government target to more than double its non-fossil fuel sources of power to 500 gigawatts by the end of the decade.

But this breakneck effort is triggering land disputes across the world’s most populous nation, highlighting the difficulty of building out capacity in fast-growing, crowded and power-hungry developing countries.

The raid on Tata’s solar project is just one example of the stumbling blocks in India’s energy transition. Companies are frequently struggling to find available land and are becoming ensnared in ownership conflicts.

“It already is a challenge and I suspect that as more and more projects are being developed it will become an even greater challenge,” says Jason Pellmar, regional industry manager for infrastructure in India, Bhutan and Maldives at the World Bank’s International Finance Corporation.

Other obstacles include environmental hold-ups, such as the legal protection granted to the Great Indian Bustard, a gravely endangered and poor-sighted bird that flies into renewable transmission lines in India’s northern deserts.

India’s clean energy sector has also come under renewed focus after US prosecutors indicted infrastructure magnate Gautam Adani — who has raised billions of dollars from American investors — as well as some executives at the billionaire’s eponymous conglomerate. The charges relate to an alleged $265mn bribery scheme of Indian officials to secure solar deals.

Adani, who denies any wrongdoing, has had projects come up against marginalised communities as have many major power producers. According to Indian research group Land Conflict Watch, at least 31 disputes involving green energy projects have affected nearly 44,000 people — a figure that founder and director Kumar Sambhav calls a “conservative estimate”.

In a recent study, the New Delhi-based Council on Energy, Environment and Water estimates that currently only 35 per cent of onshore wind and 41 per cent of solar real estate potential in India is located in areas without historical contest over land — figures that will probably only worsen as the country makes strides towards its net zero aims.

“It’s becoming a big problem for the developers,” Sambhav adds. “Many projects get stalled or delayed.”

Those increasing constrictions come at a critical juncture for India’s green energy drive as companies like Tata expand their renewable businesses. When the conglomerate, which has set up and is constructing nearly 17GW of non-fossil fuel power capacity, first revealed it would set up the solar park near Nandgaon, Tata described it as “another step” in its mission to establish clean energy solutions throughout India.

Yet for farmers, the project represents an existential threat to practices dating back to the 1970s, when the government allowed them to farm the reserved forest land to boost food production as part of India’s agricultural Green Revolution.

At the heart of the matter is confusion over who holds the ultimate title of the more than 200 acres, a question that has now reached the High Court of Bombay. To secure the site outside Nandgaon, Tata, like many businesses, turned to a land “aggregator”, or middleman, according to people familiar with the matter. One of the people said the land had long been “delisted” as environmentally protected land.

But according to forest department officials and documents seen by the Financial Times, technically no notification was seemingly issued regarding its deforestation — meaning its sale should not have been authorised, despite it no longer being a wooded area.

Tata Power declined to comment, citing the ongoing litigation. Viraj Profile, India’s renewable energy ministry, Maharashtra’s state forest department and the local government in Nashik district, where the project is based, did not respond to requests for comment.

“We’re not against renewable development,” says Raju Desale, the Maharashtra state secretary of the All-India Trade Union Congress and an official with the Communist Party of India, which helped organise the farmer protests.

But with Indian bureaucrats under top-down pressure to open up real estate for green energy projects, Desale adds that “they encroached the land . . . that land is [the farmers’] livelihood”.

When India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi took to the podium in Glasgow at the 2021 COP26 climate summit, he surprised the crowd by setting the country’s net zero target for 2070.

The announcement was seen as a major turnaround for the coal-rich country, whose government argues that developing nations, which are not to blame for historic emissions, should rightly tap fossil fuel resources at their disposal to power their industrial growth.

Modi’s stated ambition highlighted a shift that was already under way, with India scaling up its renewable capacity spurred by a dramatic fall in the cost of equipment such as solar panels, and a rush of green investment into the country.

But the sector has hit a familiar problem in India. Competing demands for land in this densely populated nation of 1.4bn people have long been cited by businesses as a critical bottleneck to investment. About 60 per cent of India’s land is farmed, compared with the 37 per cent world average, according to the World Bank, and agriculture is the main means of livelihood for the country’s majority.

The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis estimates India’s net zero goal may require up to 75,000 square kilometres of land for solar energy alone — equivalent to the size of the Republic of Ireland or about 2 per cent of India’s total area. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has also calculated that a single megawatt of solar power requires on average four acres of land.

“Availability of adequate land is a constraint for economic development and infrastructure growth broadly in India, and solar energy is not immune,” says Shayak Sengupta, India programme lead at Columbia University’s Center on Global Energy Policy.

“I suspect it will get more difficult to acquire land as projects spread geographically, especially as the most attractive parcels get used first.”

The issue is compounded by the fact that land rights remain one of India’s most sensitive political issues. Attempts by Modi’s government to overhaul land acquisition laws in his more than decade-long rule have met fierce resistance. Massive protests by farmers in northern India forced the government to repeal controversial agricultural reforms in 2021, marking one of Modi’s most significant policy reversals.

In practice, securing large, continuous tracts of land requires lengthy negotiations with vast numbers of farmers in a country where the average size of agricultural holdings shrank by about a third to 0.74 hectares in the five years through March 2022, according to a recent government survey. Renewable developers often have to design projects in a “suboptimal way just by virtue of where you’re able to procure your land”, says the IFC’s Pellmar.

India’s land market is also notoriously opaque, with a widespread absence of easy-to-access ownership records and complicated government acquisition rules. Developers often resort to middlemen to secure holdings, which opens the door to graft and competing claims.

Those hurdles are frustrating corporate India, particularly carbon-heavy industries. “It’s time-consuming,” says Neha Soni, general manager for business development at ArcelorMittal Nippon Steel India, which has built its own wind and solar capacity to curb factory emissions. “Land is a scarce commodity, so it’s a constraint.”

Modi has pushed India’s states to make more land available for renewable projects and many businesses now look to local governments for access to uncontested or barren land. Some states, including Maharashtra, have also allowed those setting up green energy parks to sidestep social and environmental impact assessment requirements.

“State and central governments have gotten creative in helping developers acquire land through leasing or offering government land,” says Sengupta.

But even this approach has limitations. In many cases, governments free up state-owned “common land” or “wasteland” for renewable energy projects, despite the fact that these areas are often used by local pastoralists and impoverished farmers for grazing or cultivation. These communities, which typically lack formal legal rights, are frequently left without adequate compensation or recourse when the land is repurposed.

Sambhav at Land Conflict Watch says these types of battles have a common theme. “Governments often present land as free of encumbrances, but on the ground, developers face protests from locals who have used it for generations.”

One potential solution mooted by energy experts is the wider deployment of so-called agrivoltaics — the dual use of solar panels typically raised above working farm land. Depending on the angle and space of the equipment, crops can be protected, or exposed to light and heat.

The first such project was tested in 2012 in the western India state of Gujarat. Since then more than a dozen pilots have been attempted. A study funded and published last year by the German Agency for International Cooperation calculated that potential agrivoltaic energy generation in India could reach anywhere between more than 3,000GW and almost 14,000GW.

Charles Worringham, who contributes analysis on India’s energy transition for IEEFA, says the potential of agrivoltaics to reduce land conflicts is “extraordinarily promising” and “could really benefit” the country’s vast rural economy.

“It’s got enormous potential, but there are fairly substantial financial barriers and policy barriers to get squared away,” he adds.

Holding back significant agrivoltaic generation is regulation and tax strictures across many Indian states that classify land for either agricultural or commercial use, forbidding dual use of farm land for business activity beyond harvesting.

Experts say the commercial viability of multipurpose cropland producing renewable energy has also not yet been tested, and many farmers will be reluctant to gamble on new technology until it is more established.

“It’s not been done at scale and in India often farmers learn from farmers, you learn from your neighbour,” says Arunabha Ghosh, chief executive of the Council on Energy, Environment and Water research institution. “The scale-up and acceleration of renewables in India is not going to come from one business model but an experiment with many.”

Other less land-intensive routes to net zero are being actively pursued by Modi’s government, including the expansion of rooftop solar. In February last year his administration launched a subsidy programme covering up to 40 per cent of the costs of installing panels on residential properties. The aim is to cover 10mn households under the scheme by March 2027, up from 630,000 currently.

Overall generation capacity of rooftop solar has expanded at a swift clip, adding more than 3GW to an almost 15.7GW total since April 2024 — though falling far short of an earlier target set by the Modi government to hit 100GW by 2022.

“Rooftop solar could and should be part of the solution,” says Pellmar from the IFC. “But I don’t think that’s going to be the ultimate answer, given the massive targets that the government of India has.”

For now, many producers at the forefront of India’s green energy ambitions still require large tracts of land, and some are bogged down in lengthy and heated contests. Shortly after its solar park near Nandgaon was raided and closed up, Tata Power filed a challenge against the action in the High Court of Bombay.

As the litigation winds its way through India’s sluggish and overburdened legal system, Maharashtra’s advocate general, the state’s most senior legal adviser, asked for the project to be reopened and work recommence in the interim even as the case remains pending, according to the people familiar with the matter and documents reviewed by the FT.

While the farmers outside Nandgaon are not party to the court dispute, many of them told the FT during a recent visit to the area that they remain angry, claiming that they had been ousted from their land. Following the forest department’s raid, “we had expectations that everything would be all right”, says 30-year-old Sanjay Tikaram Sonawane. “But then they started work again.”

Some are now despondent and say there is little support for them after years of petitioning the government to grant them title to a swath of territory that they have in practice been living off for generations. “We’re on our own,” adds Sonawane, as uniformed security guards from the surrounding and enclosed solar park keep careful watch nearby.Additional reporting by Andrea Rodrigues in Mumbai



Good morning. It’s going to be a busy news week. Donald Trump was just sworn in as the 47th US president, and he’s already signed a raft of executive orders and rescinded dozens of Biden-era directives. FT experts will break down what his second term means at a subscriber-only webinar on Thursday — don’t miss it.

Also busy this week is Meta’s Mark Zuckerberg, who is hosting a big inauguration dinner for Trump. Meanwhile in India, his company is hoping for a temporary reprieve from proceedings against it by the country’s competition watchdog.

But first, electric vehicles are all the rage at this year’s auto expo, even if they are hard to spot on our roads.

Electric vehicles are getting a big push at this year’s Bharat Mobility Global Expo (previously, auto expo). The Indian auto industry’s biggest show kicked off with the prime minister on Friday making the case for “economy and ecology”, highlighting the government’s focus on the development of green technologies and reducing the import bill for fossil fuels.

In March 2024, the government unveiled policies aimed at promoting India as a manufacturing destination for EVs. Companies investing $500mn in production facilities in the country are allowed to import electric cars as “completely knocked down kits” (where all the parts of the car are imported and assembled locally) at a reduced customs duty of 15 per cent (from 70 per cent) for five years. Many Indian states have also announced their own incentive schemes for EV manufacturers.

Over the weekend, several companies unveiled their EV offerings for India. Chinese carmaker BYD launched its electric sport utility vehicle, Sealion 7; Vietnam’s VinFast announced it would be launching two electric SUVs later this year; and homegrown Maruti Suzuki launched an electric version of its Vitara model, among others.

While two and three-wheelers have witnessed consumer enthusiasm, the same cannot be said for cars. The government is hoping EVs will constitute 30 per cent of passenger cars in India by 2030, but they only have about 2 per cent market share now.

Battery life and charging infrastructure continue to be a significant problem. It takes nearly a day to charge a car from an AC socket. While companies do install wall box chargers, they are often vulnerable to theft. In urban India’s unpredictable traffic and road conditions, range anxiety is a real issue. Access to charging points on highways is almost non-existent, making EVs a consideration for a second car in the household at best.

This is a bit of a chicken and egg situation for the industry. Car sales have to cross a certain threshold for manufacturers to invest more in the charging infrastructure but the poor charging infrastructure is a deterrent for higher sales. Indian customers are still following a wait and watch approach. While the government’s EV push for manufacturing will drive investment and employment, it should also augment the charging infrastructure in order to make private investments in manufacturing a feasible option.

Do you own an EV? Tell me what your experience has been. Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

This is a big week for Meta. In the US, Mark Zuckerberg is busy currying favour with the new administration, hosting a black-tie dinner for Donald Trump’s inauguration after ending fact-checking on Facebook and Meta’s diversity initiative. In India, on Thursday, an appeals tribunal will decide whether Meta gets some reprieve from a $24.5mn fine and stringent conditions that India’s anti-monopoly watchdog has imposed.

In November, the Competition Commission of India asked WhatsApp to stop sharing user data for advertising with other Meta entities, such as Facebook and Instagram, for a period of five years. This was after the agency’s 2021 review raised concerns that users of the messaging app could not meaningfully opt-out from their model of data sharing across platforms. The social media giant has reportedly claimed the order will force it to roll back or pause some of its services in India.

India is WhatsApp’s largest market, with nearly 500mn users, and with digital payments and ecommerce it is now more than just a messaging platform. Meta’s advertising business model hinges on accessing users’ phone numbers, transaction data and other behavioural and device information. Internet companies make it seem like personalised advertisement is a good thing for users, when in reality it is a better thing for themselves. The CCI is taking up the fight to say that just because I discussed buying a pair of shoes with a friend, I shouldn’t have to suffer being stalked by photos of those shoes on Instagram and Facebook. I, for one, am glad they have my back.

Trump’s inauguration committee has raised record breaking funds, with tech giants and corporate leaders from around the world contributing generously. Here’s how this year’s compares to past events. (statistica.com)

For the latest updates on the new Trump administration, sign up for our White House Watch newsletter.

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Do you think a Trump presidency will benefit India? Take part in our poll here, and tell us why you voted this way at indiabrief@ft.com

On Friday we asked: What are adventure enthusiasts fuelling themselves with in order to be able to summit Mount Everest in one week?

The answer is . . . xenon. After inhaling a xenon blend formulation, you can fly by helicopter to Everest Base camp and start your ascent in less than two hours. (My favourite line in the story: “I’m super-excited to see if we can leave home on a Monday morning, be on the summit of Everest on Thursday night, and make it home for Sunday lunch.”) Why? Why?!

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Good morning. Great news from India’s space agency, which yesterday announced it had managed a successful space docking (joining two fast moving satellites in space). India is the fourth country to manage this feat, after the US, Russia and China.

India’s software services sector could also do with some good news. Tech chief executives are keeping their fingers crossed that a Trump presidency will unleash animal spirits in American corporations, triggering higher spending on IT services. We’ll take a look. But first, what are your job and salary prospects?

Where are the best jobs and what’s your pay packet going to look like this year? According to the annual salary trends report published by Randstad, the best paying junior and mid-level jobs are found in Bengaluru, and senior management roles are the juiciest in Mumbai. (Excuse me for a minute while I cry in Delhi-NCR).

Salaries in Bengaluru are 23 per cent and 9 per cent higher than the national average for junior and mid-levels respectively. For senior positions, Mumbai pay packets are 12 per cent higher than the national average. Surprisingly (at least to me), Bengaluru jobs are not just in the IT sector; the city leads in financial services, manufacturing, automotive, retail and consumer goods too. Mumbai (predictably) excels in finance and banking sector jobs.

Internet and ecommerce — undoubtedly the growth industries currently — are the best paymasters, but salaries in the advertising, market research and public relations industries have taken a big leap too (26 per cent).

But to me, the real story is the collapse of Delhi-NCR. The report places it at rank seven (in tier 1 cities) for mid-level and senior executive pay. In both of these categories, salaries here are lower than the national average. Delhi-NCR is fifth at the junior level and the pay is a hair over the average, and it is consistently ranked seven (out of eight) in all the sectors the report analysed.

Two decades ago, when the shiny glass and chrome buildings emerged in Delhi-NCR’s Gurgaon, it quickly became the hub of corporate India with large Indian conglomerates and big multinationals setting up headquarters. It was great for a while, but terrible air pollution and civic services increasingly lagging behind have really done a number on the quality of life in the national capital. The other issue is that the region is spread over three states, with different rules and standards, and there is no central authority responsible for its growth and upkeep.

Now that you know where (not) to work, here’s how much you can expect your pay to rise this year. A report published this week by Mercer estimates that salary increments in 2025 will be an average 9.4 per cent, a steady growth from 8 per cent in 2020. The automotive sector is expected to be the most generous, with 10 per cent salary increments (up from 8.8 per cent last year), followed by manufacturing and engineering at 9.7 per cent. Of the 1,550 companies that participated in this survey, 37 per cent plan to increase headcount.

Overall, these are encouraging numbers. The jobs landscape for 2025 is looking good in India. But Delhi-ites, should we start a support group?

Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

On Monday, when Donald Trump takes his oath of office, one section of Indian industry will be watching with hopeful anticipation. The IT services sector, which has had a difficult few years post-pandemic, is looking forward to a Trump bump. Here’s why.

One, Trump has promised to reduce corporate taxes. Industry experts expect that the money saved on tax will be directed towards technology expansion. Second, the uncertainty over the elections are over and the US economy is expected to grow. Half of India’s IT services revenues come from North America and when the US grows, they grow too. In fact, it’s already showing signs of a revival (see graph above). HSBC analysts estimate industry growth will be 6 per cent in the next financial year, up from about 3-4 per cent over the past two years.

Our IT services companies employ 5mn people and earn revenues of $125bn, and it needs all the good news it can get. But a Trump presidency is not without its challenges for the industry. The issue of H1B visas has been raging even before Trump takes office. The president’s Maga base has come out all guns blazing against IT jobs going predominantly to Indians. Plus, the nuances of the US economy in 2025 are hazy. If the new administration imposes the tariffs it has been threatening, inflationary pressures will rise.

This is a story which should not be viewed through a binary lens. My sense is that all of these scenarios will come to bear. There will be more money funding technology services but there will also be the overhang of Trump’s America First policies. The next few quarters will probably be positive for the industry, but it would be foolish to extrapolate that to the entirety of Trump’s term.

India’s trade deficit narrowed to a three-month low last month. Key imports were precious metals, petroleum and electronics. The government revised November’s gold import figures by $5bn, attributing it to a mistake of double counting. Here’s the data for December.

I plan to start watching Black Warrant on Netflix this weekend. Directed by Vikramaditya Motwane, this is an inside look at Delhi’s notorious Tihar jail. The series is based on the book of the same name, written by Sunil Gupta, a former superintendent at the prison, and journalist Sunetra Choudhury. I read the book when it was published in 2019. It’s a gripping account with familiar names from newspaper headlines. Early reviews of the show are promising.

My friend (and former boss) Sanjay Kalra sent me a playlist of Rashid Khan’s songs. I don’t know much about Hindustani classical, but these songs were accessible even for my musically-challenged brain. I plan to properly get into it this weekend. (Write to me if you’re interested. I’ll share the playlist).

The Indian national trust for art and cultural heritage (Intach) organises some lovely walks in Delhi. It’s a great opportunity to learn about the history and culture of this beautiful city. (So what if we are underpaid, we get to gaze at Humayun’s tomb). After two failed attempts, when I registered but couldn’t make it, I’m hoping to be third-time lucky and go on an Afghan food walk with them on Saturday evening. Fingers crossed for some naan and kebabs.

What are adventure enthusiasts fuelling themselves with in order to be able to summit Mount Everest in one week?

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

On Monday we asked: How many hours of work are ideal in a week? Here are the results — I see that none of you agree with S. N. Subrahmanyan. My colleague John Reed has also weighed in on the viral remarks by Larsen & Toubro’s chief executive.

And also, now that all three results are out, see if you got last week’s poll right.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



SN Subrahmanyan, a leading Indian business boss, made remarks earlier this month calling for a 90-hour working week. In doing so he sparked a furore by touching on twin obsessions of the country’s professional class: long work hours and their toll on family life.

“I regret I am not able to make you work on Sundays, to be honest,” the chair of the conglomerate Larsen & Toubro told staff in a corporate town hall event in Mumbai.

“If I could make you work on Sundays, I would be more happy because I work on Sundays also.”

“What do you do sitting at home?” he added. “How long can you stare at your wife, how long can the wife stare at her husband? Come on, get to the office and start working.”

Though the meeting was meant to stay within company walls, a video was published on Reddit and then shared widely online, to Indians’ widespread outrage and bemusement.

This is not the first time a business leader has admonished employees in India for the hours they work.

NR Narayana Murthy, chair of outsourcing giant Infosys, invited similar controversy last year after calling on India’s youth to work 70 hours a week to compete with the likes of China, and urged them to avoid picking up “not-so-desirable habits from the west”.

Back in 2011 the late Ratan Tata, chair of the Tata Group, questioned the work ethic of British managers after his group’s acquisitions of Jaguar Land Rover and Corus, claiming “nobody is willing to go the extra mile”.

In a country with a conservative government that prizes consensus and bristles at criticism, Indian corporate bosses tend to keep public statements workmanlike and patriotic, if not studiously bland.

Subrahmanyan’s comments have prompted attention for their frank outspokenness and reference to staring at one’s wife, which some Indians found bizarre and which helped the video to go viral.

“He made it sound as if being at home and being with your spouse is a terrible waste of time,” said Rituparna Chakraborty, co-founder of Teamlease, an Indian staffing company.

Some uxorious Indian men have in recent days posted pictures of themselves staring lovingly at their wives; others rechristened Sunday as “Stareday”, which is now circulating online as a hashtag.

Leading Indian chief executives have piled on — some perhaps sensing an opportunity for virtue-signalling or schadenfreude.

“My wife is wonderful,” Anand Mahindra, CEO of the eponymous family conglomerate, said at a conference this week in New Delhi. “I love staring at her.”

Mahindra added that the debate that had been unleashed was “in the wrong direction” and should be about the quality of work, not the quantity.

Larsen & Toubro has largely sat out the controversy, initially backing its chair in a statement saying that “extraordinary outcomes require extraordinary effort”. Colleagues say he was not serious. Subrahmanyan has declined to comment.

The question of how many hours executives in India should work has led to serious debates about the country’s economic growth.

Away from the online japes and memes, Subrahmanyan’s comments touched a nerve because India’s hard-working professionals are feeling the pinch from persistent inflation and stagnating wages. These in turn feed often-voiced fears that India — no matter how hard or long people work — is heading for a “middle income trap”, in which its huge population grows old before the economy becomes rich.

While reliable data is not available on India’s average working hours, long commutes running to two or three hours both ways are common in Indian cities.

Rajiv Bajaj, managing director of Bajaj Auto, said Indian companies should move away from “archaic and regressive policies” of enforcing long working hours and instead focus on “speed at the front line”.

Others were more forthright. “90 hours a week?” Harsh Goenka, chair of RPG Group, fumed in a post on X. “Why not rename Sunday to ‘Sun-duty’ and make ‘day off’ a mythical concept!”

john.reed@ft.com



A book about Hinduism which begins with a maharaja’s cows sounds a little like a Rudyard Kipling tale, replete with spices, mystery and “backward” traditions. But in the hands of Manu S Pillai, Madho Singh II’s journey from Jaipur in the west of India to imperial London for Edward VII’s coronation in 1902 becomes the gateway to a deft exploration of what Hinduism actually means as a faith. Drawing on the lives of missionaries, maharajas and men of the Dutch, French and British East India Companies, Pillai builds the story of a system marked by adaptability, dynamism and compromise rather than ossified archaisms.

Hinduism is often imagined as a monolith of arcane and ancient rituals, in spite of the efforts of external invaders. In India itself, the image of a “faith under siege” is a core part of the Hindu nationalist rhetoric wielded by the Bharatiya Janata party — a party that has now led the world’s most populous nation for more than a decade.

Exploring four crucial centuries of Hinduism’s often terse, sometimes violent and always complex relationship with other faiths, Pillai explodes the myth of a singular, unchanging, “true” Hinduism. At the same time, he lays out the factors that allowed Hindu nationalists to forge a seemingly singular, muscular identity which has come to define Hinduism for many in the 21st century.

He argues that even before the arrival of imperial powers, Hinduism was hardly a settled affair, emerging instead from “[Brahmins’] negotiations with a bewildering variety of counter-thoughts and alternate visions”. India’s priestly class was not unified, adds Pillai, adapting to local traditions ranging from sun worship to matrilineal succession as needed.

Matters only become more complicated with the arrival of Europeans in India at the end of the 15th century. Early travelogues read rather like a rejected Indiana Jones script, full of human sacrifice, demon worship and libidinous, treacherous women. Vasco da Gama, upon arriving in Kerala in 1498, was less quick to judge: he entered a Hindu temple and participated in rituals, dismissing frescoes of “multi-armed beings with big teeth” as local forms of saints. And as some priests engaged with Brahmins, they found that the trappings of many gods were simply a humanised vision of something more akin to a familiar and orthodox monotheism. A recognition of spiritual kinship led Italian missionary Roberto de Nobili to swap his cassock for the robes of local priests in an effort to better win over converts.

Not all interactions were so harmonious. Portuguese padres in Goa, facing the pressure of the Reformation at home, clamped down on “paganism” abroad by burning temples. One, Father Acquaviva, disappointed at the tolerance he found at the court of Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great, received his desired martyrdom after erecting a cross at a destroyed Hindu temple. The British East India Company shifted from distrust of missionaries as an impediment to trade to support for its “civilising” mission thanks to pious parliamentarians and pressure groups. Among the catalysts for the Great Rebellion of 1857, Pillai argues, were evangelicals waving Christian texts at Hindu festivals.

The message throughout is that Hinduism is a living tradition defined more by variation than a singularity of thought and that those who would come to call themselves “Hindus” were more than passive subjects. Priests and potentates reshaped their beliefs in ways deemed more acceptable or sophisticated, consciously rewriting older texts to remove imagery considered embarrassing for the mores of the time. Their discussions with colonial powers were not merely those of vassals lapping up to masters, but of reflective thinkers adapting to a shifting world.

Pillai also explores the shaping of Hindutva (Hindu nationalist) identity and how outside pressures knitted a huge variety of traditions into something like a unified whole (albeit imperfectly). The history of conquerors is central to a kind of postcolonial paranoia that sees Hindus’ failure to resist as rooted in their naivety and good nature. The required remedy to resist cultural annihilation, proponents say, is to adopt an equally belligerent stance, bringing all the faithful into the fold.

Pillai avoids straying into the present; there are no references to the BJP or Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the text ends (chronologically) in 2003 with the unveiling of a portrait of Vinayak Savarkar, the father of Hindutva. This is not a weakness: to end with a deep dive into the BJP would suggest that the now prevalent nationalist vision of Hinduism is the religion’s “end point” rather than a single strain.

The book closes with Bijay Chand Mahtab, maharaja of Burdwan, almost informing the pope of the “revolting” idolatry of Madonna shrines in early 20th century Italy. That inversion of early monstrous travelogues is more than a reminder of the underlying complexities of Hinduism; it also reflects the deep similarities between faiths. Those parallels were visible in the Enlightenment and earlier, but are increasingly at risk in an age of narrow populist agendas worldwide.

Gods, Guns and Missionaries: The Making of the Modern Hindu Identity by Manu S Pillai Allen Lane £35, 624 pages

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X



A drop in the value of India’s rupee has shaken expectations that the new head of the central bank will quickly cut interest rates to stimulate the country’s flagging economy.

The currency has repeatedly hit lows and a 0.7 per cent fall against the dollar on Monday was its biggest one-day dip in nearly two years.

That decline and its implications for inflation have shattered the previously near-uniform consensus among economists that Reserve Bank of India governor Sanjay Malhotra and fellow monetary policy setters will next month cut the benchmark repo rate from 6.5 per cent, the level it has been held at for nearly two years.

The falling rupee is only one of a number of indicators taking the shine off of what remains the world’s fastest-growing major economy.

India registered a sharp drop in year-on-year GDP growth to 5.4 per cent in the quarter through to the end of September, the lowest level in nearly two years, amid a slowdown in government spending, waning consumption and weak corporate earnings.

“The rupee fall is serious for the new RBI governor,” said Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at Bank of Baroda, adding that it had “muddied the view” that there would be a headline rate cut at Malhotra’s first policy meeting, which opens just a few days after the central government lays out its annual budget on February 1.

“A freefall has implications for imported inflation and hence monetary policy, which is the conundrum,” Sabnavis said.

India relies on overseas suppliers for almost 90 per cent of its oil consumption, making it particularly vulnerable to a rise in crude prices that followed new US sanctions on Russian producers. Robust recent US economic data has also cast doubt on the need for the Federal Reserve to lower rates, helping strengthen the dollar.

Stubbornly persistent inflation, which has eroded the spending power of hundreds of millions of poor and middle-class Indian households, lies at the heart of the RBI’s dilemma.

Fuelled by soaring vegetable prices, headline inflation breached the upper 6 per cent limit of the central bank’s target band in October, though prices have since cooled with the rate slowing to 5.2 per cent in December.

Malhotra, who took office last month, had said he expected India’s economy to recover in 2025. He indicated the RBI would prioritise supporting “a higher growth path” after his predecessor Shaktikanta Das was criticised by the government for keeping borrowing costs elevated.

“It’s not an easy environment for the new governor,” said Trinh Nguyen, emerging Asia economist at Natixis, adding that “India is not alone in this conundrum” with most developing nations suffering from the strong dollar. “But fundamentally, I think growth will prevail as a priority even if a rapidly weakening rupee is a concern.”

The RBI has regularly intervened to prop up the currency, burning through almost $70bn of its foreign exchange reserves since they reached a record high of $705bn in September.

Some economists speculate that the more recent lack of strong RBI action to stem the rupee’s fall may mark a shift in stance under Malhotra towards a more market-driven view of the currency that could boost exports. The RBI did not respond to a request for comment.

Other experts are more sanguine about the impact of the rupee’s decline and believe the RBI has plenty of room to manoeuvre given an overall trend of declining inflation and the central bank’s still considerable reserves.

“I don’t think it’s as big a deal as it’s being made out to be,” said Miguel Chanco, chief emerging Asia economist at research consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics. The rupee’s more than 4 per cent depreciation against the dollar over the past year remained “fairly manageable”, Chanco said.

“It’s worth remembering that it’s probably been due a downshift for some time, having looked pricey on a real effective exchange rate basis over the past 18 months or so,” he said.

More broadly, while the RBI and India’s government last month slashed their growth forecasts for the coming year to their lowest since the Covid-19 pandemic, the central bank said the economy was showing signs of bottoming out.

Chanco said that view might be too optimistic, given that India’s fiscal and monetary policy remained tight, households were weighed down with debt and industrial capacity utilisation still was not at levels high enough to spark a fresh cycle of investment.

“We probably have at least one more big downshift in headline GDP growth,” he said.

However, another economist said the rebound in government capital expenditure that had been put on hold during last year’s general election could also bode well for a revival of the Indian economy in the months to come.

“Structurally the economy is resilient,” said Poonam Gupta, director-general of the National Council of Applied Economic Research in New Delhi. “It’s a cyclical slowdown which timely policy actions can easily reverse.”



India’s vast information technology outsourcing sector is hoping for a revival of its fortunes under a second Donald Trump presidency, with an industry that derives more than half its revenues from the US expecting incentives for its customers there to increase spending.

With the new administration promising to slash corporate taxes and tame red tape, India’s $128bn annual revenue back office and consultancy sector, with its huge campuses across cities from Bengaluru to Pune, sees opportunity in its largest market after years of anaemic demand and growth. “Mr Trump in the past has been very business savvy,” said Atul Soneja, chief operating officer at Tech Mahindra — the IT business of the Mahindra Group conglomerate — in an interview in Bengaluru. “We should hopefully start seeing the benefit.”

IT and business process outsourcing is one of India’s most important and global-facing industries, employing more than 5mn people in a country that has thus far been unable to provide large numbers of well-paid and formal job opportunities for its enormous labour force.

The sector enjoyed a surge of business as clients invested in digital services during the coronavirus pandemic. But that led to Indian tech giants becoming bloated after a hiring splurge, and the industry was hit as corporates cut back on spending with global economic pressures increasing.

Tata Consultancy Services, India’s largest IT company, which last week reported a fifth straight decline in quarterly revenue in North America, expects a better year, in part due to improving client spending as Trump takes office this week.

“Once the new administration comes in, that will also remove any uncertainty,” said K Krithivasan, TCS chief executive. “There will be more confidence in discretionary programmes coming into the next financial year.”

Nandan Nilekani, the billionaire co-founder and chair of India’s second-largest IT services company Infosys, told the Financial Times in November that the “bull case” for the industry would be that Trump’s presidency would “unleash market deregulation”, allowing companies to expand, while spurring more mergers and takeovers, all providing business to India’s outsourcers.

His comments were echoed soon after by Rishad Premji, chair of rival Wipro, who said he believed Trump’s administration would be “very pro-business and pro-growth, which helps all of our customers, which ultimately helps partners here in India and the world over”.

HSBC analysts estimate the industry will see growth accelerate to 6 per cent in the next financial year, up from about 3-4 per cent over the past two years, adding that the US outlook is now positive.

“Any tax cuts would drive more technology spending, that’s a fair assumption,” said Sid Pai, the Bengaluru-based co-founder of venture capital tech investor Siana Capital Management, who expected “steady growth” across the sector.

The renewed optimism comes as US tech executives have been beating a path to India in recent months. Last week, Microsoft chief executive Satya Nadella set forth a $3bn investment, while in October, Nvidia chief Jensen Huang came to Mumbai and announced a batch of artificial intelligence partnerships with the country’s biggest conglomerates and outsourcing giants.However, Trump’s “America First” protectionist stance promises to impose dramatic tariffs on countries — damaging growth, fuelling inflation and leading to the Federal Reserve being more cautious on lowering interest rates, according to a recent FT poll of more than 220 economists.“A large part of demand recovery for IT services companies is dependent on how the US economy performs in 2025,” said Kumar Rakesh, a Mumbai-based associate director of equity research at BNP Paribas, warning conditions for the sector could worsen if policy changes were to boost inflation and force a pause or even a reversal in rate cuts.HSBC analysts noted that Trump tax cuts in 2017 did not necessarily have a clear impact on tech spending. During the last Trump presidency, the industry also fell foul of tightening restrictions on the high-skilled H-1B visa programme, which is overwhelmingly used by Indian nationals.

While Elon Musk, Trump’s biggest tech industry backer, has argued there is “a dire shortage” of IT engineers in America, Indian outsourcers have since significantly reduced their dependency on H1-B workers in the US where they have offices servicing clients locally. Rakesh said less than 1 per cent of outsourcing industry employees now work on such visas. More widely, economists and industry figures in India expect the world’s most populous nation, which has been edging closer into Washington’s orbit and whose leader, Narendra Modi, shares good relations with Trump, could be shielded from the worst of the US leader’s impulses.

“The relationships between the two leaders have been very strong in the past as well, so we expect that to continue,” said Tech Mahindra’s Soneja.Teresa John, deputy head of research at Mumbai brokerage Nirmal Bang, who recently published research on the potential impact of “Trumponomics” on India, said overall the country was likely to “be relatively insulated” compared with other Asian nations, such as China, given its lower trade surplus with the US.

“US growth is going to hold up,” she added. “We will see that flowing through to the Indian IT sector.”



Good morning. India’s inflation for December was 5.22 per cent, a four-month low, thanks to some moderation in food prices. While the trend is encouraging, it is much higher than the Reserve Bank of India’s medium-term target of 4 per cent. Is this enough for a rate cut next month?

In today’s newsletter, we take a look at the real money gaming industry, which got a small breather on Friday when the Supreme Court asked for a temporary pause in tax proceedings against 49 companies. But first, the war of titans: India’s software service giants Infosys and Cognizant slug it out in a court in Texas.

The battle between two Indian(ish) technology majors escalated, with Infosys, on Friday, filing a counter lawsuit against Cognizant. This is the story so far: in August 2024, Cognizant subsidiary TriZetto, which provides technology services to the US healthcare industry, took Infosys to court. It accused Infosys of building a competing program by unlawfully extracting data from its proprietary software. Now, five months later, Infosys has come out all guns blazing, not only rejecting these accusations but also levelling charges of anti-competitive practices against its rival.

Infosys, in its counter suit, alleges that Cognizant obstructed the development of its healthcare platform (Helix) by poaching key personnel and placing restrictive contractual barriers. The suit specifically alleges that Ravi Kumar, who quit Infosys in October 2022 and became Cognizant’s chief executive four months later, deliberately delayed the launch of Helix while he was transitioning to his new job. Infosys is seeking a jury trial and has demanded three times the damages it allegedly suffered, plus legal costs.

Infosys and Cognizant have long been rivals, fighting over both client contracts as well as employees. These lawsuits also highlight the intensely competitive landscape in which Indian IT companies operate in the US, with little differentiation in the services they provide. Much is at stake for both companies. A protracted legal battle serves neither’s interests, but since things have got this far, a quick retreat by either party also looks unlikely.

Do you have an inside scoop on this? Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Real money gaming, a sector which hasn’t had any good news in a while, got a breather on Friday when the Supreme Court placed a temporary halt on tax proceedings that would have cost 49 companies a whopping Rs1.1tn (about $14bn). Stocks of Delta Corp and OnMobile, which both run platforms that allow users to play games such as rummy for actual money, rose by 6.44 per cent and 2.38 per cent respectively on the news. But this is just a temporary reprieve, with the final hearing set for March 18.

For years, flush with funds and abundant user interest, real money gaming companies lobbied hard to convince the government that these were games of skill, and not of chance, a distinction that allowed them to fall in the 18 per cent tax rate. But in October 2023, the finance ministry grouped these games together with lotteries and gambling. Not only would the companies have to start paying tax at 28 per cent, the tax would be computed on the value of the bet — not just on the winnings. The companies argue that the high rate of tax will lead to a surge in unauthorised gaming as operators go underground.

There are two significant factors at play. First, online gambling is a serious societal issue — one with devastating consequences especially in the low-income sections of the population. Second, in general, sin taxes are a populist tool in the government’s arsenal and it is more likely to use them than not. While real money gaming is a big business opportunity and India’s affluent are keen on spending money on it, the government’s preference will be to regulate for the larger good.

In the aftermath of the government’s October 2023 decision, several companies decided to move their headquarters outside India. This might just be the one industry the government is not going to invest heavily in luring back.

The Maha Kumbh, which comes around once every 12 years, started yesterday and will continue until February 26. Here are some mind-boggling stats about the world’s largest spiritual congregation.

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Larsen & Toubro head S. N. Subrahmanyan inadvertently launched a thousand memes with his statement that employees should work 90 hours a week. (India Brief is not going to get into what you should be staring at on Sundays).

How many hours of work are ideal in a week? Vote in our poll here.

On Friday we asked: According to Donald Trump, who operates the Panama Canal?

The answer is . . . China.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



The complacent offer a theatrical yawn. We’ve seen this movie before. The combination in 2016 of Brexit and Donald Trump’s first victory saw the American populist right sensing fertile territory in the UK. It petered out. Association with Trump was not electorally helpful. Now the film has a sequel in which Britain is viewed less as a potential soulmate than a weakened enemy to be attacked by the newly buoyant international right.

There is nothing new in political internationals. From the formal Comintern to the more sinuous networks for globalisation and neoliberalism, there have always been groupings seeking to export their world view. Trump’s first-term strategist Steve Bannon dreamt of a global movement. National Conservatism, an evangelical ethno-nationalist faction with strong ties to Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, has worked to extend its influence in the UK.

Nor is Britain unused to external attacks — although in recent years it was Brexit which provoked the incoming ordnance from both Europe and the White House.

Weakened EU nations, notably Germany are also facing fire from the US populist right — Elon Musk especially. But the UK always saw itself in a separate category: in the Anglosphere, economically liberal and enjoying a “special relationship” with America.

Yet the new attacks focus on Britain’s culture and institutions. The US vice-president JD Vance quips that Labour has turned the UK into an “Islamist country”. Javier Milei, Argentina’s president, parroted the falsehoods that lionise the far-right activist Tommy Robinson, telling Davos delegates that “as we speak, in the UK, citizens are being imprisoned for exposing horrifying crimes committed by Muslim migrants”. Musk’s onslaughts are well-documented and his hostility widely shared on parts of the American right. Ministers soothe themselves with the fact that Trump himself has (so far) refrained from joining the uncoordinated assaults. But even so there are reasons to take it seriously.

The first is that the UK is floundering. Sir Keir Starmer is unpopular. His new government is facing both ways, increasing taxes and regulation while declaring growth its primary mission. Britain appears up for grabs (as is much of the Anglosphere, with Canada and Australia likely to turn right this year).

Second, and perhaps most important, this new conservative international is not primarily an economic movement. For sure, the tech billionaires want to undermine a regulatory opponent in Brussels, but Maga’s economics are populist. Its leaders are not troubled if that leads to incoherent policies tailored nationally.

The movement’s defining feature — as evidenced by the focus on Islam — is cultural nationalism. Immigration is the tip of this spear. What unifies the diverse groups on the right is a central argument that the canon of “Judeo-Christian” western values is threatened from within by multiculturalism and progressivism. From the fear of immigrants to the promotion of policies to boost birth rates, the core premise is that the west must act to save its culture.

Allied to this is the argument that the same guilty liberals have also tilted economic policy against ordinary people, via a deep state that does not even work very well. As European economies stutter, these cultural grievances are accelerated by podcasts and social media.

There is one other key difference: the decontamination of Trump. This time the new conservative international has major bridgeheads in the UK both in Farage’s Reform UK and much of the Conservative party. Tories who kept their distance in 2016 are now openly supportive. Boris Johnson, shadow foreign secretary Priti Patel, Nigel Farage and Liz Truss made pilgrimages to Washington for the inauguration.

Political attacks have been encouraged and copied by the British right. Suella Braverman, former home secretary, echoed Vance. Little distinguishes the rhetoric of Robert Jenrick, Tory justice spokesman, from Musk.

British radical right voices discern a winning Maga agenda for the UK, based around immigration crackdowns, deporting foreign criminals, scrapping net zero initiatives, pushback on trans rights and cuts to Whitehall bureaucracy. Only in their small-state hostility to the NHS do Britain’s populists offer an exploitable vulnerability.

Furthermore, the electoral system, for so long a bulwark against new and hardline parties, might now actually work to their advantage. Talk of a Reform government is overdone, but the party’s current standing could give it a decisive voice in the next parliament. Fear of Reform is pulling Conservatives on to the same territory. One senior Tory laments “Labour has become too unpopular too quickly. We haven’t had time to rebuild our brand.” Meanwhile, Starmer lacks the communication skills to respond to an assertive right.

And victory does not have to be absolute. The movement has already shifted the boundaries. Farage’s surging party is now mainstream and the Conservatives have moved to the right. Progressives within the government find themselves in retreat as ministers fret about the threat of Reform.

It is early days. Labour may recover. Trump’s lustre may fade. But the conservative international has a new sense of momentum. This movie might yet have a different ending.

robert.shrimsley@ft.com



The Bank of England governor has warned that government-backed proposals to water down limits on riskier mortgage lending could trigger more home repossessions and fail to help first-time buyers, even as he announced plans to review the policy.

Andrew Bailey told MPs on Wednesday he was “very happy to have a very open public debate” about the restrictions on UK mortgage lending, but said this should take account of the “better outcomes” the rules had provided in avoiding a surge in home loan defaults during recent shocks.

“They have helped to avoid the creation of a large tail of mortgages, which, when we have the inevitable cyclical downturn or shocks that hit the economy, turn out to be a real problem of the sort we have seen in the past,” Bailey said. “So I think that has been beneficial.”

His comments indicate the BoE is reluctant to further relax restrictions on British banks’ mortgage lending after having done so as recently as November. The BoE’s sister regulator the Financial Conduct Authority proposed going further earlier this month.

UK chancellor Rachel Reeves backed the FCA’s proposal, telling the Financial Times last week she was “absolutely open to looking at ideas that can boost home ownership and help working families get on the housing ladder”.

Reeves and Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer have urged all UK regulators, including the BoE and FCA, to do more to support its goal of reviving the country’s stagnant economy by easing the burden of rules on business.

Bailey told the Treasury select committee that he supported Starmer’s push to boost growth, but said “there isn’t a trade-off” between this and the BoE’s primary objective of preserving financial stability.

UK mortgage lending is controlled by a mixture of rules from the central bank’s Financial Policy Committee and the FCA, most of which were introduced after the 2008 financial crisis when several banks were bailed out by the state.

The FPC limits banks above a certain size to lending no more than 15 per cent of mortgages worth more than 4.5 times a household’s income. It changed the lending threshold of this limit in November so it applied to fewer banks.

The FCA requires banks to carry out affordability tests on applicants for mortgages to ensure they could still afford the monthly repayments if interest rates rose in future. The BoE ditched a similar affordability test in 2022 because it overlapped with the FCA’s rules.

The FCA said a letter to Starmer this month — in response to a call from the government asking regulators for pro-growth ideas — that it would “begin simplifying responsible lending and advice rules for mortgages, supporting home ownership and opening a discussion on the balance between access to lending and levels of defaults”.

Bailey said the potential benefits of easing these limits further would have to be balanced against the gains from keeping them. He also warned it may do little to help first-time buyers whose main obstacle to buying a home is frequently the difficulty in affording the necessary deposit.

“In all the surveys that are done, when you ask what is the major impediment to getting into the mortgage market, it is affording the deposit,” said Bailey.

Nathanaël Benjamin, the BoE’s executive director for financial stability strategy and risk, told MPs there was still “plenty of headroom” before banks hit the limit on mortgage lending “so that isn’t a barrier”, adding that the proportion of first-time buyers in new mortgage lending was at its highest level for 20 years.

He also warned that easing limits without increasing the supply of new homes was likely to push up house prices, which would “make things even more difficult for households to get on the housing ladder”.



Harland & Wolff’s new Spanish owner, Navantia, will invest £100mn to reactivate the UK shipbuilder and deliver a key Royal Navy contract while pushing for new orders that will “determine the future of the company”.

Donato Martínez, Navantia’s director of strategy, said on Wednesday the state-owned group aimed to triple H&W’s workforce and invest a further £100mn-£200mn in the coming years, a measure of its long-term commitment to the bankrupt company best known for building the Titanic.

Navantia this week took over H&W’s four shipyards — in Belfast, Appledore in England and two in Scotland — after pushing the UK government to improve the terms of its £1.6bn contract to build three Fleet Solid Support vessels for the Royal Navy.

Neither Navantia nor the UK government said how big the increase was, with Jonathan Reynolds, the UK’s business secretary, insisting only the “absolute minimum of changes to the contract to ensure its continued delivery” were agreed.

“We have not finalised the amendment to the FSS contract [with the UK Ministry of Defence], which is required because obviously the original plan cannot be met with the situation [at H&W],” Martínez told the Financial Times after a ceremony in Belfast to mark the new ownership. He expected that to happen in the next month.

Martínez said he was already eyeing future Royal Navy orders. “Yes, [we can make a profit on FSS], I think we have the basis and the investment,” he said. “The challenge now is to run as fast as we can.”

He added that Navantia would put in the first £100mn of capex over two years across the four yards, with the bulk being spent in Belfast. Work on an expanded and automated fabrication hall in Belfast has been paralysed since July, when the company’s financial crisis came to a head and a restructuring expert was brought in to find a buyer.

Martínez said that investment would be followed by “a second lap . . . in five years’ time” of £100mn to £200mn. “There is a long-term commitment.”

H&W has 1,015 staff including 560 in Belfast, which has not built a ship since 2003. Martínez said H&W, which was taken over by Navantia UK but has no plans to drop the famous name, needs 1,500 workers.

While the initial focus is on the FSS contract — which industry figures believe is now at least a year behind schedule — Navantia has its sights on Royal Navy’s multi-role support ships (MRSS).

Martínez said: “The MRSS is a programme that is really important to capture. It’s going to determine the future of the company . . . We are focused to get as many contracts as possible, including MRSS . . . We are determined to get them.”

The FSS ships, which Martínez said would have some design changes, are due to be built in parts in Navantia’s yard in Cádiz in southern Spain and at Appledore before being assembled and launched in Belfast. Construction had been due to begin in 2025; Martínez said Appledore would begin cutting steel for the project this year.

The UK government has hailed Navantia’s rescue of H&W as a boost for the UK shipbuilding industry but some suppliers fear they will be squeezed out and that some work will move to Spain, where Navantia has spare capacity.

Martínez confirmed Navantia, which has spent more than £20mn since October paying salaries and keeping the yards open, would not pay debts outstanding to contractors for past work but hoped for good relations, noting “we need them as much as they need us”.

He said Navantia aimed to seek a partner to “co-invest’ in Methil, one of the Scottish yards, which will focus on offshore wind projects.

Despite H&W’s choppy history, Martínez was undaunted by the challenge ahead given Spain’s centuries-old maritime tradition.

“We’ve been doing this business for only 400 years,” he said. “I don’t see any reason not to keep doing [it] for another 400 . . . We are very stubborn.”



Chancellor Rachel Reeves set out a vision to “make Britain the world’s best connected place to do business” on Wednesday, as she signalled support for massive airport expansion across London.

Reeves said the government wanted a third runway at Heathrow — even though it will take more than a decade to deliver — and signalled support for more immediate expansions at Gatwick and Luton airports. Projects at Stansted and City have already been approved.

If delivered, the expanded airports could handle 309mn passengers annually — an 85 per cent increase on the 167mn travellers who used the airports in 2023, the last year for which there is complete data — according to a Financial Times analysis.

The scale of the plans shows how airports, and their group of largely international investor owners, are betting that air travel will continue to grow in the coming decades, unencumbered by concerns over carbon emissions.

“The chancellor is right to get behind airports,” said Karen Dee, chief executive of trade association AirportsUK. “Expanding capacity will support growth . . . and will not come at the expense of our sustainability goals.”

But industry experts said growth of this scale would throw up serious challenges, including the need to redraw the flight paths in the skies over London and the south east of England to accommodate all the extra aircraft, likely impacting new communities with noise pollution.

Enthusiasm from the chancellor also belied barely-concealed tensions within the cabinet that have emerged over the UK’s most contentious infrastructure project in decades.

If successful, it would also likely make flying more expensive, particularly from Heathrow, as the airport raises the landing fees charged to airlines to recoup the cost of building the runway.

Still, Becrom Basu, a partner at LEK Consulting who has advised Heathrow, said the new capacity would be used.

“The London market has been struggling to meet demand for a while . . . I think investors can be comfortable there will be a business case for that level of demand,” he said.

By far the most serious challenge is likely to be the impact of airport expansion on the UK’s carbon emissions.

“I find it a bit difficult to see how you could have a third runway at Heathrow and a significant expansion of flight numbers at Gatwick within the government’s carbon budget,” said one person closely involved with the 2015 Conservative government decision to back a third runway at Heathrow. The airport never put forward a planning application because of the pandemic, however.

Casting herself as a chancellor willing to make “bold decisions in the national interest”, Reeves called on Heathrow’s management to put forward plans to build a third runway as soon as this summer.

While previous governments had offered lukewarm support to the politically controversial project, Heathrow’s chief executive Thomas Woldbye said he believed the airport would now “sit round the table together” with the government to deliver the third runway.

“We can trust the government, they can be with us for many years,” he said.

Woldbye said the airport will now dust off its 2019 blueprint for expansion, which was shelved when the pandemic struck in 2020. Costed at £14bn in 2014, it involves diverting the nearby M25 motorway into a tunnel, demolishing 750 homes, a primary school and an energy plant.

But few doubt the scale of the political challenges still facing the project.

Earlier this month energy secretary Ed Miliband said he would not resign if the third runway went ahead, in what appeared to be a capitulation by the project’s biggest cabinet opponent.

Behind the scenes, however, Miliband was said to be “livid”, according to one government figure familiar with the situation. He was not among the cabinet ministers at the speech.

Other cabinet ministers were also taken aback by what appeared to be a sudden decision by Reeves several weeks ago. “There really has been a huge row about it, between the Treasury and just about everybody,” said one person close to the discussions.

Some Whitehall officials even suggested Reeves had tried to bounce Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer — who previously voted against the measure — into publicly endorsing the project. He so far avoided doing so, ducking a question on it at last week’s Prime Minister’s Questions session.

Despite Reeves’ warm words, one sceptic inside the government said that Heathrow’s development consent order would still have to pass stringent criteria on climate, air pollution and noise.

“They will still have to reach the same standards that they did 24 hours before this announcement,” they said. “There is a lot of road to run on this.”

Meanwhile long-standing opponent London mayor Sadiq Khan said he remained “simply not convinced that you can have hundreds of thousands of additional flights at Heathrow every year without a hugely damaging impact on our environment”.

Ruth Cadbury, Labour MP for Brentford & Isleworth — and chair of the transport select committee — said the committee would now examine “how clear the links between airport expansion and growth” are.

Cadbury said she was sceptical that the project could ever meet the four tests set by the government on climate change, regional economic benefits, noise and air pollution.

“The test is whether the project provides growth for UK [businesses] as a whole, for the nations and regions, and does it? Not really,” she said.

Reeves, by contrast, insisted the third runway would benefit the entire country.

Reeves insisted the expansion was compatible with the government’s “legal, environmental and climate obligations”, as she pointed to technological advances that could pave the way to “cleaner and greener aviation”.

The aviation industry agrees it can grow while decarbonising. Its road map to net zero 2050, published in 2022, assumes that passenger numbers can still grow while emissions fall.

To do this it is largely relying on “sustainable aviation fuels” or SAFs, which are made up of a diverse range of sources from crops and used cooking oil to household waste. The industry estimates they can emit about 70 per cent less carbon dioxide over its life cycle than traditional aviation fuel.

But it is far more expensive than jet fuel and currently only available in tiny quantities. Airline bosses have said the industry will need considerably more government support to scale up the production of SAFs to reach net zero.

Colin Walker, head of transport at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit research group, said the government’s hopes that sustainable aviation fuel will offset the extra emissions from Heathrow’s expansion “are unrealistic”.

“A third runway will increase emissions way beyond the capacity of these fuels to offset them,” he said.

Meanwhile planning experts said Heathrow has spent decades unsuccessfully pushing for growth.

“Heathrow would have to run really hard and the government’s decisions would be challenged along the way,” said Alistair Watson, partner and head of planning at Taylor Wessing.

“The only ones who will win from this are lawyers.”



Chancellor Rachel Reeves’ change of tone on growth has been long in coming. The Labour government’s repeated emphasis since coming to power on its lousy inheritance from 14 years of Conservative rule — though correct — has damaged business and consumer confidence, and made its own task even harder. The UK chancellor has at last begun to construct a more positive and forward-looking narrative. Yet this is a government that still faces two ways on growth. It vaunts its commitment to rekindling the animal spirits of enterprise even as the taxes and regulation it has heaped on to business are impeding the expansion it claims to want.

If the growth quest is to succeed, one priority must be to demonstrate a joined-up approach across government. Reeves’ statements that economic expansion is the sine qua non of Labour’s entire agenda often seem aimed at convincing fellow ministers as much as the country at large. Prime minister Sir Keir Starmer’s pledge to “hard wire” growth into cabinet decisions, by requiring “growth credentials” to be set out in policy consultations, is positive. But parts of the cabinet’s programme — notably its overcooked employment rights bill — still work against its supposedly overriding priority.

The government needs to ensure, too, that its enthusiasm for grand projects that may take decades to bear fruit is matched by a zeal to sweep away the constraints on more immediate investment across the economy. Committing to major developments such as the Oxford-Cambridge “growth corridor” and a third runway at Heathrow — provided they are delivered — is important as a way of driving long-term GDP growth. It sends a useful message to overseas investors that Britain remains ambitious and open to business. Business groups are clear that well-planned infrastructure developments create jobs and lasting economic gains.

Yet what many companies, especially small and mid-sized businesses that account for half of all private-sector turnover, are interested in above all is faster progress on deregulation, such as easing planning controls on everything from housing to wind farms.

After the government ousted the chair of its competition watchdog last week, they want to hear quickly how it plans to strike the elusive balance between a lighter-touch regulatory approach and opening up the risks of abusive corporate behaviour or financial failures. A truly smart approach here could create a competitive advantage over the sclerotic EU, which on Wednesday launched its own effort to slash red tape in the face of Donald Trump’s deregulation drive in the US.

Above all, however, Labour needs to correct its own mistakes — and lighten the new burdens it heaped on to business by placing the brunt of the £40bn tax increase in its October Budget on to employers and imposing onerous worker rights rules. The government is unlikely to row back on its headline increase in payroll taxes, though it should look again at how inheritance tax changes will hit family businesses. That leaves the employment rights bill as the area most ripe for concessions. Labour must address business concerns over the way it plans to grant day-one protections against unfair dismissal, broaden the rights of those on zero-hour contracts and hand more powers to unions in the workplace.

There are other areas where more boldness is needed. Labour should rethink the red lines that are hemming in its ability to conclude the ambitious new deal it says it wants with the EU. But if its commitment to its overriding priority is genuine, Labour’s biggest task is to heed what the enterprises that can deliver growth say they need.



A UK-based spy ring gathering intelligence for Russia had links to the “highest echelons” of the Bulgarian government, prosecutors said on Wednesday.

Biser Dzhambazov, 43, told Orlin Roussev, 46, that his relationship with several Bulgarian politicians — such as President Rumen Radev, former deputy prime minister Korneliya Ninova and National Assembly member Boyko Rashkov — was “iron clad”, prosecutors said.

The pair have both pleaded guilty to conspiring to spy on behalf of Russia.

The allegations come from the trial of three Bulgarians — Katrin Ivanova, 33, Vanya Gaberova, 30, and Tihomir Ivanchev, 39 — who have been charged with conspiracy to spy in a ring that prosecutors say was overseen by former Wirecard chief operating officer Jan Marsalek.

Prosecutor Alison Morgan KC told the jury at the Old Bailey court in London that the pair were “gleeful” about the outcome of Bulgaria’s November 2021 general election, which the incumbent Radev won, and “could not wait to get started on exploiting those connections”.

In December 2021, Dzhambazov told Roussev that they had to “work out . . . what we want and what we offer” to the Bulgarian government, adding “I’m sure they won’t let us down”. Roussev replied: “I have a long list.”

The claims came during the cross-examination of Ivanova, who denies a charge of conspiracy to spy and possessing false identity documents with improper intent.

Ivanova has said that she was deceived by Dzhambazov, her partner of 10 years, into taking part in six operations across Europe.

These include following and spying on the Bulgarian investigative journalist Christo Grozev — who uncovered Russian links to the 2018 Salisbury attack — to supposedly expose his alleged corruption and links to arms dealers.

Morgan asked why Ivanova had not mentioned her concerns about Grozev to officials at the embassy.

The court also heard how Ivanova, Dzhambazov and Gaberova volunteered to help with expat voting in the UK during the 2021 Bulgarian elections — yet Ivanova claimed when questioned not to be able to name the Bulgarian president.

She said her involvement in the election was motivated by a desire to help people “have their voice”, and repeatedly claimed not to know Radev’s name. Morgan attributed this to Ivanova “know[ing] their name features in a pocket of the evidence of this case”.

Morgan asked her: “Did it ever occur to you that you are the corruption?” She added to Ivanova: “When you were going through this process, it is inconceivable that [Dzhambazov] did not mention to you the connections he had to the Bulgarian government.”

The trial continues.



The writer is a former Treasury minister

Chancellor Rachel Reeves has made a clear attempt this week to change the narrative about the UK economy and the ability of the Starmer government to help boost it. This was necessary. The negative background mood, after hopes rose ahead of the election and immediately after, relapsed following the October Budget to one of recurrent disappointment, low expectation and dismay at the apparent lack of a narrative.

The UK has re-entered a period of close to zero economic growth. The hit to business confidence, induced by the Budget, has been compounded by concerns about rising global bond yields and the constraints this places on the government’s ability to spend, and with it, to borrow.

In her speech, Reeves acknowledged the cost to business from the national insurance increase — and again attempted to explain that she felt it necessary to get the finances under control. But as she pivoted to talk about the supply side, the picture became much more hopeful.

Rather than becoming overly stressed about demand management, I believe this supply-side focus is right. First, because much of the demand will be determined by the Bank of England: if interest rates are reduced in the way many forecast, this should be an important driver. So Reeves would not want to take steps to offset this possibility too much — not least because it would probably help bring UK bond yields down.

Second, as ministers have been eager to tell anyone who will listen, the government is constrained by its own fiscal rules, the first of which limits current spending. If it wants to avoid further tax rises, it will have to stick to them — or something close to them.

Third — and this is especially important — the UK’s problem going right back to the 2008 financial crisis, and before, has always been the supply side. Namely, our woeful productivity and our weak private and public investment. Since the crisis, feeble average growth of 1.5 per cent has been almost completely driven by very strong labour force growth. Productivity growth has remained extremely weak. If we are to have stronger growth while being less inflation-prone, we need more investment and more productivity — it really is that simple.

So Reeves needs to ensure that the government’s 10-year infrastructure strategy is centre stage from now on.

The chancellor correctly talked about excessive regulation, planning approval blocks and a lack of commitment to growth-enhancing investment projects. She promised support for a large scattering of projects to address the persistent delays and barriers to infrastructure, including the Ox-Cam project, support for a third runway at Heathrow as well as a number of schemes in the north of England.

What was missing was the framework. There was no place in her narrative for the institutions that will be crucial to delivering transparent, high-multiplier investments — and they are not actually yet up and running. But this emphasis will be necessary if the government is to instil confidence in investors.

Chancellors always like to announce big attention-catching investments even if, like the Heathrow expansion, they are controversial. Very often, though, these are not accompanied by fresh government capital and are announced on a “trust us” basis in terms of real, lasting benefits.

In this, Reeves is no exception. She cited Frontier Economics research suggesting that a third runway would have positive multipliers outside the London area — this should become part of the framework for every major initiative. But it must be done systematically, especially as the government will need to observe its second fiscal rule, and borrow to invest. Without such a framework, “trust us” might not get such a positive response from the gilt or equity market.

The new National Infrastructure and Service Transformation Authority will not be established until April. But this entity, along with the National Audit Office and others, will be absolutely fundamental to encouraging business, inside and outside of the UK, to boost the economy’s growth potential with investments. I am surprised that the chancellor chose not to talk about it: in effect, this will add and support the growth-focused division of the Treasury that both Reeves and Sir Keir Starmer have promised to establish.

In this spirit, I hope that Reeves will empower Nista to be completely transparent about the investment projects that will have positive multipliers. Because this is also the pathway for indirectly boosting the demand side of the economy, unleashing longer-lasting animal spirits in business and consumers alike.



More than half a dozen major former Conservative donors paid five-figure sums to attend a lavish fundraiser for Reform UK that raised more than £1mn on Tuesday evening.

Past Tory supporters Bassim Haidar and Mohamed Amersi confirmed their presence, and that they had each paid £25,000 for a VIP ticket to the event in order to sit at the top table with party leader Nigel Farage.

Haidar said there were at least eight significant former Conservative donors including himself at the event, while Amersi estimated there were many more “disgruntled Tory donors” at the gathering of about 100 people.

Haidar, a Nigerian-born Lebanese entrepreneur who has given £675,000 to the Conservatives in the past two years, told the FT the event was “a valuable opportunity to learn more about the party’s mission, and I believe they have a good one to ‘make the UK great again’.”

He said it was “worth considering them as a strong alternative” to the Tories, whose crackdown on non-doms prompted vocal criticism from Haidar last year.

Fellow tycoon Amersi, a UK citizen born in Kenya, said the party “certainly appeared far more electable than I would ever have imagined, and Farage was inspirational.” He added: “The energy was electric.”

He said Nigel Farage’s links to Donald Trump were an “added bonus” and praised property magnate Nick Candy, the former Tory donor who became Reform’s treasurer last month.

Amersi, who has given more than £500,000 to the Tories since 2018, said he remained a Conservative member and would be attending a cocktail party it was hosting on Wednesday night in London, as he wished to keep abreast of developments.

But he said the Tories were “losing momentum” and accused party leader Kemi Badenoch of having “no policies, no outreach, no connectivity”, adding that she “doesn’t know what ground she is occupying”.

Asked about past Tory donors attending the Reform dinner this week, Badenoch’s spokesperson said on Wednesday: “There are lots of donors out there and we’re looking for new donors all the time, bringing donors back to the party, so we are very confident about our fundraising.”

They added that the Tory leader is getting the party back on a sure financial footing ready to fight the local elections in May.

Myles Barclay, a young member of the Barclay banking family, and Andrew Reid, the British horse race trainer and former treasurer of the UK Independence party, also attended the dinner, according to two people who attended the event. Neither responded to a request for comment.

Other partygoers paid £10,000 for a seat at the dinner at Oswald’s, an exclusive private members’ club in Mayfair owned by Robin Birley.

Birley himself paid for the food at the event, according to two people briefed on the matter.

Guests were served Dom Pérignon 2012 and Nyetimber English sparkling wine, alongside a menu including lobster and avocado, sea bass, and tarte Tropezienne.

Forms requesting additional donations of between £1,000 to £10,000 were left on the tables.

Farage addressed the crowd, declaring “there is no ‘wokery’ in this room”, according to one partygoer.

He set out the party’s plans to make major gains in the Welsh Senedd elections next year. Reform is set to benefit from changes to the electoral system for the Senedd that will make the result more proportional.

Reform came second in 13 of 32 Welsh constituencies at the general election last year, and secured 17 per cent of votes, though it did not win a single seat.

Oliver Lewis, the party’s Welsh spokesperson, said this month that he believed Reform could form the new Senedd government in 2026.

The dinner is the latest signal of Reform’s momentum, after it overtook the Tories in the polls. The latest average shows Farage’s party is one point ahead of the Conservatives and just three points behind Labour.



Supermarket chain WM Morrison has become the latest UK retailer to warn that it will accelerate cost-cutting following the Labour government’s recent tax increases on employers, as the chancellor defended the move.

Chief executive Rami Baitiéh, who joined the private equity-owned supermarket in 2023 to revive its fortunes and arrest a decline in sales, said its existing cost-saving programme would be sped up partly in response to chancellor Rachel Reeves’ increases in employers’ national insurance contributions and the national living wage that were unveiled in her October Budget.

Baitiéh said that “with the Budget pressures . . . I’m talking about how we can go harder and deeper” to make the retailer more efficient and productive, having saved £312mn in costs in the year to October 27. Morrisons’ national insurance bill will go up by £75mn a year, he said.

The grocery chain, which was acquired by US firm Clayton Dubilier & Rice in a leveraged buyout in 2021, had no plans at present to slash jobs, Baitiéh added, after rival Sainsbury’s this month said it would axe 3,000 jobs.

Separately, Tesco, the UK’s biggest private-sector employer, said on Wednesday that it would cut 400 jobs, affecting bakery roles in some stores, as well as the management of its mobile phone shops. The decision is meant to simplify the business further, said the company, which has more than 330,000 employees, in a statement.

Baitiéh’s comments came as Reeves, in a speech on Wednesday, defended her decision to increase employers’ NICs but acknowledged there were “consequences on business and beyond”.

Separately, Morrisons boasted about recording the strongest quarterly sales improvement in almost four years, thanks to better product availability and competitive prices that attracted shoppers to its stores.

But since its financial year ended, growth slowed quarter on quarter after a cyber attack at a technology provider affected availability and subsequently dented Christmas sales.

Baitiéh said: “Nothing in retail is a straight line and that was certainly the case in the first quarter. Our availability is improving, and although it remains above last year, it is not yet back to pre-incident level.”

Morrisons is the UK’s fifth-biggest supermarket by market share. According to industry data this month from Kantar, Morrisons’ sales growth lagged behind Tesco and Sainsbury’s — the UK’s two largest supermarket chains — as well as discounters Aldi and Lidl during the festive period.

Morrisons’ like-for-like sales rose 4.9 per cent in its fourth quarter to October 27, the strongest quarter since the start of 2021, compared with a 3.3 per cent increase during the same quarter the previous year.

Group full-year like-for-like sales were up 4.1 per cent, while total revenue increased 3.8 per cent to £15.3bn. Underlying profits, its preferred metric, rose 11.2 per cent to £835mn, the company said.

Annual pre-tax loss broadly halved to about £500mn, according to finance chief Jo Goff, and net debt has fallen to about £3bn, from £5.5bn “at peak”. Its annual interest payments are about £250mn a year, she added.

Last year Morrisons agreed a deal to sell its petrol forecourt business to Motor Fuel Group, also owned by CD&R, with the majority of the £2.5bn proceeds used to pay down its debt.

Eleanor Simpson-Gould, a retail analyst at GlobalData, said: “Morrisons has begun to emerge from a bleak period of meagre sales and mounting debt with a strengthened balance sheet.”



Two conflicting thoughts about DeepSeek seem plausible right now. Forced to be resourceful, China is starting to expose the artificial intelligence sector of the US as flabby and coddled. Alternatively, don’t panic, America: the brute scale of US capital will tell in the end, as will the nation’s openness to foreign talent.

Either way, notice the absence of a third horse from all the discussion this week. You wouldn’t know that Europe accounts for a comparable share of world economic output to China and the US. Whatever the feats of such companies as Mistral, the continent’s role in AI — in fact, its place in the world — is increasingly that of an infant watching both parents squabbling overhead.

How has it come to this? Over-regulation of business, say some. Or a far from complete single market, which means that close to half a billion people (who are well-off by world standards) count for less than they should. Yet a third speculation is that Europe lacks an entrepreneurial culture. Whatever relative weight you accord these factors, notice that each one is to some extent a choice. It is hard to escape the conclusion that Europe’s “revealed preference” is to forfeit some economic dynamism for other things.

This is why, despite their best efforts, Elon Musk and other Silicon Valley moguls around Donald Trump will struggle to shape Europe. Their techno-libertarianism has much less purchase on the other side of the Atlantic, even — or especially — among the hard right. Who can imagine Marine Le Pen, supporter of free public transport for young workers, freezing government grants and loans as Trump tried to do this week? Even Giorgia Meloni, a pro-market reformer of sorts, has spent much of the time since the pandemic disbursing EU funds.

In Europe, nationalism is bound up with paternalism to a degree that is alien to the US experience. (Imperial Germany under Bismarck pioneered the welfare state.) The UK isn’t an exception. Brexit was, in part, a bet that British people are essentially Americans in their relish for capitalism, if only the dead hand of Brussels would let them go. Well, the fifth anniversary of the formal exit is this Friday. Still no UK government has felt politically safe to cut much regulation. Even the flintiest Tory must know that, if a single day were shaved off the statutory paid leave allowance, say, there would be pandemonium, much of it among Brexit voters. To be “rightwing” in Europe and America just means different things.

Even within the Trump government, the tech bros are at philosophical odds with the pro-worker Maga base. But at least the two camps can come together over American jingoism. What is going to glue Musk to Europe’s hard right? A shared position on certain cultural issues? It doesn’t seem enough to paper over such wildly different visions of the proper relationship between the individual and the state. Granted, both sides have an interest in the paralysis or destruction of the EU: it would spare Silicon Valley a lot of regulation. But the idea that tech would get an easier ride from a fragmented, populist-led Europe could only be entertained by someone with no knowledge of, say, Le Pen’s economic platform over the years.

The attempt to build a transatlantic club of populists isn’t new. Another Trump associate, Steve Bannon, tried it in the past decade. These projects tend to fall short for a reason that shouldn’t need spelling out. If a movement’s core idea is national assertiveness, the various branches of it around the world will almost by definition come into conflict. One nation’s expansionist territorial claims affect another’s. The desire of Strongman X to push his tech companies into foreign markets rubs against Strongman Y’s security paranoia and amour propre. The Russo-Japanese war, Operation Barbarossa, the Sino-Soviet split: liberalism owes its survival in large part to the innate fissiparousness of those who hate it. Trump, Le Pen and the like aren’t monsters on anything approaching that scale. But the principle that jingoists tend to fall out, must fall out, holds. There won’t be a Nationalist International.

Not long ago, self-respecting European reactionaries almost defined themselves against the US, which they saw as both culturally imperial and culturally empty. Even in the cold war, when the alternative was communism, parts of the continental right stood aloof. At least US Republicans used to notice the snub, and mind. Now? No head of government in the EU is closer to China than Viktor Orbán of Hungary. Yet no head of government in the EU is more beloved of America’s anti-China hard right. Whether this double game says more about his wiliness or the attention span of today’s Republicans, it is a lesson in how differently a European populist can see geopolitics from an American.

This isn’t a call for liberals to relax. The US right has the resources to put more than a thumb on the scales of European politics. With a federal election close, the Alternative for Germany is being magnified through the personal attention of Musk. But these are tactics. A more lasting alliance, an American-exported revolution, assumes a harmony of worldview that isn’t there. If the European hard right succeeds, it won’t be on account of outsiders whose very foreignness might incur a backlash. Liberalism has always been able to count on its enemies turning their belligerence on each other.

janan.ganesh@ft.com



Get Britain building again! In any conversation about the UK’s ability to construct large, growth-boosting infrastructure projects — or not — a third runway at Heathrow tops the list of missed opportunities. Efforts to expand the west London hub date back decades.

That makes it an obvious target for UK chancellor Rachel Reeves, who wants to persuade investors and businesses that her government is pro-growth. The difficulty is convincing them that a third runway can actually be delivered.

On paper, there are some sound economic arguments to support expansion. Heathrow is not only the UK’s busiest airport, catering to an estimated 83.8mn passengers in 2024, it is also the country’s largest port by value.

Even with its current two runways it has kept increasing passenger numbers, breaking a fresh record in November. Yet further growth, through small changes such as persuading airlines to switch to bigger jets, will have limits. Flights are capped at 480,000 annually. Slots to launch new routes are constrained; the airport is running at 99 per cent capacity.

There are soft benefits, too. Almost any traveller will have a story about delays or flight cancellations at Heathrow — in part a symptom of its capacity constraints.

True, there are five other “London” airports that airlines can choose from, if Southend in Essex is included. But Heathrow is a favourite for long-haul carriers as transfer traffic makes certain routes economically viable.

In reality, though, the barriers remain huge. A previous Labour administration approved a third runway at the airport in 2009. A shovel is yet to hit the ground.

Even if the weighty concerns of environment campaigners and west London residents could be swept aside, the cost and how it can be funded without making passengers and airlines balk are still big unknowns. Even in 2014, when Heathrow forecast the cost at close to £14bn, others reckoned this was an underestimation. Airlines are wary of how much charges — passed on to passengers — would have to rise to fund the returns private investors would demand.

Of course impasses over big, tricky projects have been broken before. Nuclear power plants in the UK had a similar stop-start history, which ended in 2016 when Theresa May’s government gave the go-ahead for the Hinkley Point C plant in south-west England. But now over-time and over-budget, it may not be a comparison the government is keen to make.

What’s obvious, though, is this isn’t really about near-term growth at all — rather the perception of growth. With UK businesses deeply gloomy about the consequences of Budget tax changes this year, it is little wonder the chancellor is grasping for any levers she can to get the endorphins going.

nathalie.thomas@ft.com



UK chancellor Rachel Reeves has urged Heathrow airport to fast-track proposals to build a third runway, in a much-trailed speech that sought to reinvigorate the Labour government’s growth agenda.

Reeves said the government hoped to grant planning permission to Heathrow’s expansion by the end of the current parliament in 2029, a target the airport’s boss told the Financial Times was “ambitious, but not undoable”.

The chancellor said expanding Heathrow would “unlock further growth, boost investment, increase exports and make Britain more open and more connected” in a speech on her plans to boost the flatlining UK economy.

“I can confirm today that this government supports a third runway at Heathrow and is inviting proposals to be brought forward by the summer,” Reeves said.

Thomas Woldbye, chief executive of Heathrow, the UK’s largest airport, told the FT he was confident the hub would put forward detailed proposals on that timeline. He added that the earliest the third runway could be completed would be the mid-2030s if everything went to plan.

“The target is to have planning permission by the end of this parliament. That is ambitious, but not undoable, seen from our point of view,” he said.

Woldbye added: “We are standing on, if you like, a huge body of work that has been done in the past 10 years. If we didn’t have that, we wouldn’t be able to do that, because this is a huge and complicated project.”

Heathrow’s pre-pandemic blueprint was for a multibillion-pound megaproject that would include diverting the M25 motorway into a tunnel to make room for the new runway. In the process, 750 homes and a primary school would be demolished.

Reeves said airport expansion was compatible with the government’s legally binding net zero 2050 target, pointing to “cleaner and greener flying” through so-called sustainable aviation fuels.

Sir Sadiq Khan, the Labour mayor of London, said he “remained opposed” to a new runway.

“I’m simply not convinced that you can have hundreds of thousands of additional flights at Heathrow every year without a hugely damaging impact on our environment,” he said.

The government’s push for airport expansion has also alarmed local residents and environmental groups.

“Instead of picking up any old polluting project from the discard pile, the chancellor should focus on industries that can attract investment and bring wider economic and social benefits,” said Greenpeace UK’s policy director Doug Parr.

Expansion plans at London’s Gatwick and Luton airports are further ahead in the planning process than Heathrow. Transport secretary Heidi Alexander is expected to greenlight their proposals by spring.

In her speech in Oxfordshire on Wednesday, Reeves stressed her determination to “grow the supply side of our economy”, outlining a three-pillar approach built on stability, reform and investment.

“Growth will not come without a fight, without a government willing to take the right decisions now to change our country’s future for the better,” she said.

Reeves also confirmed plans to make Oxford and Cambridge “Europe’s Silicon Valley”, with new transport links between the university towns, as well as support for a proposed regeneration scheme around Manchester United’s stadium at Old Trafford.

Business leaders have previously criticised the Labour government for introducing measures that executives say will hit growth, including a £25bn national insurance increase on employers and new labour laws.

Reeves defended the tax rises as necessary given the government’s fiscal inheritance and declined to answer a question on whether she was ruling out further taxes on businesses.

Reacting to the speech, Stephen Phipson, chief executive of manufacturers’ organisation Make UK, warned that the government needed to resolve the contradiction between the Budget tax rises and the ambitions set out by the chancellor.

“There is a clear contradiction between implementing laudable measures such as planning reform and infrastructure investment whilst, at the same time, applying a handbrake through measures which will inevitably reduce investment and freeze recruitment. This is a clear dichotomy that government needs to resolve internally,” he said.

The chancellor also stood by Labour’s flagship workers’ rights package.

The measures could cost businesses up to £5bn a year, according to the government’s own analysis and have been heavily opposed by industry, but Reeves argued they would bolster growth.

“A secure workforce is a more confident, more productive workforce and also more confident to spend in the economy,” she said.

She insisted that deputy prime minister Angela Rayner and business secretary Jonathan Reynolds have “worked closely with business to understand their concerns”, including on probation periods and the flexibility to take on workers during busy times, such as school holidays.

In a bid to reassure industry, she said the bill that the government takes through parliament “will reflect those concerns so that we get the balance right, supporting working people and supporting businesses”.

Additional reporting by Peter Foster in London and Jennifer Williams in Manchester



Good morning. Rachel Reeves has a big speech today in which she will promise to go “further and faster” to increase UK economic growth. (Our story here.) However, I will wait until after the chancellor’s address before giving my thoughts, as I prefer not to analyse speech extracts.

There is still more to be said about the government’s options for tweaking our counterterrorism response following the Southport murders. One aspect of that was the subject of an urgent question in the House of Commons yesterday. So today, I want to talk about the benefits of keeping those changes within the walls of the UK’s existing counterterrorism capabilities or as an extension to it.

Prevent was established in the wake of the 2005 bombings in London, in which the perpetrators were all British-born. Its brief then was solely to focus on Islamist extremist terror, which makes up roughly 75 per cent of MI5’s counterterrorism caseload in the UK. Since then, Prevent’s remit has been expanded to include other forms of extremism, most importantly from a resource perspective the extreme far-right, which makes up almost all of the remainder of MI5’s caseload.

Some critics of the programme argue that this broadening of scope waters down Prevent’s focus and thus its effectiveness. I think there’s some truth in this, but there’s a trade-off either way. One reason why I favour keeping all the extremist ideologies under one hat is that very few organisations advocate for their own abolition. As I’ve written a lot lately, violent animal rights activists, who in the 2000s represented a serious threat both to the life of scientific researchers and to the ability of the UK to actually deliver scientific advances, have been pretty comprehensively routed by the British security services.

I’m not saying that violent animal rights activists are never going to re-enter the scene, but I am saying that, at present, they aren’t a big threat in the UK. I think the nature of human affairs is that, if a separate part of the UK’s counterterrorism apparatus were dealing with violent animal rights activists, they would be talking up this threat to ensure their continued relevance, engaging in turf wars with other bits of the security services and generally this would drain resources and time to no good end.

Similarly, a stripped down Prevent is not going to unlock greater time and resources to tackle the problem of people who support or commit acts of terror because they are Islamist extremists. It is going to spend that time having bureaucratic battles with whatever organisation you set up to address the problem of people who support or commit acts of terror because they are on the extreme right, the extreme left, and various other causes that are currently marginal in the UK.

We may not ever be able to comprehensively defeat either Islamist extremists or the extreme far right, as we currently have done to violent animal rights activists. But it is at least theoretically arguable we shouldn’t create organisations that are incentivised to pretend that we have not prevailed.

Violence for violence’s sake, however, which typifies many spree killers and school shooters, and was the case for Axel Rudakubana, is a perennial policy problem. No state has a clear sense of how to stop that problem entirely and it may well simply be part of the human condition. A separate focus on those committing violent acts for their own sake wouldn’t have the same risks of obsolescence later down the line — but would, of course, still be competing for resources.

I had a lovely dinner last night courtesy of Martin Sandbu, but I did not, alas, have the presence of mind to ask for his recipe book. (Premium subscribers: sign up to the excellent Free Lunch newsletter, which is also now written by economics leader writer Tej Parikh on Sundays.)

I haven’t quite decided what I should cook for the return fixture but my absolute favourite cookery book is Claudia Roden’s wonderful Med.



Good morning and welcome to White House Watch! Today let’s talk about:

Jay Powell 1, Donald Trump 0.

The president did not get what he wanted from the US Federal Reserve chair yesterday. Jay Powell and his fellow central bank officials held interest rates steady, defying pressure from Donald Trump to slash borrowing costs.

The Fed kept its benchmark rate between 4.25 and 4.5 per cent and signalled it wouldn’t be moving anytime soon: Powell said that rate-setters “do not need to be in a hurry to adjust our policy stance”.

Trump was quick to express his displeasure with the decision and derided the central bank, which operates independently. He blamed Powell for inflation and said the Fed was too focused on diversity, equity and inclusion instead of high prices.

“Because Jay Powell and the Fed failed to stop the problem they created with Inflation, I will do it by unleashing American Energy production, slashing Regulation, rebalancing International Trade, and reigniting American Manufacturing,” he wrote on Truth Social soon after the rate announcement.

“If the Fed had spent less time on DEI, gender ideology, ‘green’ energy, and fake climate change, Inflation would never have been a problem. Instead, we suffered from the worst Inflation in the History of our Country!”

Powell, however, refused to react to Trump’s demands. During his press conference yesterday he stated that he was “not going to have any response or comment on what the president said”. The new administration’s policies were “not for us to criticise, or to praise”, he added.

Cornell University professor Eswar Prasad told the FT’s Claire Jones that this rate decision “will cue the political pressure”, adding:

Trump wants to destroy nuclear missiles with space lasers [free to read].

He made the proposal as part of an executive order that tasks his new defence secretary Pete Hegseth with coming up with a plan, in the next 60 days, to defend the US against missile attacks.

Trump’s idea includes building an air defence system over the US that he’s dubbed the “Iron Dome for America”, in a nod to Israel’s renowned missile shield. But what he actually has in mind is more akin to Ronald Reagan’s so-called Star Wars programme, launched in 1983 at the height of the cold war.

This Star Wars 2.0 fantasy would cost hundreds of billions of dollars — and face immense technological challenges. It also could provoke China and Russia to take countermeasures that would cancel out its effects.

Analysts say that a leakproof, space-based missile shield is all but impossible. “There is no magical security blanket,” said Tom Karako, a leading missile expert at the CSIS think-tank in Washington.

Plus, “one cannot put active defences everywhere that would be needed to defend cities, critical infrastructure and military sites”, Stacie Pettyjohn, of the Center for a New American Security think-tank, told me.

Israel’s Iron Dome defends only small areas from short-range, low-flying and non-nuclear missiles. Trump’s version seeks to intercept intercontinental ballistic missiles that travel 100 times further and seven times faster. (The US is almost 450 times bigger than Israel.)

He wants it to deploy “space-based interceptors” — a web of satellites, some equipped with lasers. But detecting, intercepting and destroying ballistic nuclear missiles during the three- to five-minute period before they enter orbit, would require laser beams effective over hundreds of kilometres.

Technology like that simply doesn’t exist.



Greetings. Last week I asked for your ideas of possible “grey swans” of Trumponomics 2.0, and you didn’t disappoint. Your worries included huge costs from new pandemics, a “wild spree of violence and revenge led by the just-pardoned criminals”, Donald Trump’s deteriorating mental health leading to him being replaced by JD Vance, an actual military grab for Greenland, and peace in Ukraine, the Middle East, or both. Oh, and a credit crisis for the US government.

All are huge but conceivable events, and the repercussions would be incalculable. But nobody — me included — predicted the sudden stops in government spending that have taken place since last week. Today’s column offers some thoughts on that.

When I say sudden, I mean sudden. First, Trump signed an executive order suspending all development aid for 90 days, with reviews determining what spending should be reinstated. Then the Office of Management and Budget announced an indefinite freeze on all federal grants and financial aid, with the exception of Medicare, social security and aid directly to individuals — but including all aid given through states, NGOs and so on. Naturally, chaos ensued, to the point where the administration U-turned, cancelling the across-the-board domestic grant freeze while pointedly reasserting the intention of aligning spending with Trump’s Maga agenda.

The original sweeping instruction on federal spending was imprecise, got the numbers wrong (it said the federal government spent “nearly $10tn” in the 2024 fiscal year, while the true number is $6.75tn), and was wildly ideological. Here are some excerpts from the OMB’s memo:

Don’t let the over-the-top silliness or the U-turn distract from the enormity of what was attempted. First, in sheer economic terms, chaos was guaranteed. Steve Bannon’s call from eight years ago for a “deconstruction of the administrative state” is back on.

Already the foreign aid freeze (which remains in force, as far as I can tell) seems to have stopped a lot of programmes in their tracks, with many development agency staff apparently ordered to stop working. And hardly any work in international development will be unaffected, since the US is the rich world’s largest donor of development aid — largely as a function of its huge economic size; it’s near the bottom of the list on a per capita basis. (Secretary of state Marco Rubio has now also approved some exceptions from the foreign aid freeze for some humanitarian assistance.)

The effects of the domestic financial assistance “pause” were bigger and more chaotic still. Medicaid — providing the healthcare of nearly one-fifth of Americans — seems to have been affected. I am told universities and health research bodies were thrown into disarray. A federal judge immediately blocked part of the order. But the uncertainty remains, beyond the possible economic fallout.

For the second type of chaos that the Trump White House has plunged the nation into is a legal and constitutional crisis, and one that more of us should frankly have seen coming. Back in November, Matt Glassman of Georgetown University warned against “potentially the biggest executive threat to the separation of powers of them all”. He was talking about violating the 1974 Impoundment Control Act, which makes it illegal for the president to simply refuse to spend money that Congress has appropriated. Shortly after the election, the newly announced heads of the “Department of Government Efficiency”, Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy, wrote in the Wall Street Journal that Trump regarded the act as unconstitutional. There is no reason to see this week’s backtracking as a change of mind, rather than a mere tactical retreat.

The federal spending freeze was, in other words, the opening salvo of a huge constitutional battle over the separation and balance of legal power in the US, in which Trump and his team are aiming to shift as much power from the legislative to the executive branch of government. That is of a piece with their support for the “unitary executive” theory which rejects limits on the president’s authority over the entire executive branch.

Third, and most important, is the political significance. A shift of power from the legislature to the executive, and a concentration of executive power in the president — what does that look like to you? I was struck by one sentence in the OMB memo in particular:

“Career and political appointees in the Executive Branch have a duty to align Federal spending and action with the will of the American people as expressed through Presidential priorities.” It also directed federal agencies to put political appointees in charge of ensuring that grants “conform to Administration priorities”.

What if “administration priorities” run counter to congressional ones? This conflict arises automatically in this case, where the presidential priority is not to spend money Congress has decided to spend. The memo could not be clearer about the answer: the will of the people is expressed through presidential priorities — not, then, those of the elected houses of Congress. The rule, in short, of one man.

The OMB memo did, to be fair, include this qualifier: “to the extent permissible under applicable law”. That extent will now be tested, and fought over, perhaps to destruction. For the stakes can hardly be exaggerated. This assault on both Congress’s power of the purse and on the US’s administrative state is as much of a self-coup as was the spurring of insurrectionists on January 6 2021.



In our era, the meaning of any image depends which side you’re on. Take the photograph of Mark Zuckerberg, Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk and Sundar Pichai sitting in front of cabinet members at Donald Trump’s second inauguration. Caricature liberal elitists, like me, saw it as a portrait of American oligarchy. Trump, his supporters and the tech moguls themselves interpret the picture differently.

Trump, a master of spectacle, put the billionaires there for a reason. His message: “I’ve brought them to heel and harnessed them to the American project.” He knows most of his voters will approve. Maga is built more on the cult of the entrepreneur than on the cult of the strongman, though they overlap. Many businesspeople regard great entrepreneurs as the winners of life’s game.

Trump built his reputation playing a great entrepreneur on TV. He then went into politics selling the notion that government was a “malfunctioning corporation called the USA”, to quote Gordon Gekko’s “Greed is good” speech from the 1987 movie Wall Street. Trump promised to run government like a business. The Donald Trump vs Kamala Harris election was, among countless contrasts, entrepreneur against government official.

Trumpism may represent the peak of the political cult of entrepreneurs. I can’t think of another entrepreneur becoming head of government in a major economy, except Silvio Berlusconi. Past US political cults were attached to soldiers (Washington, Eisenhower) or to corporate bosses, such as Mitt Romney. George W Bush, who had a Harvard MBA, was hailed as a “CEO president”. But the corporate CEO is a rule-bound figure in a suit with degrees. The entrepreneur is a wilder beast, autonomous, rule-breaking, often a college dropout. He’s his own man. (This is a male cult — recall Zuckerberg’s recent praise of “masculine energy”.)

The biggest entrepreneurial fortunes in history were coined in Silicon Valley between about 1998 and 2008. Today, the beneficiaries are middle aged. Their 80-hour workweeks are mostly over, leaving them with enough energy to pour into politics. They are known to ordinary Americans by their first names or nicknames, in Musk’s case by his tweets, and by their anti-corporate dress. The billionaires relentlessly self-brand as iconoclasts, which can go wrong, as perhaps with Musk’s apparent Nazi salute.

Underpinning the cult is the belief that what’s good for entrepreneurs is good for America. Venture capitalist Marc Andreessen told podcaster Joe Rogan that Trump’s message, “America has to win”, meant that US companies “should win global markets . . . How can anybody be against that?” After all, Andreessen argued, only economic growth could pay for “welfare programmes and food assistance programmes, all these things”.

The argument is dubious. First, Europeans retire earlier and live longer than Americans, despite lower economic growth and mostly lower governmental debt-to-GDP ratios. Second, growth doesn’t necessarily boost public spending given that Big Tech has perfected tax avoidance. Nor do these companies create many jobs. Meta has 72,000 mostly high-skilled employees, including immigrants on H1-B visas.

Last, how do the moguls — who spent decades ignoring Washington — read that photograph? In Andreessen’s telling, Joe Biden forced them into Trump’s arms. Whereas most ordinary Americans seem to have experienced Bidenism as a time of inflation and drift, the moguls saw something more sinister: a business-hating administration stamping out their freedoms. Andreessen accuses the Biden-era Securities and Exchange Commission of “trying to kill the crypto industry”.

Crypto and AI are the entrepreneurs’ new battlefields. One difference between Trump I and Trump II is that the price of bitcoin was $900 in 2016 and is more than $100,000 today, while we saw on Monday that shifts in AI can now turn global stock markets.

On crypto and AI, as on everything else, America is divided. Democrats are wary of crypto as a money-laundering opportunity. Trumpists see it as a libertarian business that subverts government (albeit that crypto entrepreneurs want bank accounts and Trump’s support). Biden tried to regulate AI; Trump won’t. Tech moguls hope he’ll help them win what Peter Thiel calls the “global war” to conquer enemy territories such as the EU, the UK and Brazil.

Billionaires care about policies, but they want love too. Several, like Andreessen, used to lean liberal. But if liberals reject you, you’ll choose the guy who loves you (for now) and shows it with his seating plan.

Email Simon at simon.kuper@ft.com

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend Magazine on X and FT Weekend on Instagram



With Colombian anti-narcotrafficking helicopters idle for want of fuel and news outlets in Ukraine threatened by closure, aid organisations and governments around the world are frantically trying to understand how the abrupt freeze of US foreign aid will affect their activities.

The 90-day suspension of US aid and “stop-work” requirement following US President Donald Trump’s executive order last week has exposed with lightning-like intensity the global reach of US assistance, whose diverse projects worldwide have been an essential part of American soft power.

The new stance on foreign assistance could threaten that goodwill by putting countries on notice that there was no longer a “distinction between allies, partners and enemies”, said Gyude Moore, a former Liberian public works minister and fellow at the Center for Global Development, a Washington think-tank. “It crystallises this idea that any engagement with the US is transactional.”

After a global outcry, Marco Rubio, US secretary of state, clarified on Tuesday that “core life-saving programmes” related to medicine, food and shelter would be exempt from the suspension. Still, humanitarian organisations around the world were left trying to figure out how they would be affected. Yet more international programmes were threatened by Trump’s shortlived federal budget suspension, which was scrapped on Wednesday.

“We are encouraged to hear that there is a waiver process for life saving programmes, but remain concerned that this could get caught up in bureaucratic red tape,” said Elizabeth Hoffman, North America executive director at One, an organisation that campaigns for financing and debt relief for poor countries.

Beatriz Grinsztejn, International Aids Society president, highlighted the threat to the US-backed President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief, which has invested more than $110bn in HIV treatment since 2003 and is credited with saving millions of lives in Africa and elsewhere. “PEPFAR provides life-saving antiretrovirals for more than 20mn people,” she said. If funding is cut, “people are going to die and HIV will resurge”.

The State Department has not provided additional guidance since Rubio loosened some restrictions, according to a US official and the head of a humanitarian organisation. Many organisations had already received stop work orders and have implemented them absent the additional information, rendering the waiver useless at this point, they said.

Trump’s executive order questioned the rationale of much US assistance, which amounted to $64.7bn in 2023, according to ONE, more than a quarter of the $223bn provided by rich countries in that year.

According to Trump’s executive order, much US spending was “antithetical to American values”. Tammy Bruce, a state department spokeswoman, said the US was “no longer going to blindly dole out money with no return for the American people”.

The threat of abrupt withdrawal of swaths of US aid, even once the temporary ban is lifted, has also underlined the historic difference between Washington’s assistance, with its emphasis on grants for health, development and human rights, and that of Beijing, whose main focus has been on loans for Chinese-built infrastructure.

“We rely heavily on the US for our funding and it is a very big headache,” said an adviser to the government in Sierra Leone in west Africa, where US-funded Mpox monitoring and HIV testing immediately stopped following Trump’s executive order.

“The best-case scenario is to get funding elsewhere,” said the adviser, part of whose salary is paid for by US aid, but indicated that China is unlikely to step fully into the breach.

Among the programmes immediately threatened, said officials, were relief efforts in Sudan, where nearly two years of civil war has unleashed arguably the world’s worst humanitarian catastrophe, with about half the 49mn population on the verge of famine.

Amjed Farid, a former special adviser to the civilian government, said vital communal kitchens relied exclusively on donor support.

“The freeze on US funding now threatens to leave millions of Sudanese vulnerable to further suffering, starvation, and inadequate medical care,” he said, although it was unclear whether Rubio’s waiver might save such programmes.

In Ukraine, the world’s biggest recipient of international assistance since the start of Russia’s invasion in February 2022, USAID has provided $2.6bn in humanitarian aid, $5bn in development assistance and more than $30bn in direct budget support.

Although President Volodymyr Zelenskyy confirmed that US military assistance had not been stopped, dozens of Ukrainian entities, including news outlets, medical facilities and veterans organisations, have reported receiving “stop work” orders.

Mediarukh, a coalition of news outlets and watchdogs, said in a statement that the freeze would have an impact on the country’s information space, which Russia has exploited during its war. “Independent Ukrainian media is one of the key elements that distinguishes us from [Vladimir] Putin’s Russia,” it said.

Colombia, which was due to receive about $380mn this year in development and counternarcotics funding, has been hit by the spending freeze.

The country has hosted around 2.8mn Venezuelan migrants, according to the International Organization for Migration, with many NGOs that provide shelter, food, and orientation now unable to pay for their operations.

“All project activities associated with these sources of funding have been suspended,” said an international NGO worker.

Even several Colombian police operations financed by the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs were put on ice during Trump’s separate federal budget suspension, which was later dropped. “Narcotics, wildlife trafficking, flora trafficking, illegal mining, hydrocarbons, everything [was] affected,” said the official.

Aid officials sought to present their programmes — whether in early-warning systems for the next pandemic or countering terrorism through youth projects — as contributing to US security in line with Trump’s new “America first” policy.

“PEPFAR is not just a global health programme, it’s a cornerstone of US national security, protecting Americans from emerging health threats,” said Hoffman of the One Campaign. “Our adversaries will capitalise on this gap in US leadership and promote disinformation which will undermine trust in the US and damage our reputation around the world.”

In Afghanistan, where the US is the largest humanitarian donor, the cuts threatened help for the women who have been erased from public life since the Taliban took over, especially young girls who still have some access to primary education.

In the long run, more threatened still may be programmes seen to run counter to Trump’s orders to “end ‘wokeness’” and to stop the use of US taxpayer money to fund what the Office of Management and Budget called “Marxist equity, transgenderism and green new deal social engineering”.

In Lebanon, Bechara Samneh, a board member at Mosaic, which provides psychosocial support to LGBT+ people — among the few active organisations providing such a service — said it had long relied on foreign donors because of local unwillingness to fund the group.

During the recent war, Mosaic provided shelter and emergency services for 400 displaced LGBT+ people. “What does it mean for the LGBTQI+ community on the ground?” Samneh said. “It means no services, no support, no emergency, no protection.”

Still, some policy advocates argued that, however unwelcome the prospective cuts were, they served as a reminder that many health and welfare systems overly depended on foreign aid.

“Our governments now know that help is coming from nowhere,” said Ayoade Alakija, a global health specialist from Nigeria. “They need to start funding things themselves and investing in their own health and education.”

Additional reporting by Andres Schipani in New Delhi, Malaika Kanaaneh Tapper in Beirut and Felicia Schwartz in Washington

Data visualisation by Clara Murray



The European Space Agency on Thursday put €862mn behind its goal to be a major player in lunar exploration, awarding a contract to Thales Alenia Space to build its first cargo vehicle for the Moon.

Daniel Neuenschwander, the ESA’s head of human and robotic exploration, said the deal to begin developing and building the robotic Argonaut lunar lander marked a major milestone in Europe’s strategy to secure greater autonomy in space.

It comes as Europe prepares for possible changes to US space policy under President Donald Trump.

“If Europe wants to play a substantial role in lunar exploration, it has to come with its own capabilities,” Neuenschwander told the Financial Times. “The Argonaut is really Europe’s autonomous and versatile access to the Moon.”

The contract is also a big win for Thales Alenia Space, a joint venture that is 67 per cent owned by France’s Thales and 33 per cent by Italy’s Leonardo.

Thales Alenia Space fought off competition from Airbus to build the lunar descent element of the lander — in essence a space truck designed to carry 1.5 metric tonnes of cargo to the Moon.

Germany’s OHB will provide navigation control and communication elements.

Argonaut is due to fly its first mission in about 2031, and is expected to carry cargo to the Moon roughly every two years after that.

The first mission, which is under discussion now, could involve delivery of navigation and telecommunication payloads, or energy generation and storage systems.

Argonaut is meant not just to enhance Europe’s independence in lunar exploration, but to take advantage of Nasa’s flagship Artemis programme, which aims to land humans on the Moon by 2027.

The win “means a lot to the company”, Thales Alenia Space chief executive Hervé Derrey said.

For Europe, he added, “it can be seen as a precursor to a growing and improving technological capability, offering an important asset for transporting experiments and materials in support of lunar exploration missions”.

Thales Alenia Space’s facility in Turin has a long history of building space modules.

It has manufactured nearly half of the pressurised modules for the International Space Station, and is a key supplier on US and European space programmes.

Derrey said exploration was “a big growing market” for his business. Thales Alenia Space in 2023 generated annual revenues of €2.2bn.

The Argonaut contract win is also good news for the joint venture’s owners, who are contemplating a consolidation of certain space assets with Airbus amid a downturn in the market for big communication satellites.

The exploration market is booming partly because of rising global interest in putting humans on the Moon again, and potentially on Mars.

Nasa has encouraged significant private sector involvement in the Artemis programme to help cut exploration costs.

Officials at Nasa have repeatedly insisted the development of a so-called lunar economy will be key to ensuring the success of future exploration efforts, including a permanent human presence on the Moon.

Several companies across the world are developing lunar landers to carry crew and cargo to the Moon as a result.

Analysys Mason, the space consultancy, estimated in its lunar market report published last summer that Moon missions between 2023 and 2033 could generate $151bn in revenues, three-quarters of which will be from government customers. Infrastructure and transport revenues were expected to account for roughly 43 per cent of that sum.

Neuenschwander said the prime driver for the European lunar lander was to ensure autonomy and strengthen Europe’s value as a partner.

However, the lander would have to be competitive and, eventually, Argonaut would evolve to be reusable, he added.

Derrey said landers carrying cargo to the Moon was an area where Europe could develop an advantage “as no one has demonstrated the capability to safely land on the Moon for this particular need until now”.

“Europe and European industries have all the technological capabilities required to compete in the lunar landing market,” he added.



Good morning. OpenAI says it has found evidence that its proprietary model was used to train DeepSeek’s revolutionary R1. But in the US-China artificial intelligence competition, do intellectual property rules apply? Should they? Unhedged doesn’t remember there being much fuss about terms of service agreements during the Manhattan project or the space race. And, for the future of humanity, AI is supposed to be more important than either of those. Send us your thoughts: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

The Federal Reserve held rates steady today — as expected — officially bringing its cutting cycle to a pause. At first, the wording of the official statement made it seem like the Fed’s posture was more hawkish than the market expected. In December, the statement read “inflation has made progress towards the committee’s 2 per cent objective but remains elevated”. This time, the statement omitted the “progress” part. Yields on the two-year Treasury rose briefly:

They fell shortly after, when chair Jay Powell dismissed the wording concern and emphasised that the central bank thinks policy is sufficiently restrictive, and inflation should continue to fall.

Other than that moment of miscommunication, it was a boring press conference. Powell did not give much on the big questions of the day — tariffs, immigration, tax, and quantitative tightening. The dullness reflected the fact that monetary policy has become less important as we inch closer to the inflation target.

Donald Trump has been breathing down the Fed’s neck. At Davos, the president said he would “demand that interest rates drop immediately”. After yesterday’s meeting, he posted the following on Truth Social:

Beneath the invective, there might be a concession to reality here. Demanding the Fed cuts rates is self-defeating at best, and the Davos demand was not repeated. If Trump wants to change the rate environment, keep inflation low, or increase growth, he’ll have to use other tools. The ball is squarely in his court.

The Fed has every reason to do nothing. The jobs market is healthy, the economy is growing, we just got two sideways inflation readings, and it seems like there is enough liquidity in the system for quantitative tightening to continue. Policy should remain where it is until more good inflation news comes in, or until the employment numbers show signs of weakness.

Meanwhile, we know nothing about Trump’s economic policy plans beyond some broad priorities, a few provocative actions, and a lot of hot rhetoric. Even if the Fed is starting to look at the risks posed by tariffs and deportations, as Powell has hinted it is, the strong economy means the central bank can afford to keep quiet and wait to see what develops. The same cannot be said of other central banks. The Bank of Canada cut rates earlier today and paused its quantitative tightening. Though tariffs were not the sole reason for the cut, governor Tiff Macklem was not shy about the potential impacts of Trump’s trade policies. He spent most of his conference discussing how the BoC was factoring tariffs into its forecasts and preparing to help counter the negative impacts. That the BoC is more forthcoming is part politics, and part economic fundamentals: tariffs, in any form, will hurt Canada much more than the US.

Fiscal policy and monetary policy are always vying for top spot on the market’s list of concerns. For now, there is little to see at the Fed. What the market needs is clarity on the fiscal front.

(Reiter)

One occupational hazard of being a market analyst are the periodic, acutely uncomfortable moments when it looks like days of hard work amounted to a lot of pointless shouting into the void. Data gathered, correlations teased out, hypothesis formed, historical analogies marshalled, counterarguments tested, arguments made. Events can reduce it all to so much squawking.

Day three of DeepSeekWeek had a distinct flavour of this futility. What have markets really learned? Much has been learned about AI from a technical point of view, of course. But the implications of these discoveries for the economy and corporate finance are, it must be admitted, still obscure. There is some consensus that Nvidia’s competitive moat is a bit less wide than it was believed to be last week. For the rest of the Magnificent Seven, all of which have a lot at stake in the AI race, the implications of radically cheaper AI models are much less clear. Apple’s strategy of not shooting tens of billions of dollars at the problems looks a little wiser now, but that’s about it.

The impact on power providers is opaque, too. Of the three utilities hit hardest this week, two (Vistra and Constellation) made significant recoveries yesterday and all three are still up over the past month. Almost all of their AI-inspired gains are still in place.

We did get a smidgen of clarity last night, when Microsoft and Meta confirmed their huge capital expenditure budgets — driven by the need for compute capacity for AI — would remain vast in the near future. Meta said capital expenditure would grow 70 per cent in 2025, to as much as $65bn.

Still, any recent insights into the most important trend in the most important sector in global stock markets seem very vulnerable to wholesale revision in the near term. Two familiar insights have been reinforced, however. Concentrated, expensive, and optimistic markets are sensitive beasts. Get used to short, sharp moves and countermoves, like the ones we’ve seen in the past few days. And remember that AI is a technology that can surprise even its leading practitioners. Forecasts for how it is going to evolve should be treated with scepticism.

Breit’s blues.



Good morning and welcome back to Energy Source, coming to you from New York.

The US Federal Reserve held interest rates steady yesterday, defying Donald Trump’s calls for deep reductions. The Fed’s pause on cuts is a setback for the renewable energy industry, which has struggled from high upfront costs and faces an uncertain future amid the US president’s tariffs threats and restrictions to solar and wind development.

Today’s Energy Source takes a first look at Trump’s efforts to unpick Joe Biden’s climate and clean energy legacy during his first week in office. We spent days reading through his barrage of executive orders and consulting with lawyers about the legal basis behind his rescissions. Email me if there’s something we missed at: amanda.chu@ft.com.

Thanks for reading,

Amanda

On his first day back in office, US President Donald Trump signed a blizzard of executive orders, bolstering the country’s fossil fuel sector and launching his first strikes at Joe Biden’s climate and industrial legacy.

An FT analysis released this morning found the new president has taken more than 70 actions to undo federal commitments, initiatives, and targets aimed at combating climate change, limiting oil and gas development, and spurring the renewable energy buildout.

We spent days combing through Trump’s first week of executive orders related to energy and climate, as well as the dozens of executive orders and presidential memorandums he rescinded, which date back as early as 1977.

Here is a breakdown of what we found — plus a complete list of Trump’s rollbacks.

Trump’s first executive orders declared a “national energy emergency”, committed the federal government to “unleashing” fossil fuel production, and reversed Biden-era restrictions on the oil and gas sector.

The most significant actions include ending the following: a ban on new offshore drilling, freezing new permits for liquefied natural gas terminals and a moratorium on leasing in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Trump also reversed Biden’s decision to withdraw the permit for the controversial Keystone XL pipeline.

Trump’s easing of restrictions will support oil and gas production in the longer term, but the short term impacts will probably be muted as producers confront a bearish market and investor demands for returns.

Climate activists said the moves delivered on the wishes of the fossil fuel executives who helped fund his campaign and undermine US efforts to tackle global warming.

“Oil bosses have worked hand-in-glove with their friends in politics to bake dirty fossil fuels into our energy systems,” said Alice Harrison, head of fossil fuels campaigning at Global Witness, adding this was happening when parts of Los Angeles had been razed to the ground by wildfires made worse by climate change.

When Biden took office, he promised to put climate change at the centre of his presidency, committing the US to new decarbonisation targets and establishing offices across federal agencies focused on the issue.

Many of these signature efforts were eliminated overnight by Trump, including targets to achieve a 100 per cent clean electricity sector by 2035 and make half of all US car sales electric by the end of the decade. Trump also terminated Biden directives to federal agencies to protect public health and the environment, prioritise climate change in foreign policy, and address climate-related financial risk.

The executive architecture established in the Biden administration to address climate change has also been dismantled, including the White House Office of Domestic Climate Policy, the National Climate Task Force, and councils to address environmental justice. Justice40, a Biden initiative to direct 40 per cent of green funds to disadvantaged communities, and the Civilian Climate Corps, another signature jobs programme, are gone.

For the clean energy industry, Trump’s pauses on renewables development on federal land and new leases for offshore wind have created uncertainty for investors. “Even a delay of necessary permits can be disastrous for a project,” said Lauren Collins, a partner at Vinson & Elkins.

Trump’s first week in office marked the latest in the US retreat from international efforts to address climate change. In his executive order, “Putting America First in International Environmental Agreements”, the president pulled the US out of the Paris climate agreement for the second time, as well as other commitments made under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, which oversees the international climate negotiations.

Financial commitments abroad have also been challenged. Trump called for the immediate cessation of financial commitments the US made under the UNFCCC and ended the US International Climate Finance Plan, a Biden initiative that multiplied the country’s commitments to developing countries on climate mitigation and adaptation.

Trump’s executive overhaul highlights the legal fragility of Biden’s climate legacy, which rested heavily on executive orders because of a deeply divided Congress.

While it’s not unusual for a new president to rescind executive orders from a prior administration, lawyers warned some of Trump’s actions will probably run into legal challenges and pushback from Congress. Most at risk is his pause on disbursements of hundreds of billions of dollars in green funds appropriated by Congress from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction Act, signature pillars of Biden’s industrial agenda. Trump has already eliminated White House offices to co-ordinate the implementation of these laws at federal agencies.

“He’s making it very difficult to implement, and he’s trying to shut down the effectiveness of the programme,” said Camille Pannu, a professor at Columbia Law School.

The limits of executive authority have protected the primary driver of investment in clean energy: tax credits. Whether Republicans in Congress will follow Trump’s attacks on Biden’s industrial policies will be seen in the budget reconciliation process, where the Republicans will be eager to slash spending to finance tax cuts.

Republican-controlled districts have overwhelmingly benefited from clean energy investment following the IRA, putting congressional Republicans in a tough spot.

Harrison Fields, Trump’s principal deputy press secretary, said the president won a “decisive mandate” from the American people and is “fully committed to investing in the priorities that voters overwhelmingly supported”. (Amanda Chu)

Energy Source is written and edited by Jamie Smyth, Myles McCormick, Amanda Chu, Tom Wilson and Malcolm Moore, with support from the FT’s global team of reporters. Reach us at energy.source@ft.com and follow us on X at @FTEnergy. Catch up on past editions of the newsletter here.



To live close to Silicon Valley is to be a guinea pig if you so choose. There is the automated robotic coffee-dispensing machine awaiting you when you first land at San Francisco airport and driverless cars ready to ferry you about. Now artificial-intelligence powered robots are entering our salons.

An Oakland-based start-up is offering $170 eyelash extensions by beauty bot, a sci-fi version of pampering that claims more precision and dexterity than a human, and — the key draw for a demographic that tends to fixate on productivity and “growth mindsets” — in a fraction of the time.

My first question naturally was — is it safe? The stakes involved (my eyes) seem high but the beauty assistant who oversees the process said that wands at the end of the robot’s arms, held on by magnets, could be easily brushed away by customers. Plus the robot is able to pause if it detects that you’re sneezing or twitching.

Still, as I lay, claustrophobic beneath a hulking, whirring machine not unlike an MRI scanner, it was difficult to feel completely relaxed.

LUUM’s proprietary technology, which was six years in the making, is designed to use computer vision to identify a customer’s individual eyelashes and rapidly glue false ones on top, taking a laborious two-hour manual process closer to the 60-minute mark.

While techno-optimists tend to focus on the power of AI and robotics to shake up sectors such as defence and manufacturing, the multibillion-dollar beauty and cosmetics industry has quietly been identified as a lucrative target by a handful of AI robot entrepreneurs.

Clockwork, which offers $10, 10-minute robot manicures, has already rolled out around 20 machines in the US, including two in San Francisco. Massage bots are being developed by a start-up called Aescape. And tech executives like Esther Crawford, director of product at Meta, are proudly posting pictures of their robotically-applied extensions.

So I lay back on my robot bed as it slowly raised me towards a white light so blinding it made me wince, even with my eyes taped shut (typical lash extension protocol). This was not soothing. But still, I was offering my eyes to the AI gods! I was looking into the light! I was the future!

Except not quite. As I lay there expectantly I heard the robot arms swish about and then . . . silence. The assistant explained there had been a slight issue with a newly-replaced component but that she was just fixing it. Somewhat disconcerted, I tried to remain calm when the robot started up a second time. Shortly after, another awkward silence, followed by two voices speaking in hushed tones. They were, they said, just “reinitialising” the robot.

Third time lucky and the robot got to work. My concerns were quickly allayed by its deft work. There was a light pressure as it applied each lash but nothing alarming. The application didn’t feel too different to my normal beauty appointments. After about 45 minutes, the assistant added a final few lashes by hand, a sort of tidying up she called the “artistry” process, and we were done.

Quick, convenient and the eyelashes look the part. I’m told a forthcoming iteration of the machine will do both eyes at once to make proceedings even faster. Still, I’m not sure I’d return. Part of my desired salon experience is escapism. During human-led lash treatments I can listen to music or a soothing podcast, or take a delicious daytime nap. Although I came to trust my gentle beauty bot and its magic wands, it was hard to unwind while the machine whirred like a printer and shone operating room-style lights down at me.

These bugbears will eventually be worked through and, despite protestations to the contrary by start-up CEOs, aestheticians’ jobs will be cut or forever altered. The male-dominated tech industry is starting to realise that this is a consumer industry of low-hanging fruit ripe for disruption.

Despite this, the era of fully automated beauty treatments is still some way off. I was very grateful for the human presence — and reminded of it when I received a text noting that I could leave a gratuity for my lash procedure via cash or a payments app. Even AI robots can’t displace America’s tipping culture.

hannah.murphy@ft.com



US President Donald Trump eliminated more than 70 climate and green energy initiatives in his first week of office, launching a sweeping and aggressive move to dismantle Joe Biden’s climate and industrial legacy.

Trump’s executive orders upended federal commitments, initiatives and targets aimed at combating climate change, limiting oil and gas development and accelerating the clean energy buildout, a Financial Times analysis of the new president’s first week of executive orders found.

Among the largest rescissions included ending the ban on new offshore drilling and removing the US from the Paris climate agreement and other commitments under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. He also terminated federal offices dedicated to climate and environmental justice, and paused the disbursement of hundreds of billions of funds from his predecessor’s signature industrial policies.

Federal targets to decarbonise the country’s electricity sector by 2035, make half of US car sales electric by 2030 and reduce emissions at federal agencies have also been eliminated.

Climate and energy experts said Trump’s policy agenda delivered on the wishes of the fossil fuel executives that helped fund his campaign and, if implemented, would severely undermine US efforts to tackle the climate crisis, build a green economy and bring down energy prices.

“It’s taking a slash and burn approach that is going to backfire,” said Alys Campaigne, climate initiative leader at the Southern Environmental Law Center, an environmental non-profit group.

“You can rescind these orders but it doesn’t make the problem go away. We’re fundamentally losing out on economic opportunity as we’re watching China and Europe outcompete us on technologies of the future.”

Harrison Fields, Trump’s principal deputy press secretary, said the president won a “decisive mandate” from the American people and was “fully committed to investing in the priorities that voters overwhelmingly supported”.

Biden vowed to put climate at the centre of his term, rejoining the Paris climate agreement and signing into law the Inflation Reduction Act, the most significant action the US has taken to address the climate crisis. The law transformed the country overnight into a top destination for clean energy investment, offering $370bn in federal incentives to support companies.

Within hours of taking office, Trump signed several executive orders to “unleash” the country’s oil and gas production.

The FT tracked about a dozen Biden executive orders that have been entirely reversed, including orders to protect the environment, address climate-related financial risk, prioritise climate change in foreign policy, and strengthen the country’s leadership in clean transport.

The rescissions ended a Biden administration pause on permits for liquefied natural gas terminals, lifted restrictions on Arctic drilling and reversed the withdrawal of a permit for the controversial Keystone XL pipeline.

“Most of the rescissions . . . reflect just the 180-degree turn away from climate change as a governing priority towards one of, as the president describes it, energy dominance,” said Chris Treanor, a partner at law firm Akin.

Climate experts said many of Trump’s orders match requests outlined in the American Petroleum Institute’s five-point policy road map published before the election, including opening public lands and water to drilling and lifting a pause on approving new LNG terminals.

Mike Sommers, chief executive of API, said in an interview that its early lobbying work meant it was “well positioned” to influence policy and it was now working hard to ensure its implementation.

The sweeping overhaul underscores the legal vulnerability of Biden’s climate legacy, which relied on executive orders amid a deeply divided Congress. Lawyers say some Trump actions could spur legal challenges, particularly regarding a pause on hundreds of billions of green funds appropriated by Congress.

Jim Bowe, a partner at King & Spalding, warned that the pause could send a negative signal about the future use of federal policies to drive private investment.

He said: “It’s going to make it more difficult when a future administration actually wants to try to incentivise behaviour by providing government support to persuade people that government support will be durable.”

(The FT Trump Tracker on climate/energy actions is published here)



Former US senator Bob Menendez was sentenced to 11 years in prison for accepting gold bars, a Mercedes convertible and half a million dollars in cash to advance the interests of the governments of Egypt and Qatar.

Menendez, 71, a New Jersey Democrat, was once the powerful chair of the Senate foreign relations committee. The sentencing is the final chapter in fraught legal proceedings that last year led to Menendez’s resignation from his Senate seat and earned him the sobriquet “Gold Bar Bob”.

The sentence “result[s] from an egregious abuse of power at the highest levels of the legislative branch of the federal government”, said Danielle Sassoon, the US attorney for Manhattan, where Menendez was convicted following a nine-week trial.

Menendez “was trusted to represent the United States and the state of New Jersey, but instead he used his position to help his co-conspirators and a foreign government, in exchange for bribes like cash, gold and a luxury car”, Sassoon added.

He was convicted of conspiracy to commit bribery, obstruction of justice and acting as a foreign agent, among other wrongdoing.

In court, he tearfully asked Judge Sidney Stein for mercy, noting his decades of public service in office, according to news reports. Outside court, he maintained his innocence and called himself a victim of a politically motivated prosecution.

The trial came after FBI agents in 2022 found more than $480,000 in cash stuffed into closets and clothing, as well as gold bars and the luxury car at Menendez’s New Jersey home.

In exchange for these items, Menendez agreed to use his influence as a senator to protect the interests of Egypt and Qatar.

He sought to pressure a US government official in a bid to shield a business monopoly that Egypt had granted to a longtime friend of Menendez’s wife. Menendez also ghostwrote a letter on behalf of Cairo to other senators, arguing for the release of $300mn in aid to the north African country.

Menendez recommended that the president nominate a US attorney for New Jersey who he thought could help derail a federal criminal case targeting a real-estate developer and long-time donor of his.

The ex-senator was expected to benefit Qatar, to in turn assist his donor, who was pursuing million-dollar investments from a fund with ties to the Middle Eastern government.

The friend of Menendez’s wife as well as the donor were also sentenced on Wednesday, to more than eight, and seven years in prison, respectively.



Donald Trump has ordered the Pentagon to prepare the US naval base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba to receive thousands of immigrants with criminal records.

The US president announced the plan from the White House on Wednesday, in a move that would dramatically expand the use of a facility that has been the destination for high-profile terrorism suspects since 2002.

The move comes as the Trump administration tries to rapidly implement a promised crackdown on undocumented immigrants, including the first raids in big cities and the deployment of troops to the Mexican border.

“We have 30,000 beds in Guantánamo to detain the worst criminal illegal aliens threatening the American people,” Trump said. “Some of them are so bad we don’t even trust the countries to hold them. Because we don’t want them coming back, so we’re going to send them out to Guantánamo.”

Trump has been pressuring countries including Mexico and Colombia to accept immigrants sent from the US back to their countries of origin, but his comments suggest some would be transferred to the military base in Cuba instead.

The president said he was asking the US departments of defence and the homeland security to “begin preparing” the Guantánamo Bay facility to house the migrants.

“This will double our capacity immediately, right? It’s a tough place to get out of,” Trump added. He later signed a memorandum to implement the plan.

“We’re going after these guys,” said Kristi Noem, the homeland security secretary, speaking at the White House on Wednesday alongside Trump’s border tsar Tom Homan.

Homan said the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency would run the facility in Cuba. “There’s already a migrant centre there, it’s been there for decades. So we’re just going to expand upon that existing migrant centre,” he said.

The US naval base at Guantánamo Bay has housed migrants in the past, including refugees from Haiti, but not on the scale Trump suggested on Wednesday.

During his presidential campaign last year, he repeatedly pledged mass deportations targeting the estimated 11mn undocumented immigrants in the US, though administration officials have said the initial priority would be to deport those with criminal records.

The naval base on the island has been leased to the US by Cuba since 1903, and has continued to be used despite a decades-long economic embargo Washington has maintained on the island nation. The prison gained notoriety during the “war on terror” for the US’s alleged torture and mistreatment of people held in the facility.



Donald Trump sharply criticised the Federal Reserve just hours after the US central bank defied the president’s calls for deep reductions in borrowing costs and left interest rates on hold.

The central bank on Wednesday kept its main interest rate at 4.25 per cent to 4.5 per cent and indicated it was now on pause, with Fed chair Jay Powell saying US rate-setters “do not need to be in a hurry to adjust our policy stance”.

Trump railed against the central bank on his Truth Social messaging platform, saying, “If the Fed had spent less time on [diversity, equity and inclusion], gender ideology, ‘green’ energy, and fake climate change, inflation would never have been a problem.”

The Fed’s unanimous decision on Wednesday to hold interest rates came just days after Trump insisted borrowing costs should fall “a lot” and vowed to “let it be known” if he disagreed with the central bank’s decision.

The Federal Open Market Committee, the central bank’s policy-setting panel, said in its decision that US inflation remained “somewhat elevated” and removed an earlier reference noting “progress” towards hitting its 2 per cent goal. Powell later clarified the changes reflected a “cleaning-up exercise” rather than a shift in policy.

The Fed’s statement “tilts a little bit hawkish”, said Sarah House, senior economist at Wells Fargo. “This is a Fed that is less worried about the state of the labour market.”

The pause followed three consecutive cuts — including a 0.5 percentage point move in September — that took the federal funds target range down from a 23-year high of 5.25 per cent to 5.5 per cent.

Powell signalled interest rates would remain on hold until the committee had more time to assess how Trump’s pledges to raise trade barriers, slash taxes and red tape, and undertake mass deportations would affect its efforts to cool inflation.

The Fed chair said the new administration’s policies were “not for us to criticise, or to praise”.

He also refused to react to Trump’s calls for the Fed to reduce borrowing costs significantly, saying he was “not going to have any response or comment on what the president said” and that there had been no contact between him and the White House since the new president took office.

Eswar Prasad, a professor at Cornell University, said: “This rate decision, which was really the only viable choice the Fed had at this juncture, will cue the political pressure. The coming months will be extraordinarily challenging for the Fed if inflation stays sticky above its target level even as Trump piles on intense pressure to cut rates and bring down borrowing costs.”

US markets broadly took the Fed’s decision in stride, with government bonds coming under moderate selling pressure.

The policy-sensitive two-year Treasury yield was 0.03 percentage points higher at 4.23 per cent by the late afternoon in New York, while the benchmark 10-year yield was flat at 4.55 per cent. Yields rise as prices fall.

In equity markets, the S&P 500 was 0.5 per cent lower. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite was down by a similar margin, after trimming some of its losses during Powell’s press conference.



Donald Trump has scrapped his order to freeze hundreds of billions of dollars in federal domestic funding, in a major climbdown following a widespread backlash.

The White House’s Office of Management and Budget issued a two-line memo to executive branch departments and agencies on Wednesday saying the original plan had been dropped.

The U-turn came a day after the original order sparked a day of political chaos and confusion among politicians from both parties, who were grappling with how their states’ critical federal services including support for the poor and elderly would be affected.

A federal judge blocked the freeze on Tuesday just minutes before it was set to take effect.

After the revocation, the White House said it rescinded the memo “to end any confusion on federal policy created by the court ruling and the dishonest media coverage”.

Trump said he wanted to “correct any confusion that the media has purposely and somehow, for whatever reason, created”, adding Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid would not be affected by his freeze.

“We are merely looking at parts of the big bureaucracy where there has been tremendous waste and fraud and abuse,” he said.

The president’s comments came a day after the White House issued clarifications about which programmes would be affected by its sweeping payment freeze.

White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt on Wednesday insisted Trump’s order to review federal funding to align it with his Maga agenda would “remain in full force and . . . will be rigorously implemented by all agencies and departments”.

Wednesday’s reversal was a blow to Trump less than two weeks into a second term. His team wanted to be free of the kind of policy reversals that characterised the early months of his first presidency.

Republican officials, including Louisiana governor Jeff Landry, had joined Democratic lawmakers and state officials in opposing the freeze.

But the U-turn will be awkward for House Republicans who defended Trump’s funding freeze during their retreat in Florida.

The president has issued scores of executive orders since re-entering office as he tries to execute a plan to deregulate the US economy and slash the size of the federal government. The orders have included blocks on federal support for foreign aid and domestic clean energy.

Democrats said the revocation of its original memo just a day after it was issued marked an early policy failure by the new administration.

Chuck Schumer, the top Democrat in the US Senate, said “Americans fought back and Donald Trump backed off” and the president had “failed in this tactic”.

Hakeem Jeffries, the highest-ranking Democrat in the House of Representatives, wrote on social media platform Bluesky that “round one goes to team America. We remain in the ring until far-right extremism has been completely and totally knocked out.”



China’s bond market is sending alarm signals over the state of the economy, as its central bank uses financial heft and brash warnings to battle deflationary pressures.

The country’s benchmark 10-year sovereign yield has fallen from more than 2.5 per cent at the start of last January to about 1.6 per cent at the beginning of 2025, sparking warnings of “Japanification”, in which the economy suffers a protracted period of deflation and sluggishness.

The People’s Bank of China has repeatedly expressed concern over regional banks buying up its government bonds in the past year, and sending the country’s borrowing costs plunging — in a mirror image of what has happened in western debt markets over the past months.

In a statement in April, the PBoC warned that China risked Silicon Valley Bank-style bank runs if its financial sector continued to purchase long-dated sovereign bonds.

Then, in August, the bank named and shamed four rural commercial banks for “manipulating sovereign bond prices in the secondary market” — a move that was seen as a warning to other banks. At the same time, people close to the central bank told the Financial Times that its plans to issue billions of dollars of fresh government debt and special bonds threatened to burst a bubble that it said had formed in the market.

This month, the PBoC won a rare reprieve from the market after it announced it would cease its programme of treasury purchases indefinitely after five months. During that time, the central bank had bought a net $1tn worth of bonds, sending yields up slightly.

But analysts say the risk of a systemic financial event stemming from this purchasing Chinese government bonds is low, given the lack of parallels with Silicon Valley Bank. In 2023, SAB had put an abnormally large proportion of its assets into US Treasury bonds without hedging the interest rate exposure.

It was one of several US banks left sitting on big paper losses as the long-dated bonds they had bought and held without interest rate hedges fell in price, after the US Federal Reserve raised rates more than 5 per cent between 2022 and 2023. Bond yields move inversely to prices. This triggered a crisis as SVB’s depositors — principally start-ups — were sophisticated clients with a need for cash.

I think the concern over something similar to SVB should not be too high because, in China, the regulator and the government are always very proactive in stepping in to provide support to financial institutions,” explains May Yan, head of Asia financials at UBS investment bank. “They wouldn’t wait for days for a bank run to occur.

“A bank run could happen at any time or, if you overinvest in low-rate assets, it becomes problematic when the central bank hikes rates rapidly,” Yan notes. “However, no one anticipates such a swift rate increase in China any time soon.”

The other concern raised by Chinese authorities — that a massive bond issuance, as may be necessary for the government to launch a fiscal stimulus, could lead to a spike in yields — has also been dismissed by some economists.

“A huge amount of bond issuance will only be done if it mirrors a weak economy due to too high private savings,” says Allan von Mehren, chief China economist at Danske Bank. “Those savings need a home and bonds would be one of them — as is the case today.”

Von Mehren adds that, even in the case of a stronger economy, in which investors switch from bonds to equities, a big move downwards in bond prices would most likely be met with intervention from authorities “to stabilise markets in that case”.

Global investors have largely brushed off the warnings from the PBoC and continued to hold Chinese government bonds as an investment, believing that their prices will rise more, sending yields further down.

“Chinese bonds were among the standout performers in local emerging markets in 2024, rewarding holders with falling yields despite rising yields globally,” points out Marcelo Assalin, head of William Blair Investment Management’s emerging markets debt team. There is still a case for Chinese bond yields to fall further given attractive real yields in higher duration bonds, the disinflationary path, and concerns around the potential for deflation.”

Mark Evans, emerging markets fixed income portfolio manager at asset manager Ninety One, is also a holder. He says: “We have been overweight for some time and remain overweight”. In his view, “real rates remain attractive” and bond prices have continued to rise despite an increased expectation of issuance to come.

But investors reject the idea that China’s sovereign bond yields could decline all the way to 0 per cent, as Japan experienced in the past decade, cementing the risks of stagnant growth and deflationary pressures.

“We expect Chinese government stimulus to be more aggressive and more effective in 2025, placing a floor on what are already low levels of yield on an absolute level,” says Assalin.



China’s manufacturing activity unexpectedly contracted in January, official data showed on Monday, in a sign of slowing momentum as the country prepares for the lunar new year holiday.

The country’s official purchasing managers’ index, a closely watched gauge amid a gloomy economic backdrop, came in at 49.1, below forecasts and the first contraction since September. A reading of above 50 marks an expansion.

The National Bureau of Statistics said manufacturing activity was “affected by the approaching . . . holiday”, which begins on Wednesday and sees hundreds of millions of Chinese workers travel to their hometowns.

A separate NBS data release on Monday showed industrial profits fell 3.3 per cent over the course of 2024, despite rising 11 per cent year on year in December. The measure, which tracks companies with more than Rmb20mn ($2.8mn) in turnover, has fallen in each of the past three years.

The new figures will add to pressure on China’s policymakers, who are grappling with a property slowdown now in its fourth year, a loss of consumer confidence, the threat of entrenched deflation and resurgent trade tensions with the US under Donald Trump.

Official data released this month showed China’s economy grew 5.4 per cent in the fourth quarter, meeting an annual growth target of 5 per cent, which was the joint lowest in decades. But much of that growth was thanks to industrial output and exports, which offset weakness in the property and retail sectors.

Beijing unveiled measures in September to boost the stock market and lower mortgage rates and has previously encouraged state-owned enterprises to buy up unsold housing stock. But economists have called for more direct fiscal support to boost consumption.

President Xi Jinping called for “vigorous” efforts to boost domestic demand after an annual economic conference for party leaders in December.

This month, policymakers expanded a programme to trade in old goods, such as home appliances, for new ones. Analysts at Goldman Sachs said the trade-in programme helped increase nominal household consumption growth to 4.5 per cent in the last three months of the year, from 3.5 per cent in the previous quarter, based on an NBS household survey.

China this year also faces the prospect of renewed trade disruption following Trump’s return to the White House.

Strong exports last year helped drive China to a record trade surplus of close to $1tn, but Trump has pledged to impose higher tariffs on Chinese goods, and forecasts show weaker or in some cases no export growth this year.

Zhiwei Zhang, chief economist at Pinpoint Asset Management, said part of the slowdown in the PMI data “may be due to weaker external demand, as the new export orders index dropped to the lowest level since March last year”.

China’s official non-manufacturing PMI gauge, which includes services, was 50.2 in January, remaining in expansionary territory but registering much slower growth than the reading of 52.2 in December.



Taiwan has drawn up a blacklist of 52 Chinese-owned ships that use flags of convenience, which it will track and proactively inspect in an effort to regulate part of a rapidly growing “shadow fleet” that is causing global security concerns.

The move comes amid explosive growth in the number of ageing vessels that evade oversight and hide their identity with deceptive signalling.

While international attention has focused on Russia’s use of this shadow fleet to export oil in circumvention of sanctions over its war on Ukraine, the ranks of such ships have swelled beyond tankers and pose increasing maritime and national security risks to coastal states.

Taipei launched its crackdown after a dilapidated Chinese-owned freighter was suspected of cutting one of its subsea cables this month, following similar incidents involving Chinese and Russian-owned ships in the Baltic Sea.

The tighter inspection regime targets cargo ships sailing under the flags of Cameroon, Tanzania, Mongolia, Togo and Sierra Leone whose owner companies are registered in mainland China, Hong Kong or Macau, according to the blacklist seen by the Financial Times.

“The cable-cutting incident reminded us of the risks posed by substandard vessels,” said a Taiwan coastguard official. “It is a risk to all coastal states, and we must fulfil our responsibility as a port state. Moreover, we face an additional risk from China.”

Beijing claims Taiwan as part of its territory and threatens to annex it by force if Taipei resists unification indefinitely. Since China often includes commercial ships in military exercises and uses fishing vessels as militia to assert disputed maritime claims, Taiwanese officials fear Chinese-owned ships could be used as part of “greyzone” operations that fall below the threshold of outright war.

Cameroon, Tanzania, Mongolia, Togo and Sierra Leone are among dozens of states that allow ship owners to register their ships without being domiciled in the country. Ship owners often choose such flags of convenience to avoid higher costs, stricter safety standards and more stringent oversight in their own nations.

Taipei is focusing on those five countries because vessels from their flag register top the ranking of vessels found to have faulty documentation, by violating maritime safety or labour regulations or circumventing sanctions, according to the Tokyo MOU, a multilateral grouping for port state control in the Asia-Pacific region.

Due to opposition from Beijing, Taiwan is not a member of the Tokyo MOU but received the organisation’s list of problematic ships “through channels”, one official said. It then “whittled down” that list by selecting those with owners of a China background.

The Taiwanese government has marked 15 of the 52 ships as posing a threat to the country because they lingered in its territorial waters for 15 days or more over the past year. Among those, the vessel suspected of cutting the cable was defined as posing a “high threat”, four others a “medium threat” and 10 more “some threat”, according to the blacklist.

On Thursday, the coastguard boarded and inspected the Bao Shun, a 20-year-old Mongolia-flagged freighter owned by a Hong Kong-registered company, in what was the first use of the new regulatory approach.

The ship had been idling close to Taiwan for two months and is one of those identified as a medium threat. A person close to the Maritime and Port Bureau said that in the past the port regulator would only carry out spot checks of vessels coming into port.

The inspection did not turn up invalid documents, contraband cargo or cable-cutting equipment on board. But the coastguard instructed it to leave Taiwanese waters. As of Sunday, it was drifting 27 nautical miles outside Kaohsiung, the country’s largest port. The owner of the Bao Shun could not be reached for comment.

On January 3, a subsea communications cable owned by a global telecoms consortium was severed just off the north coast of Taiwan. Taiwan’s government identified the Cameroon-flagged freighter Shunxing39, which had been criss-crossing the area where several regional and transpacific cables land for at least a month, as the likely suspect.

According to an FT analysis of tracking data from three different providers, the vessel’s real name is Xing Shun 39 and it is registered in Tanzania, but it has used several different identities over the past year.

In the weeks before the incident, it alternated between two different maritime mobile service identities, or MMSI numbers, broadcast from its automatic identification system (AIS). Over the past year, it has appeared under three different names, for one of which it used three different spellings, and four different MMSIs. It also briefly assumed the identity of a separate ship.

“In the normal, above-board shipping world, such deceptive practices would be unheard of, but it would be a common tactic to manipulate the AIS if you are doing something that you don’t want to be seen,” said Bridget Diakun, a maritime risk analyst at Lloyd’s List, the London-based shipping information provider.

The owner of the Xing Shun 39 could not be reached for comment.

Taiwanese national security officials said the number of ships meeting the criteria for “shadow vessels” that were operating in regional waters had ballooned over the past two years.

According to Taiwan coastguard and port officials, the vessels mostly transport frozen food and miscellaneous small cargo, often relying on smaller shuttles that transfer the cargo at sea.

“Their business model is to use the lowest cost possible by avoiding regular repairs and rarely going into port,” one of the port officials said.

Analysts said those observations reflected a steep increase in shadow vessels globally.

“Since Russia started using the shadow fleet to ship oil in violation of sanctions, the barrier of respectability has been broken,” said Elisabeth Braw, a maritime security expert at the Atlantic Council.

“Russia has shown that you can operate vessels in violation of international regulations without consequences,” Braw said. “Ordinarily when your vessel reaches retirement age, you pay to have it scrapped. But instead of doing that, ship owners now get paid by sending it into the shadow fleet.”



Hong Kong is setting its sights on a $20bn listings revival this year as it aims to exploit worsening US-China tensions and the sluggish mainland Chinese equity market.

Investment banks in Hong Kong are expecting a rush of listed Chinese companies, led by battery maker CATL, to set up a secondary listing in the offshore territory. These “A to H” listings — from mainland China’s “A” shares to Hong Kong — could raise as much as $20bn in new funds, said bankers.

A replenished pipeline would mark a sharp pick-up in activity for Hong Kong, which has lost some high-profile international companies such as cosmetics company L’Occitane and struggled to replace them.

Many of the Chinese companies turning to Hong Kong have extensive overseas operations and want to raise funds outside the mainland, as Beijing tightens capital leaving the country. Geopolitical tensions between China and the US have made listings in New York, another common pathway for Chinese companies, far less appealing.

“The Hong Kong market will bounce back this year . . . and a big component of that will be A to H listings,” said Kenneth Chow, managing director at Citi in Hong Kong. He added that Chinese secondary listings could account for as much as “two-thirds” of the total estimated $20bn of listings in Hong Kong in 2025.

Among the companies this year that have confirmed plans to set up secondary listings are pharmaceuticals producer Jiangsu Hengrui, which has a market capitalisation of $37bn, and soy sauce maker Foshan Haitian, valued at $32bn.

CATL has yet to file papers to the Hong Kong stock exchange, but Morgan Stanley estimates it could raise up to $7.7bn — a move that has been complicated by its addition to a Pentagon list of companies with links to China’s military.

Even so, there are signs of a market eager for new listings. Chinese banks have offered to work on the CATL listing for underwriting fees of just 0.01 per cent, the Financial Times reported on Wednesday.

Analysts at Deloitte’s capital market services group estimate that Hong Kong will have 80 initial and secondary listings this year, raising up to HK$150bn (US$19bn), mostly by Chinese companies. They would join household names that record much of their profit outside of the mainland, including BYD and Tencent.

An influx would also offer a shot in the arm to Hong Kong’s reputation as an international business hub. More than $10bn in equity was raised, in primary and secondary listings, in the city last year, according to Dealogic. That marked an improvement on 2023’s total of $6bn but fell far short of the record $51bn raised in IPOs in 2020 according to HKEX data. That bumper year was also driven by Chinese companies seeking listings outside the mainland.

The mainland Chinese securities regulator has further eased the path for companies to list in Hong Kong to help them expand internationally, including a recent pledge to “optimise the filing system for overseas listing”. Other Chinese companies have also given up their listings in New York in recent years, citing the high administrative burden and low turnover.

“We expect the volume of listings, including those of A+H share offerings, to gain further momentum in 2025, as more leading companies from China and around the world use [the Hong Kong] platform to expand internationally,” said a spokesperson for the Hong Kong stock exchange.

Analysts said US President Donald Trump’s policy towards China could send more companies to the territory.

Many Chinese companies were forced to delist from the US in the final days of Trump’s first administration, when the president issued an executive order, citing fears of links to the Chinese military.

“Geopolitical uncertainties [could prompt] more Chinese companies and US-listed China concept stocks to turn to Hong Kong as their preferred overseas listing hub,” Edward Au, southern region managing partner at Deloitte China, said in a report.

Industry executives said companies going to Hong Kong would hope to replicate the performance of Midea. The aircon maker raised about $5bn in an oversubscribed offering, and its shares are up 27 per cent since its September float.

That rate of growth is faster than its Chinese equivalent and narrowed the discount to its mainland shares. A company listed in mainland China typically trades at a premium to its Hong Kong counterpart of as much as 40 per cent, due to the mainland market’s higher level of local retail participation.

Regulators are closely watching the likely valuation of H shares and their discount to A shares. A capital markets banker in Hong Kong told the FT that he had had discussions with Chinese authorities about the potential valuation of H shares.

Authorities have focused on liquidity potentially leaving the country, which would devalue Chinese companies and encourage arbitrageurs looking to make a profit from the difference in prices between the two stocks.

Large-cap Chinese companies such as BYD tend to have a much smaller discount in Hong Kong, while smaller companies are relatively unloved outside the mainland.

“The bigger challenge for our . . . projects is if we can narrow the discount between A and H shares even further,” said one executive at a Chinese brokerage. “We also think that there is a high probability that there will be a further rebound [in activity] in 2025.”

The executive said he expected about $20bn in fundraising this year but added that “this is purely our own estimate”.

Additional reporting by Cheng Leng and data visualisation by Haohsiang Ko in Hong Kong



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to Hong Kong

Ask Michelle Garnaut, the pioneering Australian chef and restaurateur, how much the Hong Kong dining scene has evolved, particularly from the point of view of female chefs, since she opened M at the Fringe — the first independent fine-dining restaurant outside a hotel in the city — in 1989. You can expect by way of response a very wry, very worldly, very expressive snort. “Back then, cooking wasn’t even seen as a proper job,” she says. “Virtually no women were involved. I had one talented young female chef — a local — who quit to become a manager at KFC because her parents thought that any managerial role was more respectable than being a chef.”

It took more than 20 years for such attitudes to change, Garnaut reckons. In that time a generational shift occurred, given impetus by the rise of social media. Successful chefs — mostly men but a growing number of women as well — became ever more visible. Then, in 2013, Vicky Lau was awarded her first Michelin star at Tate Dining Room. A second star followed in 2021. It would be difficult to overstate the importance of Lau’s example to aspiring female chefs not only in Hong Kong but across Asia. Cast your eye over the Hong Kong restaurant scene today and many of its most exciting and talented chefs are women. Meet three of the best.

“Sexy. Fun. Deeply Chinese but also international. With a sense of humour.” May Chow is describing, between bites of a braised pork belly bao, the vibe of Little Bao, her instant-classic bao-based restaurant, which opened in 2013 and has been going gangbusters, in a couple of iterations and locations, ever since.

There are two ways to make it as a chef in Hong Kong, Chow says: “You can either be best in class or first to market.” She was a bit of both, combining skill and novelty by elevating and elaborating the humble bao — a steamed bun served with a meat or fish filling — in a manner never seen before. She nudged the bao into burger territory, the burger into bao territory, showcasing the joys of each in the process — a remarkable achievement of Sino-American diplomacy. The bao itself remained familiar — pillowy and yielding yet structured and bouncy, the bao of every Hongkonger’s childhood. The fillings . . . well, sometimes, as with the braised pork belly, they were familiar too; sometimes not so much, as with the chestnut tiramisu ice cream.

The Canadian-born Chow is outspoken in her support of diversity and LBGTQ+ rights. “The great thing about being a chef who is also an entrepreneur is that you can create your own culture,” she says. “Women thrive in the right culture. And there’s more than one way to be successful. Sure, you can be competitive, strong, decisive. But you don’t have to be awful.” This philosophy — the tao of Little Bao, as it were — resonates far beyond the restaurant scene. “The important thing is to recognise that we all have a choice,” she continues. “We can choose better. I hope through my own example I can help pass that message on.” Little Bao, 1–3 Shin Hing Street, Central; Little Bao Diner, 9 Kingston Street, Causeway Bay, Hong Kong. Website; Directions

To anglophone ears, the name Ho Lee Fook sounds like a colloquial exclamation of astonishment. Roughly translated, it means “good fortune for your mouth”. Where the restaurant of that name is concerned, both the literal and figurative associations are spot on. Everything about this beloved Elgin Street institution, which celebrates its 10th birthday this year (a ripe old age for a restaurant in Hong Kong), is contrived to amuse and delight, from the joyous decor (the famous wall of waving golden lucky cats) and the singalong soundtrack (nostalgic chart hits) to the sublimely executed menu (“serious Cantonese food in a playful setting”, as executive chef ArChan Chan puts it).

Though she wears her seriousness lightly, make no mistake — here is a chef of exceptional ability and ambition, committed to honouring dishes she grew up on yet bold enough to tinker with them in ways that even diehard purists are compelled, however reluctantly, to admit just . . . works. Consider her take on stir-fry king, one of those all-time Hong Kong classics with which liberties are not, as a rule, taken. Chan blithely replaces the traditional squid with abalone and jettisons the conventional cashews in favour of peanut sprouts. The one introduces a new layer of luscious, richly textured opulence, the other an element of momentary, eyebrow-raising surprise that’s swiftly followed by a “Why didn’t anyone think of that before?” sense of inevitability. The result is nothing less than a peaceful revolution between two chopsticks. Ho lee fook indeed.

Chan’s arrival at Ho Lee Fook in 2021 was a homecoming after more than a decade in Australia and Singapore. The cosmopolitanism of her experience is reflected in the make-up of her brigade at Ho Lee Fook. English is the lingua franca. The design of the restaurant is such that they and their flaming woks are the first things you see when you arrive — the waving cats come next — and the collective good vibes are as thick in the air as the wok smoke. This impression of camaraderie surely starts at the top. Chan speaks of her four principles of respect, care, fairness and honesty: “It’s an intense job. A little bit of empathy makes everything a lot easier.” A touch of genius doesn’t hurt either. Ho Lee Fook, 3-5 Elgin Street, Central. Website; Directions

“We like to categorise things. That’s human nature. But many of us are too quick to categorise Sichuan cuisine. There’s more to it than spiciness,” says Theign Phan, executive chef at the Grand Majestic Sichuan, a gleaming, jewel-toned, Gucci-wallpapered temple to one of China’s most beloved regional cuisines.

Though proud to be among the growing number of female chefs working at the highest level in Hong Kong, she is as wary of gender-based generalisations about the profession as she is of lazy stereotypes of Sichuan cuisine. “When I grew up, I was taught to believe that you can do whatever you want, as long as you do it well,” she says. “It’s up to us to change the narrative.”

As a Malaysian raised in Singapore, Phan sees herself, as the head of a Sichuan kitchen in a Hong Kong restaurant, not so much as an outsider but as a translator. There’s something of the explorer about her too — an explorer thrilled by the things she’s discovered and eager to divulge her findings with others. “Because there’s so much to share,” she says. “Did you know there are no fewer than 24 distinct flavours in Sichuan cuisine?” The sauce for bang bang chicken, for example, that infinitely moreish Sichuan staple of poached chicken and julienned cucumber, belongs, marvellously, to the “strange flavour” category, which encompasses spicy, numbing, savoury, sweet, garlicky, sour and sesame flavours.

Phan admits that there’s a skill to ordering well in a Sichuan restaurant but insists that it’s not difficult to pick up. It’s all about managing contrasts of flavour and texture. You might, therefore, start with a cold appetiser such as smacked cucumber (garlicky, viscous, crunchy, watery), followed first by kung pao prawns with cashew nuts (an unlikely yet undeniably harmonious marriage of lychee flavour with hints of Sichuan peppercorn and chillies), and then by mapo tofu with beef (the slippery and jelly-like texture of the tofu offset by zingy-yet-earthy chilli-bean paste). Steamed rice is, of course, a constant throughout — the essential thread in the tapestry. And for pudding, perhaps the silver-ear fungus with chrysanthemum resin and rock-sugar soup (sweet, floral, faintly herbaceous and in every respect as intriguing as its name might lead you to expect).

Complex? Certainly. Difficult? Not at all. Phan and the entire Grand Majestic team are on hand to advise. She sees it as their shared responsibility to make acquiring a taste for Sichuan cuisine easy and enjoyable — as well as potentially enlightening. “No pressure, all pleasure.” Grand Majestic Sichuan, Alexandra House, Shop 301, Third Floor, 18 Chater Road, Central. Website; Directions

Have you dined at a Hong Kong restaurant helmed by a female chef? Tell us about it in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



The CIA has concluded that Covid-19 probably began as a leak from a laboratory in China in a new assessment of the origins of the pandemic that killed millions of people.

The US intelligence agency said it concluded with “low confidence” that the Covid-19 virus had leaked from the research facility, in a shift of its previous position that there was insufficient information to reach a conclusion.

“CIA assesses with low confidence that a research-related origin of the COVID-19 pandemic is more likely than a natural origin based on the available body of reporting,” the agency said in a statement on Saturday.

“CIA continues to assess that both research-related and natural origin scenarios of the COVID-19 pandemic remain plausible.”

The US intelligence community — which is made up of 18 agencies — has been assessing the origin of Covid-19 for the past four years to determine if the virus emerged naturally from a wet market in Wuhan or whether it leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology in the Chinese city.

The CIA joins the FBI and energy department in concluding that the virus originated from the Wuhan lab. But it said it had “low confidence in this judgment” and would “continue to evaluate any available credible new intelligence reporting or open-source information” that could change its assessment.

The new assessment was made public just days after John Ratcliffe was sworn in as CIA director.

In an interview with Breitbart news after he was confirmed as President Donald Trump’s pick to lead the intelligence agency, Ratcliffe said he believed that intelligence and common sense “dictates that the origins of Covid was a leak at the Wuhan Institute of Virology” and would ensure that “the public is aware that the agency [CIA] is going to get off the sidelines”.

National security adviser Mike Waltz said that those who had been “labelled conspiracy theorists” for saying Covid-19 was the result of a lab leak had been “right all along”.

“We can’t stop the next pandemic if we don’t understand how the last one happened!” Waltz wrote on X.

One US official said Bill Burns, CIA head during the Biden administration, had told the CIA team assessing the evidence to take a position on the origin of Covid-19, but did not dictate the outcome.

Burns’ directive came as Jake Sullivan, who served as national security adviser, ordered the intelligence community to take another look at the origins of the pandemic as the Biden team prepared to leave office.

The US official stressed that the CIA had revised its assessment before Ratcliffe was sworn in as the new director.

“I’ve said from the beginning that Covid likely originated in the Wuhan labs. Communist China covered it up and the liberal media covered for them,” said Tom Cotton, the Republican head of the Senate intelligence committee.

“I’m pleased the CIA concluded in the final days of the Biden administration that the lab-leak theory is the most plausible explanation of Covid’s origins, and I commend Director Ratcliffe for fulfilling his promise to release this conclusion. Now, the most important thing is to make China pay for unleashing a plague on the world.”

The Chinese embassy in Washington said it strongly opposed the “politicisation and stigmatisation of the source of the virus”.

“The so-called report of the United States, without any substantial evidence, concocts misleading conclusions, throws dirty water on China and engages in framing. It is still an old routine of political manipulation of tracing the source and has no credibility,” the embassy said.

The new CIA assessment change comes just over one week after Trump held his first phone call with Chinese President Xi Jinping since at least 2021. While many foreign policy experts had expected Trump to take a tough line on China — particularly over trade — in his first week in office, the president has so far held off taking any harsh measures against Beijing.

In an interview with Fox News this week, Trump said that while tariffs gave him “tremendous power” over China, he would “rather not have to use it”.

He also signed an executive order postponing the deadline for the Chinese owner of TikTok to divest the popular video app to avoid a ban in the US.



A small Chinese artificial intelligence lab stunned the world this week by revealing the technical recipe for its cutting-edge model, turning its reclusive leader into a national hero who has defied US attempts to stop China’s high-tech ambitions.

DeepSeek, founded by hedge fund manager Liang Wenfeng, released its R1 model on Monday, explaining in a detailed paper how to build a large language model on a bootstrapped budget that can automatically learn and improve itself without human supervision.

US companies including OpenAI and Google DeepMind pioneered developments in reasoning models, a relatively new field of AI research that is attempting to make models match human cognitive capabilities. In December, the San Francisco-based OpenAI released the full version of its o1 model but kept its methods secret.

DeepSeek’s R1 release sparked a frenzied debate in Silicon Valley about whether better resourced US AI companies, including Meta and Anthropic, can defend their technical edge.

Meanwhile, Liang has become a focal point of national pride at home. This week, he was the only AI leader selected to attend a publicised meeting of entrepreneurs with the country’s second-most powerful leader, Li Qiang. The entrepreneurs were told to “concentrate efforts to break through key core technologies.”

In 2021, Liang started buying thousands of Nvidia graphic processing units for his AI side project while running his quant trading fund High-Flyer. Industry insiders viewed it as the eccentric actions of a billionaire looking for a new hobby.

“When we first met him, he was this very nerdy guy with a terrible hairstyle talking about building a 10,000-chip cluster to train his own models. We didn’t take him seriously,” said one of Liang’s business partners.

“He couldn’t articulate his vision other than saying: I want to build this, and it will be a game change. We thought this was only possible from giants like ByteDance and Alibaba,” the person added.

Liang’s status as an outsider in the AI field was an unexpected source of strength. At High-Flyer, he built a fortune by using AI and algorithms to identify patterns that could affect stock prices. His team became adept at using Nvidia chips to make money trading stocks. In 2023, he launched DeepSeek, announcing his intention to develop human-level AI.

“Liang built an exceptional infrastructure team that really understands how the chips worked,” said one founder at a rival LLM company. “He took his best people with him from the hedge fund to DeepSeek.”

After Washington banned Nvidia from exporting its most powerful chips to China, local AI companies have been forced to find innovative ways to maximise the computing power of a limited number of onshore chips — a problem Liang’s team already knew how to solve.

“DeepSeek’s engineers know how to unlock the potential of these GPUs, even if they are not state of the art,” said one AI researcher close to the company.

Industry insiders say DeepSeek’s singular focus on research makes it a dangerous competitor because it is willing to share its breakthroughs rather than protect them for commercial gains. DeepSeek has not raised money from outside funds or made significant moves to monetise its models.

“DeepSeek is run like the early days of DeepMind,” said one AI investor in Beijing. “It is purely focused on research and engineering.”

Liang, who is personally involved in DeepSeek’s research, uses proceeds from his hedge fund trading to pay top salaries for the best AI talent. Along with TikTok-owner ByteDance, DeepSeek is known for giving the highest remuneration available to AI engineers in China, with staff based in offices in Hangzhou and Beijing.

“DeepSeek’s offices feel like a university campus for serious researchers,” said the business partner. “The team believes in Liang’s vision: to show the world that the Chinese can be creative and build something from zero.”

DeepSeek and High-Flyer did not respond to a request for comment.

Liang has styled DeepSeek as a uniquely “local” company, staffed with PhDs from top Chinese schools, Peking, Tsinghua and Beihang universities rather than experts from US institutions.

In an interview with the domestic press last year, he said his core team “did not have people who returned from overseas. They are all local . . . We have to develop the top talent ourselves”. DeepSeek’s identity as a purely Chinese LLM company has won it plaudits at home.

DeepSeek claimed it used just 2,048 Nvidia H800s and $5.6mn to train a model with 671bn parameters, a fraction of what OpenAI and Google spent to train comparably sized models.

Ritwik Gupta, AI policy researcher at the University of California, Berkeley, said DeepSeek’s recent model releases demonstrate that “there is no moat when it comes to AI capabilities”.

“The first person to train models has to expend lots of resources to get there,” he said. “But the second mover can get there cheaper and more quickly.”

Gupta added that China had a much larger talent pool of systems engineers than the US who understand how to get the best use of computing resources to train and run models more cheaply.

Industry insiders say that even though DeepSeek has shown impressive results with limited resources, it remains an open question whether it can continue to be competitive as the industry evolves. Returns at High-Flyer, its big backer, lagged behind in 2024, which one person close to Liang blamed on the founder’s attention being mostly focused on DeepSeek.

Its US rivals are not standing still. They are building mega “clusters” of Nvidia’s next-generation Blackwell chips, creating the computing power that threatens to once again create a performance gap with Chinese rivals.

This week, OpenAI said it was creating a joint venture with Japan’s SoftBank, dubbed Stargate, with plans to spend at least $100bn on AI infrastructure in the US. Elon Musk’s xAI is massively expanding its Colossus supercomputer to contain more than 1mn GPUs to help train its Grok AI models.

“DeepSeek has one of the largest advanced computing clusters in China,” said Liang’s business partner. “They have enough capacity for now, but not much longer.”

Additional reporting by Wenjie Ding in Beijing

Letter in response to this article:

Techno-utopian thinking, not DeepSeek, is the threat / From Ewan Dunbar, Assistant Professor, Computational Linguistics, University of Toronto, ON, Canada



China’s central bank has pumped a record amount of short-term funds into the financial system this week in an effort to pre-empt the cash crunch that usually accompanies the lunar new year holiday.

Aimed at smoothing seasonal turbulence, the total cash injection of Rmb2.2tn ($300bn) through the 14-day reserve repo — a short-term liquidity tool — comes as millions of residents prepare to travel home, settle tax bills and hand out cash-filled red envelopes.

While these injections are commonly seen during the holiday period, the size of this week’s operation has damped expectations of an imminent cut to banks’ reserve requirement ratio, the level of funds that banks must hold in reserve.

The People’s Bank of China has in recent months repeatedly said it would cut the ratio “at an appropriate time” as part of efforts to revive confidence in the economy. It has also changed its monetary policy stance from “prudent” to “moderately loose” as it tries to spur growth.

A cut in the reserve requirement ratio is widely seen as a substantial easing move aimed at boosting long-term credit.

“The prospect for an RRR cut before the lunar new year now appears slim, given the current liquidity situation and the broader macroeconomic conditions,” said Wang Qing, chief macroeconomic analyst at Golden Credit Rating.

“The central bank had also front-loaded a significant amount of the medium-term liquidity into the market in December, leaving the system adequately supplied but not excessive.”

Delaying a cut reflects the PBoC’s intricate balancing act, with the central bank keen to reserve use of its tools for what it anticipates to be a challenging year economically, said analysts. China’s property market has been hit by a prolonged crisis, and companies are bracing themselves for the fallout of Donald Trump’s protectionist policies.

Given the strong signal sent by an RRR cut and the limited space for the PBoC to trim it further, the central bank would want to “reserve some bullets for the signalling effect for later”, said Xiaojia Zhi, chief China economist at Crédit Agricole. The average reserve requirement ratio at Chinese banks stands at 6.6 per cent.

The PBoC is expected to rely more on open market operations in 2025 to manage liquidity, instead of cuts to the benchmark policy rate or the RRR, said Lynn Song, chief economist for greater China at ING. “Significant headline moves on interest rates and the RRR are likely being reserved for a more suitable time.”

With deflationary pressures mounting and the property sector still in deep distress, Beijing is trying to reflate the world’s second-largest economy. Yet it also wants to avoid further renminbi weakness.

The offshore renminbi has been under strain, weakening 3 per cent against the dollar since Trump’s presidential election victory in early November, while the tightly controlled onshore currency hovered around a 16-month low at the start of the year before rebounding recently.

The potential escalation of trade tensions between China and the US has heightened fears of capital outflows, limiting the PBoC’s ability to lower rates.

“Recent pressure on the yuan rate will put constraints on the PBoC’s monetary easing measures,” according to an internal briefing memo this week from a state-owned bank seen by the Financial Times. “The central bank has also used subtle actions to temper market expectations of further easing at this stage.”

Since December, the central bank has set a strong daily reference rate for the renminbi, issued offshore bills and stopped buying government bonds. This suggests the PBoC is prioritising currency stability over other pro-growth targets, said Larry Hu, chief China economist at Macquarie.

“Last year, the PBoC adopted a strategy we called ‘hang in there until the Fed blinks,’” said Hu. “Now, with the yuan under pressure due to the strong dollar, the PBoC has to hang in there again until the dollar weakens. For now, yuan stability is the priority over other policy goals.”

Still, some analysts said they believed more substantial moves were on the horizon after the lunar new year holiday and that the PBoC had a choice of tools it could use.

“There are a few that the PBoC could consider, including outright reverse repos of various tenors, net government bond purchases, as well as RRR cut,” said Zhi of Crédit Agricole.



The writer is professor of law at the Gould School of Law, University of Southern California, and author of ‘High Wire: How China Regulates Big Tech and Governs Its Economy’

Last month, a Chinese start-up called DeepSeek astonished the international tech community with its latest open-source artificial intelligence model. DeepSeek-V3 delivers a performance comparable to that of better-funded US rivals such as OpenAI. This week it impressed once again with R1, its foray into AI reasoning.

DeepSeek is not a one-off. Since the middle of last year, Chinese tech companies such as Alibaba, Tencent, ByteDance, Moonshot and 01.ai have been steadily narrowing the gap with US peers, matching their capabilities and surpassing them in cost efficiency.

China’s achievements in efficiency are no accident. They are a direct response to the escalating export restrictions imposed by the US and its allies. By limiting China’s access to advanced AI chips, the US has inadvertently spurred its innovation.

To reduce reliance on high-end chips from overseas, Chinese AI companies have experimented with novel approaches in algorithms, architecture and training strategies. Many have embraced a “mixture-of-experts” approach, focusing on smaller AI models trained on specific data. These can deliver powerful results while reducing computing resources.

DeepSeek-V3 embodies the success of this resourceful approach. According to its technical report, the model was trained using a data centre powered by Nvidia H800 GPUs — a less advanced chip than Nvidia’s latest releases. Despite this, DeepSeek completed training in just two months at a cost of $5.5mn — a fraction of the sums reportedly spent by US companies such as OpenAI.

DeepSeek has also drastically reduced inference costs, earning it the nickname the “Pinduoduo of AI”, a reference to the cost-slashing business model of the popular Chinese discount ecommerce giant. This breakthrough has profound implications. It challenges the widely held assumption that cutting-edge AI requires vast amounts of computational power and many billions of dollars. DeepSeek demonstrates how software ingenuity can offset hardware constraints.

It also lays bare the limits of US export controls designed to slow China’s AI progress. While these measures may deliver short-term disruptions, their impact diminishes over time as China innovates to adapt.

The inconvenient truth for US policymakers is that strict export controls have forced Chinese tech companies to become more self-reliant, spurring breakthroughs that might not have occurred otherwise.

Not everyone agrees, however. Gregory Allen, director of the Wadhwani AI Center, at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think-tank, contends that China would have advanced regardless of US restrictions.

Certainly, the Chinese government has long aspired to make the country into an AI superpower. But its record in resource allocation is poor. State-led initiatives often result in inefficiency, corruption and waste — a reality starkly illustrated by high-profile scandals and slow progress in the country’s semiconductor industry.

What American AI restrictions inadvertently achieved was a powerful commercial incentive for China’s private sector to step into the gap. And while the US often dominates in groundbreaking research, Chinese companies excel in execution, affordability and product diffusion. In ecommerce, electric vehicles, solar panels and batteries, they have demonstrated an impressive ability to scale up.

The rise of DeepSeek is a vivid reminder that constraints can fuel innovation. For Donald Trump’s new administration, this raises an uncomfortable question: will ever-tighter sanctions on China accelerate the very progress they are designed to suppress?



The frontrunner to become Germany’s chancellor has warned companies about the “great risk” of investing in China, saying the state under his leadership would not help them if such bets failed.

Friedrich Merz, whose Christian Democratic party is leading in the polls ahead of elections next month, described China on Thursday as part of an “axis of autocracies” that did not abide by “western rule of law standards”.

“I say to all representatives of the German economy that the decision to invest in China is a decision involving great risk,” Merz said after a policy speech in which he advocated for Berlin to take a more active role on the global stage.

“My heartfelt request to all companies . . . Limit the risk you take in order to avoid endangering your own company if it triggers an immediate write-off,” he added.

Companies such as Volkswagen and BASF, as well as smaller Mittelstand groups, rely heavily on China as an export market and a manufacturing base.

German direct investment into China rose sharply last year despite warnings from Social Democratic Chancellor Olaf Scholz about growing concerns over the Chinese market.

As a result, German companies are exposed to potential geopolitical tensions between Beijing and the west, which have become a more pressing concern after Donald Trump re-entered the White House this week. On Tuesday, the US president said he intends to impose a 10 per cent tariff on Chinese imports from February 1.

“You must expect major disruptions if you take this risk. I’ve talked to a whole range of small- and medium-sized and also very large companies,” Merz said.

“If you take this risk and if you have to write off these investments from one year to the next, then please do not, under any circumstances, come to the state . . . for help,” he added.

Merz said that if he were elected chancellor, Germany would re-engage with EU partners including France and Poland and establish a “pragmatic” and “un-romanticised” relationship with the US.

“I have been advocating that we do our own homework here in Europe in view of Donald Trump’s return to office, rather than sitting like a rabbit in front of a snake,” Merz said.

“If we want to be taken seriously as equals, we as Europeans must put ourselves in a position to take responsibility for our own security,” he added.

He said that such a strategy would involve adopting an EU-wide approach to boost military capabilities through weapons standardisation and economies of scale.

Asked about Trump’s demand that Nato increase its defence spending requirement to 5 per cent of GDP from 2 per cent, Merz said Germany would aim under his leadership to spend “more than 2 per cent”.

However, he added that EU members also needed to become more efficient and “get more for our money”.

Scholz’s coalition collapsed in November, largely due to concerns over funding for Germany’s huge defence investment needs alongside its support for Ukraine.

Germany is financially constrained by a constitutional debt brake that limits the federal state’s borrowing.

The dispute triggered early general elections, which are due to be held on February 23. Polls suggest that Merz’s CDU party will win with about 30 per cent of the vote, ahead of the far-right Alternative for Germany, which is polling at about 20 per cent.

Merz has vowed to end the “bickering” he said had come to represent Scholz’s coalition government by creating a National Security Council in the Chancellery to oversee foreign policy and security.

“Ukraine must win the war” against Russia, Merz said, but “Germany must not become a party to the war”. He added that Berlin therefore needed to continue to support Kyiv financially and militarily.

“We are facing nothing more and nothing less than a revanchist, anti-liberal axis of states that is openly seeking to compete with liberal democracies,” Merz said.



China’s energy sector is getting cleaner and dirtier at the same time. The country added record capacity in wind, solar, and energy storage last year. Yet fossil fuel power generation also hit a new high. Economic growth and energy transitions don’t always sit well together.

Despite aggressive investments in renewables, China’s power sector recorded a 1.5 per cent increase in thermal power output, primarily from coal, in its energy mix last year, according to official data. The increase in fossil fuel output reflects pressures from rising electricity demand, which has outpaced GDP growth for the fifth straight year.

One driver of this is artificial intelligence. AI is highly energy intensive and gets more so as models become more complex and widely deployed. Broader adoption of automation across industries, from logistics to manufacturing, is also increasing energy demand. The expansion of 5G networks, data centres and cloud computing to support this shift soaks up electricity. These energy-intensive sectors have become increasingly important for China as it builds up its position vis-à-vis its main strategic rival, the US.

Rapidly rising demand for electricity has boosted the shares of the country’s coal companies for years, pushing the market value of the largest, China Shenhua Energy Company, to more than $100bn.

This year could mark a turning point. Analysts expect renewables to meet all new electricity demand in 2025, putting a lid on coal-fired power demand growth. While positive for the environment, it puts the fortunes of the country’s coal giants at risk.

Previously, sustained investments in wind, solar and hydropower were undermined by a lack of adequate grid infrastructure. That showed in rising curtailment rates, a measure of potential renewable energy going unused due to grid constraints. Those hit 4 per cent for both solar and wind early last year.

But more than $800bn has been set aside for grid upgrades through 2030 — and it is about to start paying off. Grids that are upgraded to enhance transmission capacity and reduce energy loss should be able to unlock more renewable capacity. Last year, solar power capacity increased by about 50 per cent while wind power rose about a fifth.

As these upgrades come online, it is a good time for investors to shift their focus towards local renewable energy stocks. Shares of China Shenhua are down a tenth this year and trade just below 10 times forward earnings, a significant discount to its solar and wind peers. The value shift may already be under way.

june.yoon@ft.com



A record number of US companies in China are thinking about moving some operations out of the country or are already in the process of doing so, according to a new study, as geopolitical tensions rise with Donald Trump’s return to the White House.

The annual survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in China found 30 per cent of respondents were exploring alternative sources for goods and relocating manufacturing out of the country last year, or had already done so — double the percentage in 2020.

Michael Hart, AmCham China president, said that while the majority of US companies were not moving, the trend towards relocation was unmistakable.

“I don’t see any reason to think that bilateral investment will increase in the next couple of years,” said Hart. “Companies [are] pivoting or bolstering their supply chain by making investments somewhere else.

“Definitely . . . I would be concerned if I was in charge of Chinese investment policy,” he said.

US and Chinese companies are bracing for the fallout of Trump’s protectionist trade plans.

While the new US president held off this week on implementing his most serious threats — which have included a 60 per cent blanket tariff on Chinese goods — he has reiterated that Washington could impose a 10 per cent levy from February 1 if Beijing does not crack down on exports of precursors for fentanyl, the deadly synthetic opioid.

He has also ordered US officials to review trade with China, including supply chains that use other countries to circumvent exposure to tariffs.

The AmCham survey conducted between October and November found that 44 per cent of companies that were considering relocation cited US-China trade tensions for doing so.

Another important reason was “risk management”, with many companies seeking to strengthen supply chains in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. “I don’t see that trend slowing down,” said Hart.

The AmCham survey noted developing countries in Asia were companies’ primary destination, with 38 per cent moving there. Developed economies such as the US, EU, Japan and South Korea had also become more attractive.

By industry, technology and research and development groups were among the most likely to move, with 41 per cent relocating or considering doing so.

Both the Biden and first Trump presidencies sought to restrict China’s access to advanced technology such as semiconductors and electric vehicle batteries, while Beijing has retaliated by choking off exports of critical minerals, in a deepening tech war between the world’s two largest economies.

The number of US companies that did not rank China as a high priority for investment has also grown, reaching 21 per cent last year, more than double the level in 2020.

Chinese officials have sought to improve the business climate this year for international companies as foreign direct investment has fallen to record lows.

Foreign business and investor sentiment in China has soured over the past few years after authorities conducted raids on consultancies and auditors and instituted vague regulations covering cross-border data flows.

But a third of the US companies surveyed said despite rising geopolitical tensions, the “quality” of China’s investment environment had improved, an increase of five percentage points from the previous year.

“China continues to be a really important market,” said Hart, adding that it was a message AmCham was trying to communicate to the “folks back in Washington”.

Market access, a long-running complaint among foreign companies in China, remained an important problem, along with increasing competition from local rivals.



Chinese authorities have sought to boost the stock market and restore confidence in the world’s second-largest economy by telling local insurance companies and mutual funds to invest more in domestic stocks.

Regulators have told state insurers to invest a minimum of 30 per cent of their new policy premiums in local shares, while mutual funds have been told to increase these shareholdings by 10 per cent annually for the next three years. This is the first time regulators have set an explicit target for investments.

The policy shift could mean that up to Rmb500bn ($68bn) could flow into the market from China’s three biggest state-owned insurers alone, according to a Financial Times analysis of last year’s policy premiums. Insurers already hold shares worth Rmb4.4tn, said regulators.

The mainland’s CSI 300 index rose as much as 1.8 per cent on Thursday, almost erasing losses incurred on Wednesday after the new US administration threatened tariffs on Chinese exports.

Geopolitical tensions, a cooling economy and a property market crisis have in recent years hit demand for Chinese equities.

The latest move, first announced on Wednesday evening by regulators including the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the People’s Bank of China, aims to “stabilise the stock market and clear the bottlenecks for the entry of medium- and long-term funds into the market”.

The announcement comes days ahead of China’s Lunar New Year holiday, a closely-watched period for retail spending and consumer sentiment.

Analysts at Bank of America estimate that the additional inflows into the equity market could be Rmb470-530bn in 2025.

“Clearly regulators do care about the stock market. They want to adopt a supportive stance and keep injecting confidence into the market right before the Lunar New Year,” said Winnie Wu, chief China equity strategist at Bank of America.

“Judging from today’s share price reaction, it appears that the incremental impact of pure financial and stock market related stimulus [is] no longer as powerful as it was during the last move in September 2024”, she added.

Chi Lo, senior Asia-Pacific market strategist at BNP Paribas Asset Management, said the announcement was a “stabilising” move because of a “lack of confidence in the private sector” and “weak demand for stocks”.

The CSI 300 index soared in late September after the government announced support measures, including funding for stock buybacks and mortgage cuts. But it has since fallen 15 per cent from a peak in early October.

In September, authorities also announced a pool of $100bn to lend to companies to enact share buybacks and to lend to asset managers, insurers and brokers to buy local equities.

The index closed up 1 per cent on Thursday while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng benchmark was down 0.4 per cent.

Chinese insurance companies listed in Hong Kong, such as China Life Insurance and Ping An Insurance, rose 2.3 per cent and 1.9 per cent, respectively.

The latest announcement included further fee cuts to some mutual fund products and a crackdown on speculative trading of Chinese shares.

It also included measures to give state-owned insurance companies incentives to focus more on long-term returns, the latest attempt from Beijing to improve the efficiency of state-run enterprises, amid concerns over capital allocation.

Investors are watching for more signs of stimulus from Beijing this year after the September package, especially measures to support domestic consumption.

Authorities this month expanded a scheme to trade in old consumer goods, such as household appliances, for new ones.

“The government has to do something to turn around confidence, and nobody knows exactly what this something is,” said Lo. “Beijing is doing different things, asking state-owned companies to buy the stock market, buy up property, and hopefully some of these things will help to turn around confidence.”



Given the all-out declaration of global trade war we feared, it wasn’t actually the worst possible outcome: the first two days of Donald Trump’s presidency saw only the US’s three biggest trading partners threatened with tariffs by the end of next week. Unless you are Mexico, Canada or China, you have the luxury of waiting until April 1 to really start worrying, because that’s when the various reports Trump commissioned on trade and investment are due.

What do we read into this timing and sequencing? Nothing, obviously. Nobody knows anything. The palace politics explanation is that the business-friendly advisers around Trump have deterred him from going for tariffs across the board straight away, but then taxes of between 10-25 per cent on a third of the US’s imports aren’t exactly what the American economy needs.

Broad-based tariffs remain a clear and present danger and taxes on goods — from China in particular — could have global knock-on effects. Given weak Chinese domestic demand, a trade war might exacerbate the supposed China Shock 2.0, in which cheap exports of high-tech Chinese goods undercut manufacturers everywhere. Chinese exports diverted from the US by tariffs, the argument goes, will slosh around the global economy swamping advanced and emerging market economies alike. And if others start reacting with their own protectionist measures, could trade wars end up being Trump’s most successful export?

The experience of Trump’s first term suggests these concerns are serious but not necessarily cataclysmic. In some cases, the US market is less important than it looks. In others, trade will find a way to adapt. It’s the risk of global recession, not the dislocation of supply chains, that is the real threat.

European policymakers are clearly terrified of Chinese imports and particularly electric vehicles (EVs). But the experience of the first Trump term should be somewhat reassuring when it comes to the diversion of Chinese goods from the US market. Simon Evenett and Fernando Martín of the Global Trade Alert project calculate that US tariffs on imports from China resulted in just a net $2.8bn diversion in goods to the EU between 2018 and 2019 — which is small relative to the $46bn overall increase in Chinese goods exports to the EU between 2017 and 2019.

Evenett and Martín found that rather than diverting sales elsewhere, exporters hit by tariffs were often forced into “trade retrenchment”, smaller economies of scale making them less efficient and hence uncompetitive in other markets. To be clear: retrenchment is not a good thing. It reduces efficiency and consumer choice. But it does also lessen the chance of major political conflict over trade.

In the specific case of EVs, the prospect of big increases in Chinese imports is genuine, with the EU already having imposed anti-subsidy duties to manage the flow. But the US isn’t a major consideration here. There were hardly any imports of Chinese EVs to the US market even before former president Joe Biden imposed 100 per cent tariffs on them. Take-up has always been weak in the US, and by promising to remove Biden’s tax credit for EVs, Trump will essentially remove US-based production and consumption from the global market. (Elon Musk, founder of Tesla, is fine with this: removing the credit consolidates Tesla’s position in the US.)

Certainly, there are substantive concerns about Chinese goods swamping other middle-income countries and governments have erected a series of anti-dumping walls against basic goods such as steel. But there’s great reluctance, among Asian governments in particular, to practice large-scale protectionism. Countries like Malaysia have become highly skilled at positioning themselves in global supply chains and managing relationships with both the US and China.

“Like other emerging markets we have put some antidumping duties on imports from China, but generally only industrial inputs such as steel and polymers,” Tengku Zafrul Aziz, Malaysia’s trade minister, told me. “Even if there’s a major US-China trade dispute, we don’t anticipate going to widescale protection.”

For both advanced and middle-income countries, the prospect of Chinese goods being kept out of the US is an opportunity as well as a threat. The consultancy Oxford Economics calculates that the impact of a purely US-China trade conflict on other regions’ exports will roughly net out — lower exports to China because of falling demand being compensated by higher sales in the US market to replace Chinese goods. Europe — which competes with China on selling machinery to the US — and Asian economies in particular will benefit.

During Trump’s first term, bilateral US-China trade dropped off sharply but overall global commerce survived until the Covid-19 shock. Chinese goods often found their way to the US via what the IMF calls “connector” countries like Vietnam by adding an extra stage in the value chain. Trump wants to clamp down on such circumvention, but global supply chains can often innovate faster than policymakers can move.

The biggest risk to the global economy and trading system from a trade war isn’t export diversion. Supply chains are flexible enough to survive a lot of jockeying for position. It’s a sharp weakening in overall demand, perhaps from Trump crushing consumer spending by trying to eliminate the overall US trade deficit with tariffs, or from falling Chinese export sales adding to the woes of the country’s struggling domestic economy. That would take a truly dramatic escalation in trade tensions to achieve. We’re about to find out just how reckless Trump is and whether he wants to risk it.

alan.beattie@ft.com



Polestar, the electric-car maker backed by China’s Geely, said it will seek new suppliers to get around a US government ban on Chinese software in new high tech vehicles.

The ban threatens Polestar’s future in the US, but its chief executive Michael Lohscheller said the group would continue to expand in America despite the return of Donald Trump as president, who has vowed to revoke the country’s electric vehicle “mandates”.

Last week, the US commerce department finalised rules prohibiting the use of Chinese software and hardware for electric vehicles, shutting out cars made in China from the American market.

Polestar was considering new non-Chinese suppliers for its EV software and other components Lohscheller said in an interview, adding the group had enough time to find a solution before the ban came into effect from its 2027 model year vehicles.

“We have a manufacturing facility in the US. We are creating American jobs,” Lohscheller said, referring to a Volvo plant in South Carolina that produces Polestar EVs.

“We will and have to find solutions because the US is a big growth market for us.”

Polestar was spun out of Swedish carmaker Volvo, which itself was bought by Geely in 2010, and listed in 2022.

However, Polestar’s shares on Nasdaq have since languished, losing more than 90 per cent of their value as the company burnt through cash to scale up its premium EV business.

Last week, Polestar revealed it would take two more years for its free cash flow to turn positive and lowered its market expansion plans.

Following a major offloading last year, Volvo retains an 18 per cent stake in Polestar. Geely and its owner Eric Li own a combined 63 per cent stake.

In the US, Polestar faces Trump’s executive order to end generous EV subsidies and the president’s threat of a global tariff war. This comes on top of rising competition from Chinese rivals and Tesla in other markets.

Some analysts have questioned whether Polestar can expand in the US under its current ownership structure.

Barclays analyst Dan Levy said in a note that Polestar may “either need to exit the US or be spun out into an independent company with no control from Geely nor usage of Geely technologies”.

However, Lohscheller said pulling out of the US was not an option. “I think we should hold the course” on Polestar’s electric vehicle strategy, he added. “And then we will see what customers really want.”

The former Opel chief stressed Polestar’s software-defined vehicles and other technologies will set the brand apart at a time when many other start-ups have struggled with slowing growth in sales of battery-powered cars.

He added order intake for the company’s electric vehicles was up about 37 per cent in the fourth quarter due to demand for its Polestar 3 and 4 models.

“Who else has this [strength in software-defined vehicles] in the market today? And the answer is Tesla, Rivian and the Chinese. That’s a big, big advantage,” he added.

Lohscheller cautioned against “overreacting” to Trump’s executive orders upon taking office, including one aimed at halting distribution of unspent funding from former president Joe Biden’s landmark climate legislation.

He added: “One statement on the first day doesn’t have to solve everything. If [Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act] were really stopped, let’s see because . . . there was a lot of good investment going into the US. Let’s see how that plays out.”



Two Iranian cargo vessels carrying a crucial chemical ingredient for missile propellant will sail from China to Iran over the next few weeks, according to intelligence from security officials in two western countries.

The Iranian-flagged ships — the Golbon and the Jairan — are expected to carry more than 1,000 tonnes of sodium perchlorate, which is used to make ammonium perchlorate, the main ingredient for solid propellant for missiles.

Two of the officials said the sodium perchlorate could produce 960 tonnes of ammonium perchlorate, which makes up 70 per cent of the propellant for solid-fuel missiles. That amount of ammonium perchlorate could produce 1,300 tonnes of propellant, enough to fuel 260 mid-range Iranian missiles such as the Kheibar Shekan or Haj Qassem, the officials added.

Ammonium perchlorate is among chemicals controlled by the Missile Technology Control Regime, an international anti-proliferation body.

The chemicals were being shipped to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the elite arm of the Iranian military, two of the officials said.

The two officials said 34 20-ft containers containing the chemical had been loaded on to the Golbon, which departed the Chinese island of Daishan on Tuesday. The Jairan is expected to depart China with 22 containers in early February. Both ships, which are owned by Iranian entities, were expected to make the three-week voyage to Iran without making any port calls, the officials said.

The officials said the chemicals were loaded on to the Golbon at Taicang, a port just north of Shanghai, and were destined for Bandar Abbas, a port in southern Iran on the Persian Gulf.

Based on data from vessel tracker Marine Traffic, the Golbon spent at least several days off Daishan island before leaving on Tuesday. Marine Traffic showed the Jairan about 75km south of Daishan off the coast of Ningbo in China’s Zhejiang province early on Wednesday.

The officials could not say if Beijing was aware of the shipments. The US and its allies have frequently criticised China for providing support to regimes from Tehran to Moscow.

The Chinese embassy in Washington said it was “not familiar” with the situation and that Beijing was committed to “maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East and Gulf region and actively promoting the political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue”.

The Iranian government declined to comment.

Dennis Wilder, a former top CIA China analyst, said China had carried out extensive arms sales to Iran dating back to 1979, including supplying “Silkworm” anti-ship missiles in 1986 during the Iran-Iraq war.

“Since the early 1990s, China has assisted the Iranian military extensively with its ballistic missile development programme and has provided expertise, technology, parts, and training,” said Wilder, who is now at Georgetown University.

“China’s motivation for secretly assisting Iran today includes clandestinely helping Iran produce missiles for the Russian war effort [in Ukraine], cementing common cause against perceived US hegemonism . . . and Beijing’s purchase annually of large amounts of discounted Iranian crude oil.”

Washington has also criticised China for violating US sanctions by purchasing Iranian petroleum, but critics of Joe Biden’s administration say it did not do enough to enforce the sanctions.

The US has also increased pressure on Beijing over the past two years for not doing more to stop the shipment of dual-use items to Russia that have helped Moscow in its full-scale invasion of Ukraine. But the volume of shipments has shown little sign of falling.



The renminbi weakened and Chinese stocks fell after US President Donald Trump said he could impose a 10 per cent tariff against China from next month.

The CSI 300 index of Shanghai- and Shenzhen-listed companies closed down 0.9 per cent on Wednesday, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index retreated 1.6 per cent, led lower by the mainland Chinese companies listed in the territory.

The offshore renminbi, which trades free of the limits imposed by Chinese financial authorities, weakened by 0.3 per cent on Wednesday to 7.29 a dollar before recovering to 7.27.

The dollar strengthened by 0.15 per cent against a basket of currencies including the pound and the yen. The price of gold also rose to an 11-week high of $2,758 per troy ounce.

“The central question about tariffs is does Trump want [higher] tariffs or does he want them as a tool to negotiate?” said Andrew Tilton, chief Asia-Pacific economist at Goldman Sachs, which forecasts that “more tariffs are likely”.

China had largely avoided direct attention from Trump during his whirlwind first day in office, in which he suggested levying 25 per cent tariffs on the US’s largest trading partners Canada and Mexico, leading traders to slash bets on a resumption of the trade war started in his first term.

Trump said on Tuesday that the 10 per cent tariff was being considered to punish China for the flow of the opiate fentanyl to Mexico and Canada. The US has accused China of sending the chemicals used to make fentanyl to Mexico, where cartels manufacture the drug.

It was a repetition of an earlier threat the new president had made last year, on top of a campaign vow to impose a blanket 60 per cent levy on Chinese imports.

Traders widely expect the US dollar to continue to strengthen against the currencies of major trading partners, including China, as higher tariffs and lower interest rates in China weigh on the renminbi.

More than a quarter of fund managers polled in a Bank of America survey said “long US dollar” was the most crowded trade in January.

“Market moves have in no way fully undone [the pricing of] tariff risk; if the US were to come out and say ‘no tariffs’ you would likely see a meaningful weakening in the US dollar,” said Tilton.

Stocks in the rest of Asia were broadly up on Wednesday. Korea’s Kospi rose 1.3 per cent and Japan’s broad Topix climbed 0.9 per cent. Taiwan’s benchmark index advanced 1 per cent while India’s Sensex edged up 0.2 per cent.



A nondescript serviced office on the 24th floor of an anonymous block in Singapore might seem a curiously low-key place to base an affiliate of a giant Chinese mining conglomerate.

But in the case of Yuxiao Fund, a Singapore-domiciled Chinese company which tried to acquire control of military-use mineral assets in Australia, it was entirely deliberate.

Instead of pursuing its interest in Northern Minerals, an Australian rare earths company, from their headquarters in China, the owners of mining conglomerate Jinan Yuxiao Group chose to set up a low-profile Singaporean entity.

The point of a Singapore domicile was that it changed the angle of attack. A bid originating from a neutral south-east Asian nation with a highly regarded legal system was intended to reduce suspicions in Australia over Chinese acquisitions in sensitive industries, analysts say. It is one of several strategies that Chinese corporations are using to adapt to a hostile world around them.

Ultimately, its attempt to raise its stake in Northern Minerals was blocked by an Australian government “wary of allowing a foreign entity, especially one with strong links to the Chinese Communist party, to control a critical national resource”, according to John Coyne, analyst at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, a think-tank based in Canberra.

But Yuxiao Fund’s use of Singapore hints at a much bigger and more complex geopolitical trend. An intensifying rivalry between China and the US-led west is driving a fragmentation in the world’s economic order. Beijing, Washington, Brussels and other capitals have imposed a range of tariffs, export controls and other measures to protect their domestic markets and stymie competitors’ technological progress.

In response, company executives and analysts say, Chinese corporations are setting up shop in a host of relatively non-aligned third countries, hoping they can bridge the increasingly hostile gap that divides China from the west.

The prime motivation behind shifting investment into these relatively insulated countries — which include Singapore, Vietnam, Ireland, Hungary and Mexico, among others — has been to circumvent protectionist measures imposed by western powers against China-based companies.

Chinese investment is pouring into such countries, according to figures provided exclusively to the FT by the Rhodium Group, a research provider. But as more of China’s exports are rerouted through these jurisdictions, officials in the US and Europe are growing increasingly concerned about the emergence of back doors into their markets.

“Global Chinese companies are definitely facing their most challenging time ever,” says Frank Pieke, professor at the East Asian Institute of the National University of Singapore.

“But they are also much better equipped than in the past to meet these challenges. They are larger, more sophisticated and have much more to offer to the countries that they operate in.”

China’s emergence as an economic superpower over the past four decades has been propelled to a large degree by globalisation.

Open markets and free trade underpinned China’s long export boom and helped facilitate huge transfers of capital, knowledge and technology from the west to Chinese companies.

Many have gone on to become world leaders in their sectors: examples include BYD and CATL in electric vehicles and batteries, Huawei in telecoms and ByteDance in social media.

Faced with imported goods that are a match for their domestic incumbents in quality terms, and growing more concerned about national security issues, western powers have cooled on globalisation.

According to a recent IMF study, trade and investment between two distinct blocs — one centred on the US and the other on China — have declined by more than within those blocs, especially since the onset of the war in Ukraine.

The so-called connector countries are seeking to insert themselves between the two and are “rapidly gaining importance and serving as a bridge”, according to the IMF. Flows of trade with and investment in such countries have increased dramatically since the US, Europe and others began erecting trade barriers with China.

For Chinese companies, investing in such countries brings several advantages. One is access to large free trade areas with minimal tariffs and regulatory friction. Another is that domiciling in a new geography can allow Chinese companies to dilute or repurpose their identity, thus remaining below the trade flak flying between China and the US-led west, analysts say.

So marked is this behaviour in Singapore that it has earned a distinct name. “Singapore-washing” describes a process through which Chinese companies set up a subsidiary or reincorporate in the city state to mitigate the geopolitical risks and scrutiny often directed at China-based entities.

Chen Zhiwu, professor at the University of Hong Kong, says he is “always impressed by human ingenuity when it comes to responding to the rise of deglobalisation forces”.

“As long as there are diverse political institutions among the nations on earth, some countries will try to offer a platform for globalised businesses to engage in cross-institutional arbitrage,” he adds.

Perhaps the best known example is Shein, the fast-fashion group currently seeking a public listing in either London or New York. It originated in 2008 in the eastern city of Nanjing and its supply chains, warehouses and inventory remain in China.

But in 2021 its enigmatic founder Sky Xu, who also goes by the names Xu Yangtian and Chris Xu, relocated himself and the company’s headquarters to Singapore. Shein, valued at $66bn in its last private funding round, now defines itself as a “Singapore-headquartered global online fashion and lifestyle retailer”, according to its website.

It will still need approval from Chinese regulatory authorities ahead of its planned overseas listing, according to multiple people familiar with the situation. Beijing’s powerful Cyberspace Administration of China is also reviewing whether there is a risk that some of Shein’s data could fall into foreign hands.

But the company’s customers, business partners and potential investors will look at Singapore and see a respected jurisdiction providing a transparent pathway towards legal redress if things go wrong, analysts say.

Singaporean identities are also sometimes used to access the market in India, skirting New Delhi’s clear antipathy towards Chinese investment. In a crackdown that started in 2020 after clashes between Chinese and Indian troops along their shared Himalayan border, India has banned more than a hundred Chinese social media, lending and other apps, citing data protection and privacy concerns. It has also launched several regulatory probes against Chinese tech companies.

But that has not stopped China’s Shunwei Capital — established by Lei Jun, the founder of smartphone maker Xiaomi — investing in Indian market automation platform WebEngage and dairy brand Country Delight in 2022. Those deals were done through SWC Global, which describes itself as the Singapore “affiliate of a leading multibillion venture capital firm based in Asia”.

Joyy, a US-listed tech business with roots in China, has also recast itself as a Singapore-based global company after establishing an entity in the city state in 2021, according to corporate filings.

“There is a track record of Singapore becoming a cover for companies with questionable ties to China and even the Chinese state,” says Ja-Ian Chong, associate professor of political science at the National University of Singapore and a non-resident scholar with Carnegie China.

China also has reservations about Singapore-washing. One senior Chinese official, who declined to be identified, says Beijing felt a sense of discomfort with the trend among certain Chinese companies to “de-Chinafy” when they set up offices overseas. “It raises questions of loyalty to China that some in Beijing find uncomfortable,” the person says.

Shein declined to comment.

Chong believes such concerns are mirrored in Singapore. “If there is an accumulation of such cases, especially companies with [Chinese Communist party] ties using Singapore’s preferential arrangements with other countries, or increasingly using their entities here to circumvent restrictions, this could end up with negative speculation and political risks for Singapore,” he says.

Jinan Yuxiao Group is a case in point. It has equity affiliations with the state-owned Chinese miner Shenghe Resources, says Mary Hui, a Hong Kong-based researcher on China’s industrial strategies and author of the a/symmetric newsletter.

As well as having stable relations with both China and the west, many of the group of third countries also tend to be members of free trade areas that guarantee access to large western markets at zero or low tariffs.

Singapore and Vietnam are both members of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a grouping of 15 Asia-Pacific countries that accounts for around 30 per cent of the world’s GDP. In addition, both have long-standing bilateral free trade agreements with the US.

“Setting up in Singapore has a whole range of benefits for a Chinese company,” says the vice-president of one Singapore-based Chinese technology company, who declined to be further identified.

“If we do business from China, we hit a wall of tariffs and suspicion over everything we want to do in the US market,” the executive adds. “From Singapore, there are no tariffs and the suspicion is much less.”

Similar considerations apply to Ireland and Hungary. Both are members of the EU, whose single market provides regulatory unity and zero tariffs across 27 member states and 450mn people. Tariffs imposed by the bloc on products imported from China do not apply if those same products are manufactured and sold inside the EU.

Ireland’s experience shows the clear commercial dividends that a country can reap from linking China and the west.

Bilateral trade with China has tripled in the past five years and there is a clear desire on both sides to increase investment, said Ireland’s then-prime minister Leo Varadkar as he welcomed his Chinese counterpart Li Qiang on a visit early this year.

Big-ticket Chinese investments in Ireland include those from ByteDance, parent of the short form video app TikTok, WuXi Biologics, a drug company, Huawei, the Chinese telecoms equipment giant, and the Bank of China, a big Chinese state-owned bank. In total around 40 Chinese companies employing 5,100 people are clients of Ireland’s investment promotion agency IDA.

IDA executives say the agency “definitely considers” TikTok to be a Chinese company. But TikTok itself is at pains to stress its non-Chinese credentials. Its spokespeople in Ireland said that the company’s international headquarters are in Singapore, while in Europe it is incorporated in the UK and Ireland and is subject to UK, Irish and EU laws, not Chinese ones.

They added that although ByteDance, which is headquartered in Beijing, remains TikTok’s parent, about 60 per cent of ByteDance is beneficially owned by global institutional investors such as the Carlyle Group, General Atlantic and Susquehanna International Group.

WuXi Biologics said it “would prefer not to participate in a story focused specifically” on its country of origin. “We believe our impact is most accurately reflected as part of the collective achievements within Ireland’s vibrant life sciences sector,” the company added.

Hungary, another key country for Chinese investment in Europe, has notably warmer relations with Beijing than many others. On a visit to Budapest earlier this year, Chinese President Xi Jinping described bilateral ties as being “as mellow and rich as Tokaji,” referring to a Hungarian dessert wine.

Hungary’s authoritarian president Viktor Orbán, the EU’s longest-serving head of government, praised China for loving peace and being an “important stabilising force” in the world.

Hungary received 44 per cent of all Chinese foreign direct investment in Europe in 2023, overtaking the ‘big three’ economies of Germany, France and the UK, according to a study by Berlin-based think-tank Merics.

Mexico is a member of the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), the successor to Nafta, which embraces 510mn people and accounts for another 30 per cent of the global economy.

Chinese companies have quietly gained a considerable foothold as investors in Mexico over recent decades. North America’s USMCA free trade agreement means Chinese businesses making everything from fridges and televisions to textiles in Mexico gain privileged US market access.

América Móvil, the telecoms group controlled by the billionaire Carlos Slim, relies heavily on Huawei technology. Mexican appliance and refrigerator manufacturer Mabe is 48 per cent owned by the acquisitive Chinese group Haier.

One in five cars purchased in Mexico last year was made in China, with half of those coming from Chinese manufacturers. Electric-vehicle makers such as BYD and Chery are now scouting Mexico for factory sites so they can export to the US and avoid tariffs on vehicles imported to the US from China, which rose to 100 per cent at the start of August.

However, US patience with Mexico’s role as a tariff-free staging area for Chinese companies to the US market is already running thin. The US Trade Representative, which oversees America’s trade policy and negotiations, has also scolded Mexico over a lack of transparency in its steel and aluminium imports from third countries like China.

But some in Mexico City say China is too deeply embedded in Mexico to change course. In any case, there is only so much either country can do to limit China’s reach.

“In Washington they’ve only just realised,” says Enrique Dussel Peters, director of the Center for Chinese-Mexican Studies at UNAM, the National Autonomous University of Mexico. “They think the discussion is: ‘on Monday I don’t want to see China in Mexico’.

“That was maybe an option 20 years ago. Today it isn’t.”

Additional reporting by Kaye Wiggins in Hong Kong

Data visualisation by Keith Fray



Singapore’s National Day rally is traditionally an opportunity for the prime minister to outline domestic policy plans, but Lawrence Wong this year used his first address to sound an uncharacteristically ominous tone.

“We have seen what happens in other countries when the broad middle falls behind,” said Wong, who took office in May as Singapore’s fourth prime minister and only the second not from the founding Lee family. “The centre does not hold. Societies begin to fracture and collapse.”

“Do not assume this cannot happen here,” he added. “It can — and it will — unless we take decisive actions to prevent it.”

Wong’s warning this month reflected the government’s concerns about the political implications of rising living costs ahead of an election that must take place by November 2025 and will initiate a post-Lee political era.

The increased disillusionment of Singapore’s middle class, under pressure from high housing prices, threatens the fragile consensus that has underpinned the city-state’s growth and stability for decades, analysts said.

“The top is not very big, but the middle is huge here,” said Gillian Koh at the National University of Singapore’s Institute of Policy Studies. “It’s core to [the government]’s interests to ensure there is a broad, strong, healthy, stable middle class.”

Economic sentiment has dominated public opinion. According to the latest quarterly survey in June by local pollster Blackbox Research, 52 per cent of respondents said cost of living was the issue that mattered most, followed by salaries and wages, at 16 per cent. Immigration, often a hot-button political issue in the city-state of 6mn, came in at just 5 per cent.

Singapore is generally lauded as an economic success. It ranks fifth in the world in GDP per head, according to the IMF, trailing the likes of Luxembourg and Switzerland. And despite Singapore’s free-market reputation, more than 80 per cent of its resident population lives in public housing, according to government figures.

But not everyone has kept pace with rising prosperity. “Nobody in Singapore is going to die of hunger, but there are food insecurities,” said Robin Lee, chief executive of charity Food from the Heart, which in 2023 fed about 60,000 low-income individuals. “It is shocking for some people that in a country like Singapore we still have to do this.”

Heading into an election, “definitely cost of living hangs in the mind”, he said. “It is really, really high, and even though wages are also high, it’s relative.”

Singapore’s ruling People’s Action party — which has governed the tightly controlled country continuously since 1959 — is battling these economic challenges as it faces falling vote shares, including in the 2020 election, when the opposition made significant inroads.

The PAP’s dominance is such that even the opposition Workers’ party bridles at the suggestion of winning power. Its leader, Pritam Singh, demanded a correction to an April article in the Straits Times that suggested his party aspired to form a government, clarifying that its medium-term goal was merely to “play our part in ensuring at least one-third of parliament is not in the PAP’s hands”.

“The WP seeks an evolution, not a revolution of our political system,” he said.

With the PAP all but certain to prevail in the polls — and Wong to remain prime minister — he faces the challenge of winning over a disenchanted electorate following a transition from the Lees.

Wong was tapped by the party after Lee Hsien Loong, the son of founding leader Lee Kuan Yew, stepped down as prime minister in May, having led the city-state since 2004. Lee Hsien Loong has stayed on in government as a senior minister and secretary-general of the PAP, following his father’s example.

Wong, who was principal private secretary to Lee Hsien Loong before holding a host of ministerial appointments, has highlighted his ordinary-man credentials, often referencing his non-elite schooling, in a bid to appeal to ordinary Singaporeans.

His rally speech included a series of handouts and populist pledges, including support for unemployed people to study or reskill, policies to maintain the affordability of public housing, improved shared parental leave and upskilling allowances covering 24 months of full-time training for Singaporeans aged 40 and above.

The 2024 budget announced in February also includes a S$1.9bn (US$1.5bn) expansion of the government’s cost of living adjustment system of vouchers, cash payouts and rebates.

Wong’s government has also pledged to develop an Islamic studies institute to support Muslim leaders and another to improve standards of spoken Mandarin — initiatives that reflect attention to maintaining harmony among Singapore’s multi-ethnic population, which is 15 per cent Malay, 7.6 per cent Indian and 75 per cent Chinese.

With a severe reliance on imports, Singapore has limited scope to reduce costs, but recent economic data has pointed to a brightening picture. Core annual inflation in July fell to 2.5 per cent, the lowest level in more than two years, while non-oil exports grew 15.7 per cent year on year, the first annual climb since January.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore, which Wong chaired until May, has maintained the currency’s strength around 10-year highs against the US dollar, partly to keep down the cost of imported goods.

This focus on affordability, more than tensions over foreign workers or balancing US-China geopolitical frictions, appears to be an imperative for Wong. “It is something the government needs to address very carefully,” said Robin Lee of Food from the Heart.

Letter in response to this article:

All Singaporeans benefit from the nation’s progress / From Ng Teck Hean, High Commissioner, Republic of Singapore, London SW1, UK



Singapore’s prime minister has warned that raising tensions between the US and China will have an impact on the city state’s economy and the broader region.

Lawrence Wong, who took office in May, said on Sunday in a national address that the “intensifying rivalry” between Washington and Beijing was Singapore’s single biggest geopolitical concern.

“The mutual suspicion and distrust will continue”, affecting international trade, security and co-operation, he said. “As a small country, totally reliant on trade and a stable global environment, we are bound to be impacted.”

Singapore’s trade-to-GDP ratio stood at 311 per cent in 2023, one of the highest figures in the world, according to the World Bank.

Wong said irrespective of who won the November presidential election in the US, “it’s clear that America’s attitude towards China is hardening. Meanwhile, China is convinced that America is trying to contain it and suppress its rise.” Both the Trump and Biden administrations have ratcheted up tariffs on Chinese products, which Beijing responded to with countermeasures.

The US provides much of Singapore’s military capability, while China is the city state’s biggest trading partner. Maintaining good relations with both is a priority for Singapore, but also an increasing challenge.

Wong also warned of a changing global manufacturing map. Where once developed countries outsourced production to cheaper locations in Asia, “that era is over”, he said, noting that the US, China and European countries wished to reshape supply chains in their favour.

The US and EU have both sought to reduce reliance on Chinese supply chains, favouring nearshoring strategies: in 2023 the US bought more goods from Mexico than China for the first time in 20 years, according to the US Department of Commerce.

Singapore, the world’s largest transshipment hub, has not yet seen an impact on its own role in trade — total container volumes in the first five months of the year were up 7.7 per cent year on year, according to the Maritime & Port Authority of Singapore — but the country is potentially vulnerable to supply chain realignment.

The National Day Rally speech is considered the country’s most significant annual political event, usually accompanied by domestic policy initiatives. Not only was this Wong’s first such address as prime minister, but it was likely to be the last before Singapore holds a general election, which must take place before November 2025, but is widely expected to be held earlier.

Speaking in Malay, Mandarin and English Wong focused on policies concerning education, families and public housing availability. He highlighted the need to keep Singapore’s multi-ethnic population cohesive and financially included.

“We have seen what happens in other countries when the broad middle falls behind: societies begin to fracture and collapse,” he said. “Do not assume this cannot happen here. It can.”



Chinook helicopters crossed the Singaporean skies, flanked by Apache gunships, while German-made Leopard battle tanks paraded on the streets below and US-made F-16 fighter jets put on an air show.

Last week’s exhibition, part of Singapore’s annual National Day celebration, offered a vivid display of the military assets of a country that according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute had the world’s third-highest military spending per capita in 2023. It ranked fifth in 2021.

This year’s parade, the first under new Prime Minister Lawrence Wong, takes place as rising geopolitical tensions and emerging cyber threats are pushing the city state to boost defence spending and rethink its traditional stance of preparation and deterrence.

On National Day, Wong warned that “tensions between the US and China continue to rise. For now, they don’t want to collide. But they are engaged in a strategic rivalry that can undermine peace and stability, especially in this region.” These were, he said, “powerful forces”.

“They are what keep me awake at night,” he said.

“A lot more can be done in hardening civilian systems and getting the population psychologically ready for disruption in case Singapore gets caught up in a power confrontation,” said Ja Ian Chong, associate professor at the National University of Singapore.

Singapore’s military strategy has long been encapsulated by founding prime minister Lee Kuan Yew’s remark in 1966 that the city state should be a “poisonous shrimp” — small but hazardous for predators.

“Ultimately Singapore is trying to deter coercion directed against the city-state, without really trying to project power very far outwards,” said Scott Harold, associate director of the Rand Corporation.

In a sign of an increased focus on defence, Singapore in February outlined a S$20.25bn (US$15bn) defence budget for the current fiscal year. That is a 13 per cent increase over the previous annual budget, although revisions in last year’s spending means the actual increase is 2.5 per cent. In 2014, the budget was S$12.6bn.

Singapore has long sought to maintain friendly relations with both the US, an important non-treaty ally, and China, its largest trading partner. But that geopolitical balancing act is being tested in an increasingly fractious environment.

One proximate source of concern is the South China Sea, where China has made vast maritime claims that are disputed by countries including Malaysia, Vietnam and the Philippines, and where recent stand-offs have inflamed tensions.

“South China Sea tensions are particularly unwelcome in Singapore because it has no territorial claims of its own there, but would inevitably get drawn into potential conflict,” said Jonah Blank, senior research fellow at the NUS and senior political scientist at Rand. “From Singapore’s perspective, there is no US-China conflict that would be anything but a disaster.”

Singapore has been deepening military ties with the US, as Washington strengthens its security net in the Indo-Pacific region. Under a memorandum of understanding renewed in 2019, US planes and ships can pass through Singapore.

But Singaporean politicians have been careful to avoid outright criticism of China’s increasingly assertive regional posture. Speaking at the Aspen Security Forum in July, Singapore’s defence minister Ng Eng Hen said Beijing moving deeper into the South China Sea made “perfect military strategic sense . . . from their point of view”.

Much of Singapore’s military hardware and technology has been sourced from the US or Nato, an alignment that would make the city-state “dependent on the US or other western allies” in a US-China conflict, Chong said. In such an event, Singapore would be asked to provide transit for the US military — which China would pressure it not to allow, he added.

Singapore’s defence strategy was still tilted towards conventional land capabilities, analysts said — an outdated focus when the city-state is only linked by land to Malaysia, an ally. “If there is going to be greater instability because of issues in the South China Sea and any potential conflict around Taiwan . . . Singapore is going to need to make sure its sea lanes and air routes are safe,” said Chong.

Singapore has ordered 20 Lockheed Martin F-35s the most advanced fighter aircraft, which are set to begin arriving in 2026, as well as four Type 218SG Invincible-class submarines from Germany’s Thyssenkrupp Marine Systems, which are expected to be operational by 2028.

At the same time, the US and Singapore are expanding their co-operation in emerging technologies.

In July, Ng and US defence secretary Lloyd Austin agreed to co-operate on data, analytics and artificial intelligence. Singapore is seeking to incorporate AI into military thinking: it launched a fourth branch of its armed forces, the Digital and Intelligence Service, in 2022, and has held defence exercises around critical infrastructure and digital attacks.

“AI could also shape decision-making processes in military operations,” said Collin Koh Swee Lean, senior fellow at the S Rajaratnam School of International Studies, pointing to its potential to identify threats within the “constrained and cluttered maritime domain” near Singapore, which includes crucial lanes for global shipping.

Ultimately “there is recognition that a lot of the potential for conflict in future will involve key infrastructure that may not be physical”, said Chong.

This — rather than the tanks on display in the National Day parade — may represent Singapore’s future military priorities. “The calibration needs to be less land force heavy, more naval and air force,” Chong said.



In what were once wild jungle and palm oil plantations in southern Malaysia, the likes of TikTok, Nvidia and Microsoft are racing to install the building blocks of the digital economy: data centres.

Billions of dollars are being invested in the state of Johor, just a few kilometres from Singapore, by companies taking advantage of cheaper land and more abundant energy for computer infrastructure while staying close to south-east Asia’s biggest financial centre.

Johor’s fortunes may soon be more closely tied to those of its wealthy neighbour. Malaysia’s king, the motorbike-riding billionaire Sultan of Johor, is championing an effort to bind his state closer to Singapore in a single economic zone, expected to include tax breaks and smoother cross-border trade.

There is a model in China, where Shenzhen’s transformation from fishing village to tech megapolis started after it became a special economic zone (SEZ) on the doorstep of Hong Kong. Malaysia hopes that Johor can be as integral to the regional digital economy as Shenzhen has been to China’s manufacturing growth.

“Johor could become the Shenzhen of south-east Asia,” said Tengku Zafrul Aziz, Malaysia’s investment, trade and industry minister. “The data centre industry can form the backbone of a broader transformation of the state into a high-tech manufacturing powerhouse.”

The boom in Johor gathered pace after Singapore, which has limited energy resources, placed a three-year moratorium on construction of power-hungry data centres in 2019. Johor spurred investment by cutting approval times from more than three months to as little as seven days.

Robin Khuda, chief executive of AirTrunk, a data centre with facilities across Asia, said Malaysia had given the company its “smoothest” entry to any of its markets. The group planned to expand further in Johor, Khuda said.

Foreign investment into the state of 4mn people hit RM58.8bn ($12.6bn) in 2022 and RM31bn in 2023, compared with RM10bn in 2019, according to figures from Malaysian Investment Development Authority.

Johor’s economic growth is expected to outpace national forecasts up to 2025, according to Mida.

At Johor’s Sedenak Tech Park, land prices have gone from about RM40 per sq ft a couple of years ago to about RM70 to RM80, according to Adi Yaacob, a senior manager for JLand Group, the developer. The group is part of Johor Corporation, the state development company.

The activity has pushed Malaysia to the top of the list of Asia’s fastest-growing data centre markets, according to a report by Cushman & Wakefield. The country has a development pipeline of 1.2 gigawatts of data storage capacity, an increase of 600 per cent in the next five years from its current 189 megawatts.

Malaysia is predicted to make up the majority of south-east Asia’s data centre market in terms of capacity by 2035 thanks to its proximity to Singapore, according to Morgan Stanley research.

The next boost should come from artificial intelligence companies that want to build AI foundational or training models in Malaysia, according to Yeoh Seok Hong, managing director of YTL Power International. His company has struck a $4.3bn deal to build an AI data centre in Johor with Nvidia as a tenant — an agreement that involves a partnership in cloud computing and a supercomputer project. YTL Power’s share price is up more than 100 per cent this year since the announcement.

Meanwhile, ByteDance, TikTok’s Chinese owner, plans to invest about RM10bn to set up an AI hub in Malaysia, minister Tengku Zafrul Aziz said in June. The company is already an anchor tenant at three data centres in Johor. Microsoft has also been snapping up sites and recently acquired land in Johor to expand.

All of this is a prelude to the establishment of an SEZ with Singapore, which is due to be agreed this year. The push has gained momentum since the business-friendly Sultan of Johor, who has good relations with Singapore, became Malaysia’s king in January.

“The current king is very pro-business and wants Johor to be successful. I think Johor needs something like [the SEZ] to move forward,” said Govinda Singh, an executive director at real estate consultancy Colliers International.

But he pointed to past problems between the two countries including stalled projects. A plan for a high-speed rail link between Singapore and Kuala Lumpur was abandoned after the countries failed to reach agreement.

“The main difference [now] is the Johor king and [Malaysian prime minister] Anwar are really trying to get the economy up and running. There is willingness at national and state level . . . Can it last? You have to be a bit sceptical,” he added.

“Ultimately I am not sure Johor can be successful without [the SEZ], even with the data centre boom.”

Many wonder if the data centre surge will increase pressure on resources while not contributing many jobs. Malaysia still relies on fossil fuels, including coal, for most of its power. Many aspiring cloud providers have no plan for renewable energy.

Liew Chin Tong, Malaysia’s deputy minister for trade and industry, said he was “uneasy” about some parts of the industry and wanted more stringent requirements for water and renewable energy use in data centres.

“Finding the balance is what I am most concerned about. We also want to make sure data centres will generate spillover to the economy, such as localisation of equipment and parts as well as creation of jobs for Malaysians,” he said.

Still, both places have become increasingly integrated. The two land crossings between Johor and Singapore, Woodlands and Tuas Link, are among the busiest and most congested border crossings globally.

One engineer working at US semiconductor giant Micron’s Singapore fabrication plant said he intended to buy property in Johor this year in anticipation of the SEZ. “I can afford a house in Johor as opposed to a tiny, expensive apartment in Singapore.”

A SEZ would make Johor attractive to everyone from multinationals to young engineers, according to ​​Lee Ting Han, a member of Johor state’s executive council. “What I hope is that investing in Johor is one day regarded by everyone as the same as investing in Singapore.”

Johor was always “regarded as the Wild West in Malaysia”, said Greg O’Shea, the head of Singapore and Malaysia for supply chain consultancy TMX Transform. “That is really starting to change.”



The risk of higher prices for everything from cars to smartphones for the world’s consumers just got a lot higher. Congestion at Singapore’s container port, which is at its worst since the pandemic, has started spilling over to neighbouring ports, posing a risk for global supply chains. Shipping rates have risen as much as fivefold over the past year and it is only a matter of time before some of that is passed on to shoppers.

Singapore is the world’s largest transshipment hub: the container port connects more than 600 ports from 123 countries and has an annual capacity of 50mn 20ft equivalent units, a measure of volume. Things are getting serious when congestion from a hub of this size starts a domino effect for neighbouring ports.

That rare phenomenon is playing out this week with container ship congestion spreading to neighbouring Malaysia.

One explanation is that ships rerouting to avoid Red Sea attacks have led to bottlenecks in other Asian and European ports. Diversions have then meant more ships going through Singapore. Maersk, the world’s second-largest container carrier, for example, said it would skip two westbound sailings from China and South Korea this month owing to severe congestion. JPMorgan had estimated the Red Sea shipping crisis could add 0.7 percentage points to global core goods inflation for just the first half earlier this year.

Now, another more unexpected problem could mean lasting disruptions to the global supply chain even when the Red Sea shipping crisis eases. The total volume of vessels, especially to and from China, has surged in recent months, and the annual peak shipping season has arrived earlier than expected.

US President Joe Biden unveiled tariffs on a wide range of Chinese imports including chips, batteries, steel, medical products, electric cars and solar cells in May. Tariffs have also been proposed on other products such as ship-to-shore cranes. Companies have been rushing to secure inventory of these items before each of the tariffs go into effect later this year.

Among those hit will be automakers, which unlike other manufacturers of smartphones or smaller electronics, cannot shift their shipments to airfreight.

Singapore’s ports are not the only danger spot to watch. The biggest US ports union suspended labour talks last month and has instructed members to prepare for a possible strike starting in October, threatening to create a perfect storm for global supply chains.

A backlog of a similar scale in Asia during the pandemic resulted in higher prices for all kinds of products. The longer the shipping congestion lasts in Singapore, the higher the risk of another inflationary jolt for the world.

june.yoon@ft.com



Singapore’s state-owned fund Temasek has said it will prioritise US investments and be “cautious” about China after warning that its large exposure to the world’s second-biggest economy had hit its performance.

Temasek, one of the world’s biggest state-owned investment groups, said on Tuesday that the value of its portfolio rose just 2 per cent to S$389bn ($288bn) in the year to March.

While those figures lag behind a 28 per cent gain for the S&P 500 stock index over the same period, the rise was an improvement on last year when its value tumbled 5 per cent in its worst returns since 2016.

Growth from investments in the US and India was “offset by the underperformance of China’s capital markets”, Temasek said in its annual review. The MSCI China index was down 19 per cent during the same period.

China is Temasek’s third-biggest market after Singapore and the Americas, with 19 per cent of its portfolio tied to the country. The group has been one of the big beneficiaries of China’s growth over the past two decades with bets on technology giants Tencent and Alibaba and ecommerce group Meituan.

“What we’d like to see is consumer confidence returning and spending going up” in China, Chia Song Hwee, Temasek’s deputy chief executive, told the Financial Times.

He said Sino-US tensions had altered its approach. “In the US we try to invest in companies that do not rely on importation from China. And in China, we invest in companies that do not rely on exports to the US.”

Chia also struck a cautious note on artificial intelligence investment. He said Temasek was “not in a hurry” to put money behind the AI boom and warned of “hype” in the industry.

The state-backed group did not plan to invest directly in OpenAI, he said, but added that people “should not be surprised” if it had exposure to the company through investments in venture capital funds. Temasek was in discussions to invest in OpenAI, the FT reported in March.

Chia said Temasek’s approach to early-stage AI start-ups was “to invest through VC funds who are much more nimble and they will build a portfolio around the space”, adding: “We will probably do direct investments on the back of what we learn from that.”

Temasek said last year it was “disappointed” with its $275mn bet on failed cryptocurrency exchange FTX. It was forced to write off its stake after the company collapsed, prompting a rare backlash from investors.

“When there’s a lot of capital coming into any area one needs to be watchful,” Chia said at a press conference, identifying “the AI hype” and the boom in private credit as two areas of exuberance.

Temasek said the US would continue to be “the largest destination of our capital” outside Singapore. It said it would increase its focus on India, Japan and south-east Asia, markets that have benefited as global investors seek to cut their exposure to China as growth slows and geopolitical tensions rise.

Temasek praised the performance of London-based bank Standard Chartered, despite chief executive Bill Winters in February describing its share price as “crap”. Temasek is the lender’s biggest shareholder.

“I think the operating performance actually improved quite significantly” over the past three years, said Connie Chan, Temasek’s head of financial services.

Temasek has over the years shifted from public equities to private markets, increasing its allocation to unlisted assets to 52 per cent of its portfolio as of March from 20 per cent in 2004.

While it benefited from a private equity boom, executives have warned that funds face the prospect of lower returns as rising interest rates have hit its debt-fuelled model.

“Low interest rates, with a lot of leverage to make acquisitions, drove some part of the returns in the private equity space,” said Alpin Mehta, head of real estate and deputy head of private equity fund investments at Temasek.

“But even if you had to take that and strip that off, I think the returns are still fairly attractive.”



One of my favourite spots to walk past in Singapore is what my daughter calls the “red car house”. Nestled on a corner in one of Singapore’s richest neighbourhoods, the house in question is actually a grandiose mansion with at least six red Ferraris and Lamborghinis parked outside.

Owned by a wealthy local businessman, the house is well known in Singapore. It is so opulent that it features in a Crazy Rich Asians-inspired tour of the tiny, island city-state, based on the popular 2018 film.

The Hollywood hit was an invaluable marketing vehicle for Singapore and a gamble by its tourism board and film commission. Both threw their weight — and an undisclosed sum — behind the movie. The gamble paid off. After the film’s release, Singapore experienced a record number of tourists and enjoyed a wave of global attention.

Now, however, Singapore is trying to play down the movie and the image that it presents. A reputation for high living and expensive business costs have become a sensitive topic for locals ahead of the next general election.

The city, one of Asia’s main financial centres, has been ranked the world’s most expensive for nine of the past 11 years by the annual Worldwide Cost of Living survey from the Economist Intelligence Unit.

Singapore wants to convince locals and expats otherwise. “What does it really cost to live in Singapore — the world’s ‘most expensive’ city?” ran a recent article from one of the government agencies. This dismissed “familiar tropes”, including “over-the-top mansions in Crazy Rich Asians, the infinity pool at Marina Bay Sands and incredibly expensive cars”.

The government’s arguments are not all that convincing. Cost-saving advice includes not having to buy seasonal clothing because “it’s summer all year round”. There are also promises of 45c cups of coffee (I am yet to find this deal) and the ability to rent government housing, held up as proof that the city is not “necessarily as expensive” as London or New York.

For some, the city’s extravagant reputation is still a bonus. Philip Choo, who was inspired by the book to launch the city’s first Crazy Rich Asians tour in 2014, says he is still enjoying high demand from customers, especially from the US.

But a spate of recent news stories has reinforced the cliché of foreigners living lavish lifestyles and pushing up costs for everyone else. In May, 35-year-old Chinese citizen Wang YunHe was arrested in Singapore for allegedly running one of the world’s largest cyber crime computer networks. According to the indictment, his possessions included a luxury apartment in the city’s glitzy Orchard shopping district, a Ferrari F8 Spider and a number of Patek Philippe watches.

The result is that more Singaporeans are questioning government schemes that have enticed the rich to live here. One example is the family office regime. There are now more than 1,400 single family offices — funds that manage a family’s wealth — in the city-state, compared with 50 in 2018.

Manu Bhaskaran, an economist and chief executive of consultancy Centennial Asia Advisors, told me that Singapore’s rising costs were the product of government policy. The “business model brings in foreign investors who bid up rents, wages, and other service costs . . . The family offices are an example — how much extra revenue do they generate for the rest of us?”

Perhaps aware of such sentiment, another government article has proclaimed that Singapore’s high cost of living is limited to wealthy expatriates. It claimed city ranking calculations include “products such as brand name raincoats and foreign daily newspapers” not typically purchased by Singaporean households.

Singaporeans are unimpressed. “Not sure why they cherry picked two items and said it’s not relevant to Singaporeans,” wrote one Reddit user. Another observed that the difference might lie in the suggestion that locals should have different expectations to foreigners. “It is only expensive for expats because the average Singaporeans are not supposed to aspire for the finer things in life.”

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com

Letter in response to this article:

Extravagant claims about Singapore are clickbait / From Ng Teck Hean, High Commission of the Republic of Singapore, London SW1, UK



Temasek has been backing a wave of international dealmaking by some of its biggest companies as the Singaporean state-owned investment company faces pressure to boost returns from its S$382bn (US$282bn) portfolio.

The global investor has been an influential “behind the scenes” supporter of major mergers and acquisitions by companies it has stakes in, including Singtel, ST Engineering, Singapore Airlines and Sembcorp Marine, said two people familiar with the transactions.

More such deals encouraged by Temasek, whose profits form a major source of revenue for the government’s national budget, are in the pipeline, one of the people added.

While Temasek has become a consequential investor in public and private markets globally, Singapore-based companies still comprise 54 per cent of its portfolio. It was formed in 1974 to own and manage the shares and assets of the government. By comparison, GIC, the country’s sovereign wealth fund, invests outside Singapore and manages the nation’s foreign reserves.

“Temasek is trying to supercharge the animal spirits of its Singaporean companies to make them more global and have better growth prospects because that [helps] its own bottom line, especially as a general election looms,” one of the people said.

Many of the companies involved were struggling with low growth prospects or flagging share prices, they added.

“I would not say Temasek are forcing it . . . because being an activist investor is not their style, but there is certainly a message through greater engagement that they would like portfolio companies to lean in. They have been strongly supportive of this M&A activity behind the scenes,” they said.

“There has been pressure from the government for some time to boost returns,” said another person familiar with the situation. “We are going to see more of this [deal activity].”

Temasek declined to comment. The company said publicly this year that more engagement with portfolio companies had created a “value uplift north of S$10bn”.

The focus on dealmaking follows Temasek reporting one of its worst annual results in recent times for the year to March 2023. The company reported a 5.07 per cent drop in shareholder returns, its poorest performance since 2016. The group slowed its investment pace for the period, calling it “the most challenging year for markets” in the past decade.

Temasek is owned by Singapore’s finance ministry. Lawrence Wong, who became Singapore’s prime minister last month, has also been finance minister since 2021.

Temasek’s one-year total shareholder return has been negative for two of the past four years. However, the state group prefers to cite growth over the longer term, reporting in 2023 a rise of 7.7 per cent over three years and 6 per cent over 10.

Another person close to Temasek said conversations about its returns with the government were “no more than the usual” pressure to improve them during a period of prolonged global economic uncertainty.

Recent deals involving Temasek-backed companies include telecoms provider Singtel, in which it is the majority shareholder, leading a $1.75bn investment this month in digital infrastructure business ST Telemedia Global Data Centres — another Temasek-backed company. Singtel’s share price is trading at its highest since 2022.

In March, Singapore approved the merger between Tata-owned Air India and sister airline Vistara, a joint venture between Tata and Temasek-backed Singapore Airlines. The deal has been touted as strengthening the national carrier’s presence in the fast-growing Indian market once it completes in 2025.

Last year, Sembcorp Marine finalised a merger with Keppel Offshore & Marine, forming one of the world’s largest energy operations and maintenance engineering companies. Temasek, the majority shareholder of Sembcorp Marine, was “strongly behind” the deal, one of the people said.

Temasek has also struck some of its own deals. The fund sold liquefied natural gas trader Pavilion Energy to the oil major Shell this month for an undisclosed sum, although the fund had valued it at $3.63bn in March 2023.

Letter in response to this report:Singapore state investor’s long-term strategy / From Lena Goh, Managing Director, Public Affairs, Temasek, Singapore



Welcome back. Today we focus on a story that gives a window into the push to clean up the vast global shipping industry — and the tensions and dilemmas that can plague national efforts to ride the waves of the energy transition — with Mercedes Ruehl’s report from Singapore.

Meanwhile, on the other side of the world, it’s been a mixed season for sustainability-related resolutions at shareholder meetings in the US. We digest some of the key numbers.

Have a great weekend — we’ll see you on Monday. — Simon Mundy

Singapore’s beaches and coastal parks have been unusually quiet in recent days. The city-state’s southern coastline became a sea of black after a dredging boat hit a bunker vessel on June 14, spilling more than 400 tonnes of oil into the ocean.

The pungent kerosene smell has hit inhabitants of the mostly man-made resort island of Sentosa, which many billionaires call home. A clean-up is under way but could take months to clear fully.Singapore is an integral part of the global shipping industry given its strategic geographic location. It is one of the biggest and most important hubs in the world for bunkering — that is, supplying ships with fuel.But the latest oil spill highlights the risks of being a bustling port. The Singapore Strait is one of the busiest sea lanes in the world and remains vulnerable to oil spill accidents such as the June 14 incident. As Singapore strives to maintain its position in the industry by becoming a leader in green bunkering, the transition could expose the city to further risks.

Green bunkering involves supplying ships with alternatives to fossil fuels, such methanol and ammonia. These substances come with far lower carbon emissions than the petroleum-derived fuel oil used by most marine vessels, but are highly toxic if spilled into the sea. A 2022 study led by the Environmental Defense Fund found that an ammonia spill could have more severe impacts on fish than an oil spill of comparable size, though it would not persist for as long in the environment.The world’s first voyage using ammonia as a shipping fuel, conducted by Australian miner Fortescue Metals Group, departed from Singapore in May. The city carried out the first ship-to-containership methanol bunkering for Maersk last year. The government said last month it is ready to offer full-scale commercial operations for the bunkering of methanol as a marine fuel.The commercial benefits to Singapore of being a green bunkering hub are obvious. Bunker sales of biofuel blends increased to 520,000 tonnes in 2023, more than triple the 140,000 tonnes in 2022. Total business spending by key maritime companies overseen by Singapore’s Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore hit more than S$4.8bn (US$3.5bn) in 2023, up from S$4.3bn one year earlier.

The International Maritime Organization, the UN’s maritime body, is set to introduce stricter emissions rules for the shipping industry — which accounts for 3 per cent of global carbon emissions annually — from 2027. Companies globally are testing the uses of methanol, ammonia and hydrogen to comply with some of these new rules.

Singapore is putting money behind the green push, too. The Maritime Singapore Decarbonisation Blueprint, launched in 2022, was established to support the development and commercialisation of new technologies, with $300mn committed to initiatives over the next decade.The MPA is working with the industry and investment community to fund start-ups in this space, with some S$68mn raised for 116 start-ups as of the end of 2023. The MPA and the Singapore Maritime Institute gave S$19.3mn in funding to universities and research institutes in 2023 for maritime R&D in smart ship development and green tech.However, trialling these new fuels — which also include green hydrogen — opens Singapore up to potentially more accidents, as well as lucrative business. It does not take many incidents such as June 14 to move public opinion on the matter. Studies on the effects of an ammonia or methane leak still are ongoing, but there are already concerns in the industry over their potential dangers to both humans and marine ecosystems. Singapore may hope the risk is worth the reward. (Mercedes Ruehl)

This year’s shareholder meeting season is nearing its close, and some interesting trends are already visible in the data. Check out this chart using data from investor intelligence firm Georgeson, showing proposals voted on as of June 20 at companies in the Russell 3000 — an index designed to include the biggest 3,000 listed companies in the US.

The number of shareholder proposals related to social issues has continued to climb, with notable upticks in resolutions around artificial intelligence and health issues. In contrast, governance- and environment-related proposals have declined slightly, despite an increase in resolutions around biodiversity.

Meanwhile, there’s been a steep rise in proposals against the environmental, social and governance agenda, doubling so far this year from the same period of 2022.

But if we look at rates of support for these resolutions, we see a different story:

There’s much more support for governance-related proposals than for other categories, with environmental and social proposals suffering a steady decline in backing. This chimes with complaints from major asset managers about a rash of climate-related proposals that they consider inappropriately restrictive of company management.

Investors are clearly far more damning in their response to anti-ESG resolutions, which have had an average support rate of just 2.3 per cent so far this year. (Simon Mundy)

Is targeted taxation of the ultra-rich a good idea, and how could it work? Martin Sandbu makes the case.



Singaporeans are a competitive bunch. One of the must-know Singlish words for those living in the city-state is kiasu. The Chinese Hokkien term roughly means a fear of missing or losing out and often refers to someone trying to get ahead of others. “Fomo on steroids” is how one Singaporean friend describes it.

One of the best places to see this in action is the queues at lunchtime around stalls of the city-state’s favourite hawker food markets. Another area to observe the kiasu mentality in the Asian financial centre is in business, such as foreign investment.

Singapore made a surprise announcement last month that it would free up more power for data centre expansion. The move came as the chief executives of Nvidia, Google, Microsoft and others have been swinging by neighbouring Malaysia — and other countries in south-east Asia — in recent months pledging billions in data centre investment.

In Malaysia alone, the tech groups — three of the top four biggest companies by market capitalisation globally — have committed $8.5bn in new data centre, cloud and artificial intelligence investment in the past six months. Which is why more than one Malaysian government official joked that Singapore’s decision to court more data centres was a “typical Singapore kiasu response” to its neighbour’s progress.

Of course there is some competition between Singapore and its neighbours, especially Malaysia from which it gained independence in 1965. But it is overly simplistic to dismiss Singapore’s move as kiasu-ness — even if there is an element of that at play. The city-state is already hyper connected and one of the biggest data centre markets in Asia — a trend that accelerated as Hong Kong became a less favoured destination for data centres and undersea cables. It is one of the top submarine cable hubs globally, with connections to 25 active subsea cables and more to come. None of that will change soon.

The decision to increase data centre capacity last month was a surprise to many because the government imposed a more than three-year moratorium on new data centres between 2019 and 2022. The proliferation of the energy-guzzling facilities had been consuming a substantial amount of Singapore’s resources. That ban helped push data centre companies into nearby Johor, the Malaysian state just across the causeway, and to a certain extent Batam, a close-by Indonesian island.

The conundrum Singapore faces now — like many other countries — is that it grossly underestimated how demand for AI is going to expand the global market for data centres in coming years. The city-state has made little secret of the fact that it wants to be the AI hub for south-east Asia, if not the top in Asia.

That’s because being such a hub brings other economic benefits. For example, as part of Nvidia’s data centre investment in Malaysia, the company will partner with local conglomerate YTL Power to develop the country’s fastest supercomputers using Nvidia’s AI chips. Microsoft last month unveiled landmark AI infrastructure investments in Indonesia and Thailand.

Singapore realises it cannot ultimately compete with its neighbours for land and power. The key is how to complement it. The reason Johor is popular with global tech giants from ByteDance to Nvidia and Microsoft is because it is just a few kilometres away from hyperconnected Singapore.

“Both Johor and Singapore can benefit from the data centre boom. They complement each other,” says Rangnath Salgame, chair and chief executive of Princeton Digital Group, an Asian data centre company based in Singapore but expanding in Johor. It is a “symbiotic relationship”, he adds.

And as more and more companies diversify supply chains away from China that puts Singapore in pole position. One way it can benefit is by promoting a Singapore + one strategy, whereby companies establish a headquarters in the country to leverage its international business environment, free trade agreements and access to professional talent, but then have their manufacturing — or data centre — facilities in places such as Johor.

This is already a long-term trend. Singapore was the top recipient of inward foreign direct investment flows in south-east Asia between 2013 and 2022, according to the latest data published by the bloc. In 2022, Singapore attracted $141bn of FDI, accounting for more than half of the region’s total. So should Singapore really be kiasu?

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com



Singapore has refused to renew the visa of the US-born chief executive of heavy-duty shipping company Red Box Energy Services after the company was designated by the US Treasury for breaching sanctions on Russia.

Philip Adkins, who co-founded Red Box and moved the group’s headquarters to Singapore, told the Financial Times that authorities in the city-state had denied him a work visa, in effect forcing him to step down.

“I maintain the company was always compliant with all applicable international sanctions and it is my understanding my former colleagues are actively engaged with Ofac to delist the vessels — but in the meantime I am unemployed and I am no longer the CEO of Red Box,” Adkins said after the Singapore Ministry of Manpower’s decision on the visa.

Red Box was placed under sanctions by the US Office of Foreign Assets Control, an enforcement agency of the US Treasury, in May following an FT story on an audacious journey by its two main ships — the Audax and Pugnax heavy-lift vessels — from China through the ice-bound Northern Sea Route across Russia’s northern shore.

The vessels delivered large structures to Murmansk in northern Russia, the biggest city in the world above the Arctic Circle, to be used in a liquefied natural gas project that is under construction and the subject of sanctions.

Adkins argued at the time that the structures were “simple steel frames” that did not breach sanctions. Industry experts said they appeared to be modules critical to the development of Russia’s Arctic LNG 2 project.

The UK added Red Box to its sanctions list this week. The US said last month that designating Red Box demonstrated “the United States’ continued resolve to constrain the Arctic LNG 2 project’s production and export capacity and limit third-party support to the project”.

Adkins, who was born and raised in the US, has not himself been placed under sanctions. He says he holds a passport for St Kitts and Nevis. But the Ministry of Manpower can exercise a large degree of influence over those working in the city-state through its visa system.

The ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment outside normal Singapore business hours.

Adkins’ early career was as an investment banker, including helping to fund Disney movies during a long spell in Japan. He went on to run a brewery in Australia before entering the shipping industry in 2007 as chief executive of Netherlands-based Fairstar Heavy Transport, before launching Red Box.

He said he was now based in Hong Kong, where he has permanent residency. Red Box also has offices in Rotterdam.

The Audax and Pugnax vessels are capable of carrying structures weighing 20,000 tonnes and are reinforced to allow them to traverse ice-covered waters. They played a crucial role in the construction of Russia’s Yamal LNG project, which launched in 2017.

Both vessels were also designated by Ofac in May.

Adkins said that a lot of banks and other third parties had “overreacted” to the sanctions regimes and that was making business more “challenging”.

“There’s a certain amount of embarrassment and disappointment that comes with no longer being the CEO,” Adkins said. “But I accept the consequences of the sanctions, even though I don’t agree with them.”



Singapore Airlines is offering initial compensation of $25,000 to some of the passengers on a flight from London last month that suffered severe turbulence, leading to one death and multiple severe injuries.

Those with injuries requiring long-term medical care have been offered an advance payment of $25,000. For those who suffered minor injuries in the May 21 incident, the airline has offered $10,000. The carrier said in a social media post on Tuesday that it had sent the offers to passengers on June 10.

A law firm representing some of the passengers said it was advising everyone to seek legal advice before signing anything with Singapore Airlines.

“Our working theory remains that this incident could have been avoided and therefore some fault lies with Singapore Airlines,” said Peter Carter, director of Carter Capner Law.

“Our team, which includes very experienced airline captains, believes there is evidence to suggest that the aircraft flew through the top of a thunderstorm or in proximity to one as it passed over an area notorious for thunderstorm activity in the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone.”

Singapore Airlines responded: “We regret that we are unable to comment on the views of other lawyers. SIA is fully co-operating with the relevant authorities in the investigation into this incident.”

Earlier, the airline said it had invited those who sustained more serious injuries “to discuss a compensation offer to meet each of their specific circumstances when they feel well and ready to do so”.

“Passengers medically assessed as having sustained serious injuries, requiring long-term medical care, and requesting financial assistance are offered an advance payment of $25,000 to address their immediate needs. This will be part of the final compensation that these passengers will receive.”

The airline confirmed it had also given passengers S$1,000 (US$740) for immediate expenses following the flight. It said it would provide a full refund of airfares to all passengers, including those who did not suffer any injuries.

One person died and dozens were hurt, including suffering severe spinal and brain injuries, when Flight SQ321 from London to Singapore experienced sudden, extreme turbulence over the Irrawaddy basin in Myanmar. The flight was diverted to Bangkok.

The aircraft dropped 178ft in under five seconds, with passengers experiencing rapid changes in g-force, or vertical acceleration, according to a preliminary chronology of events compiled by Singapore’s Transport Safety Investigation Bureau, the US National Transportation Safety Board, the Federal Aviation Administration and Boeing.

The flight underwent an “uncommanded” increase in altitude and airspeed while the autopilot was switched on, which the report said was most likely due to the aircraft being hit by a rapid upward movement of air, which lifted it more than 360ft.

Overall the incident lasted just over a minute before the flight returned to its planned altitude.

Turbulence, already the leading cause of non-fatal injuries in on-board accidents, is becoming more common and severe as global warming affects weather patterns and the Earth’s atmosphere.

The preliminary report, based on data from the aircraft’s “black box” flight recorder, said it was probably flying over an area of developing convective activity at 37,000ft when the turbulence hit. Convective weather usually refers to thunderstorms or developing clouds. A probe by the Transport Safety Investigation Bureau is ongoing.

News of the Singapore Airlines payouts came after an Austrian Airlines aircraft on Sunday suffered such severe damage from a hailstorm that its nose cone was torn off and the cockpit windows were severely damaged.

The aircraft, flying from Palma de Mallorca, encountered the storm shortly before arriving at Vienna’s Schwechat Airport. The airline, part of Germany’s Lufthansa Group, said in a statement that the aircraft, including the cockpit windows, aircraft nose and coverings, had been “damaged by hail”.

“The aircraft encountered a thunderstorm cell during approach to Vienna, which according to the cockpit crew, was not visible on the weather radar,” the airline said. The airline said all passengers on the flight were unharmed.

The crew of the flight — carrying 173 passengers and six crew — issued a Mayday call because of the extent of the damage, the airline said, adding that the flight had landed safely in Vienna.



Singapore has convicted the final person in a record S$3bn ($2.23bn) money laundering case that cast uncomfortable scrutiny on the Asian business hub’s embrace of foreign wealth and put pressure on its clean reputation.

On Friday, Wang Dehai became the last of 10 Chinese nationals arrested in the case last August to plead guilty and was sentenced to 16 months in prison.

The investigation, which was linked to online gambling in Asia, involved island-wide raids and the seizure of gold bars, expensive wines, crypto assets, designer handbags and luxury cars, as well as the arrest of the 10 individuals — including one who jumped out of a second-storey window in an attempt to escape police.

The investigation rocked Singapore, which prides itself on its strong anti-money laundering regime and clean reputation, and prompted questions over how those involved operated for years while splashing their wealth in the city-state.

Sentences for the individuals convicted in the case have ranged from 13 to 16 months in prison and a number have been deported to countries including Cambodia and Japan. One had his sentencing adjourned to Monday and will probably receive a 17 to 18-month sentence.

“The public has the perception that the sentences seem lighter or not aligned with the charges put forward given the sums involved and given the case itself is unprecedented,” said Suang Wijaya, a partner at law firm Eugene Thuraisingam. But he added the prosecution considered other aspects, including the state resources saved by the accused pleading guilty.

The more than S$3bn of assets seized in the case belonged to 27 people, with 17 still at large outside the country, according to police. The individuals who were apprehended held passports from a range of countries — many with golden passport regimes — including Cambodia, Vanuatu, Turkey, St Kitts and Nevis, Dominica and Cyprus.

However, all were later identified as originating from Fujian province in China and also held Chinese passports.

Investigators in the case had asked several banks, including Malaysia’s CIMB and Citigroup’s local subsidiary, to provide documents. Police also took control of millions of dollars held in accounts with Credit Suisse and Bank Julius Baer by one of the suspects and questioned real estate agents and precious metals dealers.

Singapore’s government said last year it might impose anti-money laundering controls on luxury assets, including cars, watches and handbags and also increase scrutiny of mushrooming single family offices — funds which manage private wealth — as a result of the scandal.

“The length of the sentences meted out in individual cases might look short relative to the eye-popping total sums of money laundered, S$3bn, but are actually in line with legal precedent in similar white collar cases in Singapore,” said Remy Choo, a white-collar defence lawyer and managing director of Singapore law firm RCL Chambers Law Corporation.

“The discrepancy between public perception and legal reality arises because the underlying offences for illegal online gambling occurred overseas, and the prosecutions in Singapore were not brought to prosecute those underlying offences,” Choo added.

Eugene Tan, associate professor of law at Singapore Management University, said the convictions and resulting deportations, as well as the asset forfeitures, had been obtained “without a long drawn-out court case”.

“All these took place in under a year, ensuring that state resources can be better deployed elsewhere,” Tan said.



Singaporean heritage shophouses are enjoying roof-raising demand. Private equity giant Ray Dalio’s family office has bought in. The wife of Alibaba founder Jack Ma has acquired several. The infamous Fujian Gang of money launderers from China and their alleged associates bought a whole portfolio.

Comparable to brownstones in New York’s Brooklyn or properties in London’s Soho, the Singaporean colonial buildings have been fetching record prices as they get snapped up by family offices, billionaires and local developers.

Located on prime land, exempt from the hefty taxes foreign buyers must pay to buy residential property and with a finite supply of roughly 6,700, commercial shophouse sales surged to an all-time high of S$1.9bn ($1.41bn) in 2021, according to data from Knight Frank, with the trend continuing in 2022.

And while sales by volume dropped in 2023, they remained above pre-pandemic levels. So do prices. Shophouses in the city centre have been selling for S$5,000-S$6,000 per sq ft — in some cases as much as S$8,000, say estate agents. That is comparable to recent deals by Prada or Gucci’s parent company Kering on New York’s Fifth Avenue — among the world’s most expensive retail spaces.

The new owners want top tenants. Coach, Dior, boutique hotels and Michelin star restaurants are opening inside shophouses. “Shophouses were one of the only asset classes whose value continued to rise even during the pandemic,” says Yap Hui Yee, a director at estate agency Savills, pointing to the prestige of owning a part of Singapore history.

Then, last August, Singapore police unveiled a S$3bn money-laundering investigation — the city-state’s largest ever — involving individuals suspected of links to illicit online gambling from mainland China. Along with gold bars, luxury cars and handbags, the so-called Fujian Gang and their associates had also bought shophouses with the allegedly laundered funds.

Some gloriously ornamented shophouses are still gathering dust as they wait to be sold to recover bank loans as part of the investigation.

“I see shophouses now as having a pre-AML (anti money laundering) period versus a post-AML period. It has affected transaction volumes . . . although prices are holding firm,” Yap says.

The money-laundering case, along with rapid gentrification, has reinforced to many people the need to nurture a rich seam of Singaporean heritage.

The Singapore shophouse was not always in such high demand. It has come a long way from its roots in ancient China. The buildings started life as the homes of merchants and their families in the 1840s. The archetypal shophouse had the shop premises on the ground floor while the family often occupied the rear of the building and the rooms on the floors above. They were built with front verandas contiguous with their neighbours. In a city prone to sudden tropical thunderstorms and harsh sun, this created a continuous covered walkway along which to stroll. They were still being built until as late as the 1960s.

When Singapore gained independence from Malaysia in 1965, shophouses were on the way out. Entire streets of them were demolished to make way for glittering new office blocks and shopping centres. It was only in the 1980s that the government had a shift in attitude towards old buildings, culminating in the Urban Redevelopment Authority’s Conservation Master Plan of 1989. This involved gazetting city centre neighbourhoods — including Chinatown — as historic and conservation areas.

“Many people, including within the government, felt a lack of connection to the past and the country becoming sterile. So the government stepped in,” says Clemence Lee, an executive director at property company CBRE.

Even so, it is only in the past decade or so that shophouses have become hot property. Local developers such as 8M Real Estate, Clifton Partners and others started buying commercial shophouses to reinvent them into boutique hotels and jazzy bars and restaurants. Their upper storeys became especially popular as a more unique office space option than the usual skyscrapers.

“When I started buying shophouses in 2014 they were undervalued,” says Ashish Manchharam, the founder of 8M Real Estate, adding that they were “under-appreciated and seen as cheap space”.

“Places like Soho in London were using heritage space in creative and imaginative ways, I wasn’t seeing that in Singapore,” says Manchharam, who has since sold his stake in 8M.

Among 8M’s projects is boutique hotel 21 Carpenter, a block of four adjoining shophouses that was once a remittance house for early immigrants. The hotel merges past and present: for example, the rooms incorporate quotes from letters immigrants wrote home to family members.

Investor demand for shophouses as a defensive asset class soared during the pandemic — “even for me now the prices are pretty expensive”, Manchharam says. At the same time, draconian new laws imposed by Beijing on Hong Kong lessened the latter’s appeal as an international business hub, making its longtime rival Singapore a natural alternative.

Already a stable, low-tax and business-friendly destination, Singapore experienced record inflows of capital from family offices and wealthy individuals — especially from China — eager to park money in a safe place. New investment schemes, such as single family office regimes, helped shift the global centre of gravity for the world’s wealthiest towards the city-state. The number of such offices, which manage and invest a single family’s private wealth, exploded from just a handful in 2018 to more than 1,500 by the end of 2022.

Much of this new capital found its way into property. Foreigners’ ability to buy residential landed property in Singapore is limited to certain areas with certain permissions, so the appeal of commercial shophouses grew, especially freehold ones. A boost to dealmaking came from government action. In April 2023 it doubled the additional buyers’ stamp duty (ABSD) for foreigners from 30 per cent to 60 per cent as part of measures to cool the housing market. Most shophouses are zoned commercial so foreigners do not have to pay the higher fees associated with residential purchases.

“A decade ago you could buy a shophouse for S$5mn-S$8mn in the city centre but now you are looking at S$15mn-S$20mn per shophouse,” says Mary Sai, an executive director at Knight Frank specialising in shophouses, citing their exemption from both ABSD and sellers’ stamp duty.

That changed in August last year when Singaporean authorities arrested and charged 10 individuals, all holding Chinese passports, with money laundering. In December, 10 shophouses owned by two Chinese nationals with alleged ties to one of the accused were put on the market by DBS bank to recover repayments of its loans.

“There has been a slowdown from August onwards due to the money-laundering situation and more stringent checks,” Sai says. Sales of commercial shophouses fell to S$95mn in the final three months of 2023, a 70 per cent drop on the same period the year before and the lowest quarter in 13 years, according to agency PropNex. High interest rates, which increase the cost of mortgages, have also contributed to the slowdown.

However, many longtime tenants in heritage and tourist areas have still had to pay much higher rents or move because of new landlords who want to see a return on the millions of dollars they paid.

Singaporean Aileen Tan has seven or eight businesses located around culturally rich Kampong Glam in heritage shophouses, including the popular Blu Jaz café. The area borders Little India and is known for its textiles shops and local cuisine eateries as much as its bars and cafés. She has been trying to engage government authorities to help shield tenants and protect communities.

“Money from wealthy foreigners is going into shophouses and there has been a lot of flipping for profits and it is affecting tenants,” she says. Tan is on her third landlord for a property that she rented two years ago. She is worried about the increase the latest owner will want for her upcoming renewal.

Tan has been doing business in the area for 20 years, working with other tenants in encouraging live music or getting local artist friends to paint murals on the sides of shophouses along the famous Haji Lane. But the mix has changed, and new tenants such as photo booths and souvenir chains do not care about the heritage aspect of shophouses, she argues.

The slowdown in the market for shophouses presents an opportunity, say local industry players, to think about the role shophouses should play within communities. More institutional owners and landlords are expanding efforts to showcase the buildings’ heritage value. In 2020, for example, the wealthy Spanish Portabella family acquired a residential shophouse on Neil Road with the intention of donating it to support research and training in conserving shophouses.

Fang Low, founder and chief executive of Figment, works with owners of commercial and residential shophouses, encouraging them to “bring back the soul” to shophouses by working with artists and other creatives, often converting them back to residences. One of his projects has been repurposing shophouses that became karaoke bars and massage parlours in one of Singapore’s former red light districts. “Shophouses were homes to begin with and people forget you can live in these.”

Low grew up in a shophouse and returned from overseas alarmed at the “copied and pasted” urban landscape of condominiums and government housing blocks. “We work with mainly foreign families but I am seeing more local Singaporeans now as appreciation grows for shophouses’ heritage,” Low says.

One such Singaporean is Andy Lim, of JL Family Office, who says he got into the shophouse market “by chance” during the pandemic. He bought one shophouse, now home to his family office on Club Street, in 2020, and a another across the road in 2021 — even as prices continued to rise.

“I realised there was a lot more history in this space than in the real estate I had been doing. In school I never learnt anything about this heritage,” Lim says.

Such owners are willing to pay the higher prices that shophouses now command. Lim’s second shophouse cost S$26mn, compared with S$21.8mn when it last sold in 2018. But rather than renting the second property out to the highest-paying tenant, Lim has kept the space free for the public to use as a “social impact hub”. Community groups are among those that use the building for minimal cost, with Lim giving up roughly S$500,000 in annual market rent.

Vivienne Soon, director of Breezeway Development, which owns multiple conservation shophouses, says on balance having brands — it hosted a pop-up by Coach in one of its shophouses — brings in more of the public to shophouses. But the company also charges an under-market rental for some heritage or cultural tenants.

“It feels churlish to say this because we, like many others, have enjoyed a meteoric rise in capital values, but I worry about gentrification at breakneck pace,” says Soon. “Pure gentrification is not a great story for heritage.”

Another local group that has been buying is Meir Collective, a Singaporean real estate investment and management company. Sebestian Soh, who returned from a stint in London with a newfound appreciation for the beauty of Singapore shophouses, convinced his father, a property developer, to invest family money in the market in 2018.

As well as buying, selling and conserving heritage real estate — Meir now has a portfolio of 21 shophouses — Soh and his team help owners manage their properties including giving conservation advice. Soh’s first shophouse purchase is now home to his family office.

Soh says that while the market has taken a pause after the money-laundering investigation, and as some properties are sold to pay back loans, he expects demand will recover. But he hopes companies like Meir can help the flood of new shophouse owners appreciate their value to Singapore.

“It can be tough to navigate the government’s planning controls. But it is important to work together as shophouses become increasingly institutionalised,” he says. “Before there was Singapore there were shophouses. Everything else is new. But if everything is new and sterile, we have nothing.”

Mercedes Ruehl is the Financial Times’ Singapore and South-East Asia correspondent

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @FTProperty on X or @ft_houseandhome on Instagram



Bridgewater Associates founder Ray Dalio’s family office has bought two multimillion-dollar “shophouses” in Singapore, as billionaires snap up the heritage properties in the city-state.

The Dalio Family Office, which announced it was moving into the Asian financial hub during the coronavirus pandemic, purchased two shophouses on Club Street in 2021 for roughly S$25.5mn (US$18.9mn), according to two people with direct knowledge of the deal.

Family offices — private wealth managers set up for rich individuals — have exploded in Singapore from a handful in 2018 to about 1,400 in 2023. They have invested in Singapore real estate, with shophouses a popular choice. The properties sometimes stand empty or are used as offices, residential buildings or business premises.

A development approval issued by the government at the end of 2023 for the site at 44 and 46 Club Street lists Tan Mae Shen, the Singapore managing director of the Dalio Family Office, as the developer.

Renovation of the properties is due to finish early next year, according to the application, and the company has started hiring on LinkedIn. The Dalio Family Office is also expanding in Abu Dhabi after the billionaire stepped away from his hedge fund.

A spokesperson for Dalio declined to comment. Rawlinson & Hunter, a London-based professional services firm named on the ownership documents, also declined to comment.

Singapore is home to nearly 60 per cent of family offices in the Asia-Pacific region, according to KPMG. The family office of Google co-founder Sergey Brin has also set up a branch in Singapore, alongside many rich Chinese families.

There are about 6,700 shophouses with conservation status in Singapore. The buildings, whose design was introduced by Chinese immigrants in the 1800s, doubled as the business premises and living accommodations of early merchants in the former colonial outpost.

Zhang Ying, the wife of Alibaba founder Jack Ma, in January paid about S$45mn for three adjoining shophouses on nearby Duxton Road, according to documents lodged with the government. Zhang is also a Singaporean citizen.

Sales of shophouses hit a record S$1.9bn in 2021 with the average price of a property rising from a range of S$5mn-S$8mn to S$15mn-S$20mn over the past decade, according to real estate consultancy Knight Frank.

The consultancy said the doubling of the property stamp duty for foreigners to 60 per cent last year on residential purchases fuelled interest in commercial shophouses among family offices, since the properties can serve as part of their assets and as an office.

However, both shophouse sales and the rate of openings of new family offices have slowed since last August’s S$3bn money laundering investigation in Singapore. Some of the accused and their alleged associates were linked to family offices and acquired shophouses with the funds.

In response to the investigation, the Monetary Authority of Singapore tightened checks for family offices at the end of last year, slowing sales of the heritage properties.

In December, 10 shophouses owned by two Chinese nationals with alleged ties to an accused person in the money laundering case were put on the market by DBS bank to recover repayments of its loans.

“Some, although not all, of those properties associated with the launderers are being sold and the market — especially foreign buyers — are waiting to see what price they fetch and to draw a line under the saga,” said one property agent who declined to be named.

“But it has tarnished the shophouse market by association, so I expect sales to be lower this year.”

Additional reporting by Ortenca Aliaj in London



Singapore’s prime minister has promised a “thorough investigation” after a British man died and dozens were injured during extreme turbulence on a Singapore Airlines flight from London.

Members of Singapore’s Transport Safety Investigation Bureau (TSIB) were dispatched to Bangkok to formally investigate the sudden turbulence that hit Singapore Airlines flight SQ321 on Tuesday.

A 73-year-old British man died during the incident, identified as Geoff Kitchen. Bangkok’s Samitivej Hospital said in a statement on Wednesday that as of lunchtime local time there were 20 passengers in intensive care. Nine patients had surgery on Tuesday and a further five were expected to undergo surgery on Wednesday.

“The Transport Safety Investigation Bureau under the ministry of transport will conduct a thorough investigation,” Prime Minister Lawrence Wong said in a social media post on Wednesday.

The National Transportation Safety Board, the US government investigative agency responsible for civil transportation accident investigation, said in a statement on Tuesday it would also send a representative and advisers to help aid Singapore’s investigation, as the incident involved US company Boeing.

The agency said it has “long been concerned about turbulence-related accidents and incidents” in the social media post.

Boeing said it is in touch with the Singaporean carrier and is “ready to support them”.

Flight SQ321, which left London on Monday, diverted to Bangkok and landed on Tuesday afternoon after experiencing “sudden extreme turbulence” while flying over the Irrawaddy Basin in Myanmar. There were 211 passengers and 18 crew on board the Boeing 777.

Turbulence is a growing problem for airlines, and the leading cause of injuries on board passenger planes. It is expected to worsen because of climate change.

Singapore Airlines has not provided details on whether the aircraft flew into storms or if the problems were caused by “clear air turbulence”, which occurs in seemingly calm conditions. Passengers were being served breakfast at the time of the turbulence and have described chaotic scenes of bodies and items being flung about the cabin.

In a statement on Wednesday morning the airline said a relief flight carrying 131 passengers and 12 crew members who were on board the SQ321 flight had arrived at Changi Airport from Bangkok.

Transportation to their homes or hotel accommodation was arranged for passengers travelling to Singapore, while those with onward connections were rebooked on alternative flights.

Another 74 passengers and six crew members from SQ321 remain in Bangkok. This includes those receiving medical care, as well as their family members and loved ones who were on the flight.

Tributes have poured in for Kitchen, a father of two who was travelling with his wife.

“My deepest condolences once again to the family and loved ones of the deceased. I also hope and pray that those who are injured will recover and return home soon,” Wong said.



AstraZeneca is investing $1.5bn in a manufacturing site in Singapore dedicated to the production of antibody drug conjugates, an advanced form of chemotherapy that the drugmaker believes could replace conventional treatment.ADCs deliver toxic drugs directly to cancer cells, avoiding damage to surrounding healthy tissue. AstraZeneca has a portfolio of the drugs, including Enhertu, which is currently manufactured by its Japanese partner Daiichi Sankyo and generated more than $2.5bn in sales last year. It is used for breast and lung cancer.

AstraZeneca’s investment in its first fully dedicated ADC site underlines the importance of the drug category to its future business and is the first time the drugmaker has built a manufacturing presence in Singapore.

AstraZeneca said on Monday that the move was supported by Singapore’s Economic Development Board but neither AstraZeneca nor the EDB disclosed what incentives it would receive from the Singaporean government. A person with knowledge of the deal said the package included tax exemptions and other government subsidies.

Construction of the site will begin this year, and the company expects it to be operational in 2029.

Singapore, a small island city-state, has limited space, and in recent years has focused on luring foreign high-tech manufacturing with generous subsidies and tax incentives.

The country has more mature manufacturing facilities compared with neighbouring countries in south-east Asia such as Malaysia and Indonesia, and has benefited immensely from supply chain shifts as companies diversify away from China.

Companies including Siemens have unveiled big investments in Singapore in recent years, with the German group announcing a high-tech plant in the city-state last year. Taiwan semiconductor giant TSMC and its affiliate Vanguard International Semiconductor have had talks with the government about using the city as a manufacturing hub.

Singapore is also close to some of AstraZeneca’s fast-growing markets in south-east Asia. Sales in the company’s emerging markets excluding China increased 24 per cent in 2023, making it AstraZeneca’s fastest-growing area.

AstraZeneca said last month that it wanted to build separate supply chains for the US and Europe.

Pascal Soriot, AstraZeneca’s chief executive, said: “Singapore is one of the world’s most attractive countries for investment given its reputation for excellence in complex manufacturing.” He added that “antibody drug conjugates have shown enormous potential to replace traditional chemotherapy for patients across many settings”.

The announcement comes after AstraZeneca said in February that it would spend $300mn on a new facility in Rockville, Maryland, to make another form of advanced cancer drug and announced a $388mn investment in its manufacturing sites in Dunkirk, France, last week, as it meets demand for its medicines.

The update comes ahead of an investor day on Tuesday, when the British drugmaker will share more detail on its plans for investment by 2030.



When I was two or three, I went walkabout and wasn’t found until some time later at a local mall. What a close brush with disaster, readers will think. What a potential loss to English letters and the Clerkenwell restaurant trade. Relax. This happened in one of the safest countries on Earth. I got my infant meanderings out of the way in Singapore.

A point gets lost in all the coverage of the island state as it changes leadership this month. Economic enrichment is Singapore’s other achievement. It comes below, and wouldn’t have happened without, the creation of order and cohesion where there had been communal strife. To quote its per capita income, which now tops that of the US, is to understate what has happened in a once-fractious Chinese-Malay-Indian society.

So, what can other countries learn from Singapore? Be small. If the US could hive off 320mn people and 99 per cent of its land mass, it would be an easier nation to mould. Second, have a maritime rather than continental setting. The likes of Bolivia are missing a trick there. Third, and foremost, get an individual of the calibre of Lee Kuan Yew as founder-leader. I presume there are headhunters for these things.

And so on and so unhelpfully on. In the end, Singapore is too particular, too sui generis in both its assets and liabilities, to constitute a template. It has but one universal lesson: the importance of an open mind.

The podcaster Chris Williamson has an almost-great line. “If I know one of your views, and from it, I can accurately predict everything else that you believe, then you’re not a serious thinker.” As a quote, it needs some Wildean polishing. But it captures the single oddest thing about politics. From someone’s view on, say, Israel-Palestine, it is too easy to anticipate their opinion on public spending, on abortion, on Brexit, on net zero. A lot of people, even or above all the most educated, take their views from their peers as a kind of bundled software. This is what we might call irrational coherence.

Singapore is a lesson in what can be done when this mental trap is avoided. If the mark of a thinking person is a having a weird mix of beliefs, the island has had a few among its policymakers. This is a high-income nation where most people live in public housing. It is a private-sector paradise where civil servants can earn a fortune.  It has an acute sense of independence from the west but uses English as the main language of instruction. Conservatives in Britain and America have tended to regard the island as proof of concept: look what stern laws and low taxes can do. (It was under President Reagan that LKY addressed the US Congress.) But the government involves itself in matters of identity to an extent that would make the same people flinch.

The Singaporean “method” has been to come at each question afresh. The result is a lack of pattern: a libertarian nanny state. Even the nation’s Freedom House score, 48 out of 100, shows how hard it is to categorise the place. (The UAE, to which Singapore is so often likened, scores 18. Switzerland, another expat hub, rates 96.)

It is difficult to examine each issue one faces on its merits. This isn’t, or isn’t just, laziness, but a need for the comfort blanket of a worldview and a like-minded tribe. In the west, I sense, politics has come to provide the fellow-feeling that might once have come from religion, large families or a homogeneous town. If Singapore, or at least its officials, have been able to resist this, perhaps it is because the very idea of groupism has such raw historical connotations there.

The press is full of “Whither Singapore?” articles this month, and fair enough. The country has to navigate the US-China rift without the helpful scale of other Asean nations. It flourished in a world order that is decomposing. (LKY’s all-too-prescient speech to Congress urged America to uphold free trade.) But the island’s ultimate advantage, and example to the world, was always inside the head. That rational incoherence isn’t so easily lost.

Email Janan at janan.ganesh@ft.com

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life & Art wherever you listen



Lawrence Wong has been sworn in as Singapore’s new leader, as the city-state charts a new path after decades of rule by the founding Lee family.

Wong, 51, is only the fourth prime minister of the Asian financial hub. He succeeds Lee Hsien Loong, who had led the tightly governed island nation since 2004 but announced he was stepping down last month.

A US-trained economist who has been deputy prime minister since 2022 and who also serves as finance minister, Wong was sworn in on Wednesday evening at the presidential palace, completing the rare political transition.

Speaking after his swearing-in, Wong warned that Singapore was grappling with a “dangerous and troubled world”. The city-state had enjoyed 30 years of peace in the Asia-Pacific since the end of the cold war, but that “era is over”, he said.

As a small country with an open economy, Singapore would be affected by international conflict and rivalry, “marked by geopolitical tensions, protectionism and rampant nationalism”, Wong said in an often grim speech.

Wong’s succession was carefully choreographed by the ruling People’s Action party, which has governed Singapore continuously since 1959. Lee, who oversaw 20 years of stunning economic success for the country, will stay on in government as a senior minister.

Wong called the moment a “significant milestone” for the young country. “I am the first prime minister of Singapore to be born after independence [in 1965],” he said, adding he and other so-called fourth generation politicians would differ from their predecessors.

“We will lead in our own way. We will continue to think boldly and think far. We know that there is still much more to do,” he said.

Academia SG, a collective of Singaporean scholars, welcomed Wong’s pledge to “maximise the combined energies, imaginations and strengths of all Singaporeans”.

“The new team should reject the legacy of punitive and paternalistic responses to dissenting views,” the group said.

On the domestic front, Wong and his team will face increasing pressures over deepening inequality, higher living costs and unhappiness among the country’s local population with foreign workers, including expatriates.

Record capital inflows from greater China as well as countries such as India and the US have raised living costs and house prices.

A financial hub and trading centre of just 6mn people, Singapore is reliant on overseas workers, from construction labourers to top-tier bankers. But the government has increasingly restricted the employment of foreigners to prioritise the local labour force.

Singapore, which maintains friendly relations with both the US and China, is also navigating a more febrile geopolitical landscape in the Asia-Pacific region as a result of the superpowers’ rivalry.

“We have to be guided by what is in Singapore’s national interest and do so in a way that is consistent and principled,” Wong said. “And that means from time to time, we will have to say things or do things that some countries may not be so happy with. It could be China one day, it could be the US another day.”

Lee’s departure raises the likelihood of a general election, which Singapore is due to hold by November 2025, coming this year. The PAP has in recent elections suffered a declining share of the popular vote, making the first contest with Wong at the helm a consequential test for the ruling party.

Wong, who as with every prime minister to precede him is ethnically Chinese and western-educated, became a member of parliament in 2011 after more than a decade in the civil service.

Despite the carefully managed succession, Wong was not always the intended next leader. The PAP’s initial succession plans for Lee were thrown into disarray in 2021 after deputy prime minister Heng Swee Keat stepped out of the running. Wong was selected in 2022.

Lee’s departure also draws to a close his family’s leadership of the country. His father, the late Lee Kuan Yew, is regarded as the patriarch of modern Singapore, ruling from 1959 until 1990.

When Goh Chok Tong, Singapore’s second prime minister, took over, Lee Hsien Loong was waiting in the wings as deputy prime minister before becoming leader himself in 2004.

Letter in response to this article:

Singapore still coping with foreign policy vulnerability / From Khaw Wei Kang, Macau



Shortly before Taylor Swift arrived in Singapore in March, the country’s deputy leader, Lawrence Wong, went viral after posting an awkward TikTok video of himself playing her “Love Story” on his guitar. The unassuming US-trained economist will have to get used to the spotlight. On May 15, Singaporeans will wake up to Wong becoming their first new prime minister in 20 years. He will be only the second non-member of the Lee family dynasty to lead the tiny, affluent island city-state of 6mn people.

This is just the third transition of power since Singapore’s independence from Malaysia in 1965. Last month Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced he would step down as head of the ruling People’s Action Party. His late father, Lee Kuan Yew, regarded as the architect of modern Singapore, led the nation from 1959 until 1990.

The older Lee’s combination of economic planning, investor-friendly policies and openness to trade gave the nation some of the highest living standards in the world. Under the current Lee, it has flourished as a global financial centre. But Wong, a former civil servant, will take the reins as the city-state navigates a challenging geopolitical environment. Cracks are also emerging in its heavily state-directed society.

“We punch above our weight in global affairs,” says Chan Heng Chee, a Singaporean academic serving as ambassador-at-large at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. But she warns against complacency. “The economic model is changing,” she explains, “shifting away from the globalising forces that helped make Singapore a success towards greater protectionism. Different times call for different leaders.”

Not that Wong’s appointment signals a revolution. He has been preparing for a carefully choreographed transition since April 2022. Meanwhile, fissures in society have widened with a rising cost of living and greater inequality. Resentment of foreign workers, a large part of the city’s labour force, has increased while the PAP faces pressure to transform from an illiberal leadership to a more inclusive government. In addition, the US-China rivalry is playing out in neutral Singapore’s backyard, necessitating an ever trickier balancing act.

Wong, 51, comes from humble origins and did not attend elite schools. His father was born in China but moved to Singapore and his mother was a teacher. His political rise was swift. He served as Lee’s principal private secretary from 2005 to 2008, then led the education and national development ministries before becoming finance minister in 2021 and deputy prime minister in 2022. One person who knows him calls him “relatable, if a little uptight”.

As co-chair of the Covid-19 task force, Wong was associated with Singapore’s efficient handling of the pandemic. “It paved the way for his visibility with everyday Singaporeans for the first time,” says Linda Lim, a professor emerita at the University of Michigan, who knew Wong when he studied economics there. Yet it was not the public that chose Wong. Lim claims he was selected because he was acceptable to the largest group of people within the PAP, rather than for being a visionary. “He is a piece of the puzzle, but the party is still everything in Singapore,” she says.

Others are more blunt. “He wasn’t the first choice for many but he is close to the prime minister,” says one public servant who dealt with Wong as Lee’s principal private secretary. “Never did I think back then that he would be the next leader of Singapore.”

Despite carefully curated videos of his guitar playing and enjoying local landmarks, Wong, who is twice married with no children, has remained relatively private. “He is not a natural politician, he is a technocrat by training and inclination and he will need to learn the cut and thrust of politics,” says Eugene Tan, a professor at Singapore Management University. “Right now, though, he still needs to prove he can rally not just the public but also his colleagues behind him.”

Donald Low, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, has known Wong for decades and describes him as an “open-minded conservative” whose ability to adapt quickly is often underestimated. “He favours incremental over radical change, evolution over revolution,” he says.

Wong has stressed continuity and said there will not be cabinet changes until after a general election. Prime Minister Lee will stay as a senior minister. Others, though, would like to see more original policies. “In a more tumultuous world, will just some policy tweaks by the new leadership be enough?” says Ja Ian Chong, associate professor at the National University of Singapore.

But first, Wong will need a mandate. The next general election is now expected as soon as this year. It will be a consequential poll, even though a PAP victory is all but assured. The party, which has governed since independence, earned one of its lowest vote shares in the 2020 election. The opposition Workers’ party meanwhile won the highest number of seats since independent Singapore’s first general election in 1968 and has repeatedly called for more inclusive governance.

“This is the first time in independent Singapore history where the prime minister can no longer look to more advanced economies and say we just need to catch up,” Low says. Strong leadership with more participation from voices outside the PAP is needed, he adds. “The road map has to come from within. That is now Lawrence Wong’s challenge.”

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com



An octogenarian oil trader has been convicted of “cheating” HSBC and abetting forgery after a lengthy trial in Singapore, drawing a line under an oil dealing scandal that left banks facing hundreds of millions of dollars in potential losses.

Lim Oon Kuin, the 82-year-old founder of Hin Leong Trading, was found guilty on Friday of two charges of cheating HSBC and one of encouraging a Hin Leong contracts executive to forge a document. A sum of US$111.7mn was involved.

Hin Leong, one of the most powerful names in Asia’s oil trading industry, had been hiding losses from trading in futures markets and selling off oil inventories that had already been pledged as collateral for loans, according to legal filings.

The Singaporean tycoon will be sentenced in October and faces a maximum 10-year jail sentence for each of the three charges. He had become one of the city-state’s wealthiest people before his empire collapsed in 2020 as oil prices tumbled.

With its low corporate tax rates and stability, coupled with a location straddling the shipping lanes that connect China with global markets, Singapore has become one of the world’s biggest commodities hubs, competing directly with London, Geneva and Houston.

But the wrongdoing exposed at Hin Leong, along with other commodities trading scandals, have raised questions about the integrity of Singapore’s regulatory framework and its oversight of commodities trading houses.

A high-profile accounting scandal in 2018 at commodities business Noble Group’s Singapore entity brought the business to the brink of collapse, while Japan’s biggest trading house Mitsubishi Corporation was forced to liquidate its Singapore unit Petro-Diamond in 2019 after a rogue trader lost more than $300mn through unauthorised transactions.

HSBC and DBS, Singapore’s biggest lender, were among the bank creditors that provided trade financing to Hin Leong for years, with Lim originally being charged in 2020 after confessing to hiding US$800mn in losses and directing the company’s finance department not to disclose the losses, suffered in futures markets.

He also revealed he had sold a “substantial part” of the company’s oil inventories and used the cash as general funds, even though it was the subject of inventory financing agreements with banks.

He was later hit with more than 100 other charges, but prosecutors proceeded to trial on just three of them. Lim remains at liberty on a S$4mn (US$3mn) bail.



Hong Kong-based Harvest Global Investments has agreed a strategic partnership with Singapore-headquartered digital assets-focused financial technology group MetaComp to make its new cryptocurrency spot exchange traded funds available to investors in the city-state.

Under a memorandum of understanding signed by the two companies, MetaComp and its affiliates will provide investors access to Harvest’s crypto spot ETFs via its proprietary client assets management platform, known as Camp by MetaComp.

According to the Singapore-based fintech, the initiative is designed to expand the global footprint of the Harvest ETFs and enable MetaComp to “enrich its wealth solution portfolio with highly sought-after financial products”.

Harvest Global Investments is among the Hong Kong units of three mainland Chinese asset managers — also including Bosera Asset Management and China Asset Management — which launched two ETFs each tracking bitcoin and ether prices on April 30. The Bosera funds were launched in partnership with HashKey Capital.

In addition to the crypto ETF distribution, the collaboration between MetaComp and Harvest will explore opportunities for the integration of Harvest’s various asset management solutions into MetaComp’s service offerings.

The fintech said it would also provide Harvest with access to its digital payment token suite of services.

It noted that the co-operation “is designed to serve not just the existing clientele of both entities but also to capture new segments eager for advanced financial solutions across traditional finance and crypto finance”.

Bo Bai, chair and co-founder of MetaComp, said the deal reaffirmed his company’s “commitment to being the bridge that links traditional finance with crypto finance”.

“With Harvest’s expertise in asset management and MetaComp’s robust capabilities in providing a comprehensive suite of digital payment solutions, we are poised to deliver unparalleled value to our clients and the market,” he added.

MetaComp, which specialises in blockchain technology and digital assets, is licensed and regulated by the Monetary Authority of Singapore.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



Singapore is studying proposals to shake up its struggling stock market as the gap between the financial hub’s performance and other regional exchanges widens.

Singapore Exchange (SGX) is reviewing a document from the nation’s venture and private capital association, according to three people familiar with the discussions. The Singapore Venture & Private Capital Association (SVCA) includes state funds GIC and Temasek, local and global venture firms, and buyout groups including General Atlantic, Warburg Pincus and KKR.

Discussions have been going on since the beginning of the year, the people added, and the SVCA’s proposals are also being considered by the government’s Economic Development Board, Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Ministry of Trade and Industry.

The government did not commission the document, but it has appeared as it discusses policy changes with SGX to boost the stock market. The two are responding to the next wave of south-east Asian companies — such as Singapore-based automotive marketplace Carro — opting for the US over Singapore to list.

Among the proposals suggested is mandating stock market participation from the record sums of private capital that have poured into the city-state in recent years, such as into family offices and other wealth management businesses.

There are also more politically sensitive suggestions, such as mechanisms allowing pension and sovereign money to be invested in the stock market as seen in Australia or Thailand, the people said. While Temasek invests in local companies, GIC, which manages the government’s foreign reserves, only invests internationally.

“There has been a shift in thinking by the government that this is not just an SGX problem but important to Singapore’s national agenda. Is it possible to be a well-rounded and relevant international financial centre with an anaemic stock market? Perhaps not,” said an industry executive involved with the discussions.

One person involved in the document’s creation who did not wish to be named said they had “not seen an all-government and industry approach like this since Singapore first decided it wanted to foster a tech and venture capital industry in the late 2000s”.

“For the first time, they seem more willing to consider more maverick, aggressive moves such as investing pension money — which is normal elsewhere but new for Singapore.”

SGX chair Koh Boon Hwee, appointed last year, has been heavily involved and more willing to hear fresh perspectives, the people said. Koh, a business veteran in the city-state, has also chaired telecoms group Singtel, the city’s biggest bank DBS and Singapore Airlines.

The MAS said it “has received the proposals and is reviewing them”. SGX, the EDB and MTI declined to comment.

Singapore has risen as a financial centre in recent years, boosted by a crackdown by China’s President Xi Jinping on the rival business hub of Hong Kong and record amounts of private wealth and capital flowing into the island state, regarded as a haven for its stability and business-friendly, low tax market.

But the government’s success in private markets has never flowed through to its stock exchange — even as more new economy and technology companies set up their headquarters in Singapore.

SGX has been dogged by low volumes and questions over corporate disclosure practices. Delistings frequently outnumber listings. The bourse has a high concentration of businesses in which state investor Temasek has a big block stake, as well as asset-heavy companies such as real estate investment trusts that have languished in recent years amid higher interest rates.

The exchange was one of the quietest globally last year in terms of deals and funds raised, at seven and $300mn respectively, according to PwC research. Its poor performance has become starker with regional exchanges preparing for an initial public offering revival as global macroeconomic conditions improve.

The Indonesian stock exchange was among the top five exchanges globally by total number of IPOs in 2023. India recorded its highest number of IPOs since 2017 last year at 234, an increase of 56 per cent on 2022 while private investors are shifting more capital to it in preference to China.

Japanese stocks last month broke a bubble-era record while Hong Kong Exchange has appointed new leadership as the city fights to maintain its status as a major financial centre.

“There is a growing fear that even some private capital could leave Singapore in favour of being closer to those faster-growing markets, especially India,” said one Singapore-based venture capital managing partner consulted by the government and SGX.

The government has also been closely watching other countries’ policies, such as the UK dialling up the pressure on pension schemes to help companies grow, the people said. Like GIC, Singapore’s Central Provident Fund also has abundant capital. While retail investors can use their CPF money to invest in selected stocks, that does not move the needle in terms of volumes. There is no government policy that mandates or encourages CPF investment into equities at a broader level.

Another proposal includes more collaboration with south-east Asian stock markets, including the potential for Singapore to host a regional exchange down the track and underpin any issues such as currency risk.

“Singapore trumpets that it is an ‘innovation economy’ but has a retirement system that is so risk averse. Building that liquidity might start to incentivise fund managers,” another person familiar with the talks said.

Others however questioned whether the latest attempt would be enough to turn around SGX’s trajectory.

“Creating supply and demand is hard. They really need to be talking to market makers like local funds and asset managers and I still am not seeing that,” said one Singapore-based hedge fund executive.

Previous efforts, such as tie-ups with the Nasdaq and Tel Aviv exchanges to attract secondary listings, or a Spac regime being introduced in 2021, have failed to work.

“It’s nice to have ideas and to make it part of the Singapore national agenda. But fixing poor disclosure practices, or strengthening corporate governance to give investors more assurance, remain the broader issues for us,” the hedge fund executive added.



Singapore has given international banks an unusual series of top-level briefings on geopolitics as it seeks to reassure them that the financial hub can remain stable and neutral at a time of rising tension between China and the west.

In meetings organised by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong’s office, officials discussed US-China rivalry, the Middle East conflict, the Ukraine war and the $2.2bn money-laundering scandal that rocked the city-state in August, according to four people with knowledge of the talks.

The meetings have been held over the past six months with US and European financial institutions including Citigroup and Standard Chartered as well as some local banks, they said.

Co-ordinating minister for national security Teo Chee Hean, a top public official, led many of the discussions. Foreign minister Vivian Balakrishnan, trade and industry minister Gan Kim Yong and minister for home affairs K Shanmugam, were also involved in some of the briefings, the people said.

The city-state has plotted a careful path as a neutral financial centre at a time of rising tensions between Beijing and Washington and the briefings show Singapore’s determination to reinforce its neutrality after large inflows of people and capital from mainland China.

One attendee said the US-China tensions “featured heavily” in the talks and officials sought to correct a “misperception” that Singapore is tilting towards China. “They were trying to explain that Singapore is not neutral but is friendly with both and chooses according to its own interests depending on the situation,” they said.

Another person who attended a briefing said that the government sought to reassure those present that financial institutions were not going to face unnecessary regulation in the wake of a $2.2bn money laundering investigation, the largest in the city-state’s history.

Ten foreigners linked to China have been charged with money laundering and the financial regulator is probing whether lenders and other institutions took necessary steps to mitigate risks as part of the probe.

Banks have since significantly tightened up scrutiny of clients, with approvals for setting up private banking accounts and new family offices in the city-state now stretching into months and in some cases more than one year.

Ministers overall sought to emphasise Singapore’s safety, reliability and trustworthiness amid geopolitical uncertainty.

“While Singapore regularly holds meetings with business groups, briefings by such senior ministers are not routine. The government [being] proactive, especially after the money laundering episode and the current global political and economic uncertainty,” one person familiar with the briefings said. “Singapore’s global stock as a financial hub is rising and the risks of being misunderstood and bad actors operating here have become greater.”

The prime minister’s office said public officials have been engaging with various groups, including banks and finance institutions, for decades. “We engage on a variety of issues — not only on international developments but also economic and social issues . . . Participants appreciate the opportunity to engage with ministers and public officials,” Lee’s office said.

A US bank executive said the meetings had been well received by local employees, though senior leadership were surprised that the prime minister’s office was contacting the business on geopolitical matters. The inclusion of ministers such as Teo, a former two-star rear-admiral who has been serving as co-ordinating minister for national security since 2015, “raised eyebrows”, they said.

“The ministers attending are among the top in Singapore, it is not something you say no to but it was surprising,” the person said. “The overall message we got was they want to make clearer that Singapore is still the safest, most reliable financial hub in the region.”

Standard Chartered and Citigroup declined to comment.

This story has been amended to correct the name of the Singapore home affairs minister K Shanmugam



The chief executive of Air India has acclaimed the carrier’s progress in an ambitious turnaround under its Tata Group owner, while acknowledging the challenge of restoring the reputation of the former state-owned national carrier that Indians love to complain about.

Campbell Wilson, the Singapore Airlines veteran hired after Tata bought Air India in a $2.4bn deal in 2022, is taking steps to transform the airline’s offering and expand and modernise its fleet as it looks to win back some of the customers who deserted it for Gulf or other foreign airlines.

“There’s a blessing and a curse to being the national carrier,” the New Zealander told the Financial Times in an interview at Air India’s headquarters outside Delhi. “There is a lot of love and a lot of expectation, and there is a lot of commentary — for better or worse.”

In India, he said, “it’s just a little more heightened because of the profile of India’s decline and the hopes and dreams of India’s rise”.

Under the airline’s five-year transformation plan dubbed Vihaan (Sanskrit for “dawn of a new era”), Wilson has steered Air India through the “taxi” and “take-off” steps of the turnaround. By its own account it is now in the final, “climb” phase, merging its sprawling operations, driving profitability and enhancing customer value, and taking Indian aviation to the global stage.

New aircraft from 2023’s huge 470-jet Boeing and Airbus order are beginning to arrive at an average rate of one every six days, allowing Air India to open more routes. Meanwhile, the company is overhauling tired interiors in some of its older aircraft — a process that has been delayed by supply chain bottlenecks in the global industry.

Wilson completed two mergers in 2024 — between Air India and Vistara, its joint venture with Singapore Airlines, and between its two regional airlines, Air India Express and Air Asia India.

This is a corporate turnaround story in sync with India’s triumphalist narrative under the Narendra Modi government of a rising nation proudly shedding its past of colonial oppression and economic underperformance.

For Tata, the business opportunity is clear: if Air India successfully transforms its fleet, upgrades its service and flies more new routes between India and Europe, North America and the Asia-Pacific region, it can win back customers who had sworn off it, including passengers among India’s large diaspora.

The airline is still in the red: it reported a net loss of Rs44bn ($520mn) in the financial year to the end of March 2024, narrower than the Rs114bn it had lost the previous year.

For some, the change is not fast enough. Indian media and social media have revelled in Air India’s mishaps since Tata bought it, from missing luggage and damaged seats to poor food and two emergency landings in Russia for safety reasons in 2023 and 2024.

“People are getting impatient about why it is taking so long for Air India to be rejuvenated, to be made into a world-class airline, which has been the ambition of the Tatas,” said Jitender Bhargava, a former executive director of the airline and author of a book on the carrier, The Descent of Air India.

Wilson insisted the turnaround is on track, saying it was a feat to have managed two mergers, an overhaul of the Air India brand — including a new logo, uniforms and livery — and to have recruited more than 9,000 new employees, reducing the workforce’s average age from 54 to 35.

“There’s no airline that I’m aware of in history that has done all these things at the same time, and done it in two and a bit years,” he said.

When Tata bought Air India, it was struggling to pay vendors and had 30 aircraft on the ground that, Wilson recalled, the airline was cannibalising for parts to keep the rest of the fleet in the air. Staff were using private Gmail accounts for company business. Air India was the last airline using its ancient, mainframe computer reservation system.

Tata committed $200mn to revamping its IT system and consolidated 63 offices into a single campus in Gurugram.

In February 2023 it announced what was then the biggest jet order in aviation history for 470 aircraft, later to be pipped by its biggest domestic rival IndiGo, which ordered 500 jets from Airbus in June.

Wilson also set about refurbishing interiors and sourcing components for Air India’s existing fleet, including the 30 grounded jets that had been raided for parts.

“Something like 30,000 components we had to find — and that was just one aircraft,” he said.

Delivery of some of the Boeing aircraft, he added, had been delayed by the recent strike by machinists at the US group, further straining a “tight market” for delivery of aircraft and componentry.

“Every airline is affected,” Wilson said. “It’s just probably a little bit more frustrating for us, in an aircraft and product renewal process with an appetite for massive expansion.”

Air India has, however, managed to induct 100 aircraft in less than two years, allowing it to launch more than 100 new routes.

Outside critics of the airline say Wilson should have taken a more radical approach to overhauling its existing fleet, which still includes old aircraft with dowdy interiors on many domestic routes. Indian media have made headline news of customer complaints about its “unclean, worn-off seats” or a traveller on a New York-bound flight who said she was served an omelette with a cockroach in it.

“The problem with Air India was never about the branding,” said Mark Martin, an aviation analyst and chief executive of Martin Consulting. “The problem with Air India was the quality of the product — the seats, the cabins, the heat exchanges, the in-flight entertainment — and the first priority should have been to get the 180 existing aircraft back online.”

Because some of the jets were older and their parts no longer in production, Wilson has had to turn to Air India sister company Tata Technologies to help reverse engineer plastics, trays and recliners for business and first-class seats. (A business seat in a Boeing 787, he said, had 11 different actuators to control its position.)

Air India still faces entrenched scepticism among Indians who abandoned it during its decades of decline. It also faces vigorous competition from the foreign carriers that fly to India and from IndiGo, which introduced an “IndiGo Stretch” business class on the Delhi-Mumbai route last month, taking the flag carrier on directly for its highest-value customers.

Bhargava thinks that in a growing Indian market both Air India and IndiGo “will give any Gulf airline a run for the money” once they take delivery of all of their long-haul aircraft on order.

Wilson acknowledges the competition, but points to small victories, such as Condé Nast Traveller having recently voted Air India the world’s 12th-best airline.

“We do see this as a bit of a national mission, to make a new Air India,” he said. “If and when we get it right — and I’m quite convinced it’s when — there will be a huge level of support and engagement and customer loyalty that will come.”

He added: “So I’d rather there be some interest than no interest.”



Good morning. Last week, we talked about India’s slowing GDP and now official estimates have placed it at 6.4 per cent, the slowest year since the pandemic. Over the next few weeks, we’ll assess the impact this will have on our investment and consumption climate and what the government’s Budget proposals to spur growth are likely to be. In today’s newsletter, we also take a look at the bull run in defence-sector stocks in Indian equities. But first, Microsoft’s chief executive is on a whirlwind tour of India, leaving a trail of gifts behind him. It’s good news, but could it have been better?

Microsoft chief Satya Nadella was in India earlier this week, dropping gifts like a belated Santa Claus. Local news reports led with the $3bn investment that the company is planning to make over the next two years in India. This money is mostly for developing artificial intelligence and cloud services under Azure, Microsoft’s cloud computing platform, and part of it will also go towards training 10mn Indians on AI skills by 2030. Nadella described this as the single largest expansion that Microsoft has ever done in India.

Nadella is excited by the level of development activity going on in India; some 17mn Indian developers are on GitHub, a platform that allows developers to create, store and share their code, which Microsoft acquired in 2018. He expects Indians to be the largest community on GitHub by 2028. Indian developers are working on more than 30,500 generative AI projects.

These numbers are interesting but not phenomenal. The global AI arms race, at this point, is clearly between the US and China. American technology companies are hoping the incoming Donald Trump administration will not place any regulatory shackles on the development of AI in order to stay ahead of China. These groups include Microsoft itself, whose president Brad Smith wrote an impassioned blog post on the topic earlier this week.

While a few Indian companies are doing some interesting work on AI, at this point they are nowhere near any significant breakthroughs in technology or product development that would make them leading global players. Microsoft’s $3bn investment in India should also be viewed within the company’s global plans: it expects to spend $80bn this year developing data centres globally, with more than half of that figure invested in the US.

My take may seem negative about India to some, especially those who feel we should be taking this chance to revel in the praise Nadella has heaped on the country. I see my view as that of a concerned parent urging their child to prepare before an examination. In investing in our technological future, it will serve us better to be ambitious and driven at this point than to be sitting back in smug satisfaction. All I am doing is looking Microsoft’s gift horse in the mouth and finding it to be too small.

Know an Indian company that is doing groundbreaking work on AI? Tell me about it at indiabrief@ft.com

The Make in India initiative is paying off, quite literally, in the arms and armaments industry. There’s a bull run in stocks of companies that are engaged in defence production. This trend has not gone unnoticed by India’s mutual fund industry, with four large asset management companies launching funds that are dedicated to investing in this sector. Companies such as Hindustan Aeronautics, missile maker Bharat Dynamics and Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders, the country’s largest naval shipyard, have seen their order books swell as the Modi government pushes the military to shop locally. Consequently, their share prices have significantly outperformed the index.

While state-owned companies are still the largest manufacturers of defence equipment, big Indian conglomerates such as the Adani Group, Larsen & Toubro and the Tata Group have started or augmented their investments in the sector in recent years. India is hoping to eventually become an exporter in the arms business, after being the world’s largest importer for more than two decades.

These are great developments for India’s manufacturing sector as well as the defence industry. I am less enthused about the defence funds. The dominant companies in the sector are government owned, with very little free float in the market. Big fund houses buying and selling this limited float can lead to high price fluctuations, and it is anyone’s guess whether retail investors are aware of these risks.

Launching funds with sectoral themes to quickly mop up some fresh funds is an old habit in the asset management business, something I remember writing about 20 years ago as a young reporter covering the industry. Every once in a while, it leads to some finger wagging from the regulator and then it is business as usual. The more things change, the more they stay the same.

As cars get more software heavy, US automakers are seeing an increasing number of software-related car recalls.

I am reading Character Limit: How Elon Musk Destroyed Twitter (love a title that is direct and to the point), written by journalists Kate Conger and Ryan Mac. I first heard about the book on a podcast, Elon’s Spies. The book is a fascinating, and sometimes frightening, insight into how the world’s richest man operates. It is an especially chilling read at a time when he is taking on the global political order, routinely barking insults at world leaders.

I am also enjoying the series Why Women Kill on JioCinema. It’s a comical and clever look at marriages through three different decades. Warning: the men on the show don’t end up looking very good.

According to Donald Trump, who operates the Panama Canal?

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

Which Indian IT major do you think will post the best results this quarter? Here’s how you voted. TCS, whose results arrived yesterday, seems a clear favourite. We’ll have to wait for HCL Tech on Monday and Infosys next Thursday to spot the Nostradamuses among us.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



The achievements of Manmohan Singh, who died at the age of 92 on December 26 2024, make him one of the most important policymakers of our era. Today’s economically dynamic India is his legacy. Almost as significant is the example he gave of intelligent, informed and honourable public service. Singh took ideas seriously, yet was unfailingly courteous and open to the ideas of others. I had the privilege of knowing him from 1974, when I was a senior economist in the World Bank’s India Division and he was the government of India’s chief economic adviser. He was one of the greatest men I have known.

Singh’s most important achievements as a policymaker were made during his years as finance minister from 1991 to 1996. He was appointed, to his surprise, by prime minister PV Narasimha Rao, at a time of a huge foreign exchange crisis. Cometh the hour; cometh the man. He seized the opportunity to deliver radical reform of an anti-trade and anti-market policy regime that had crippled India’s economy since independence. He had known of these errors since he wrote India’s Export Trends, his doctoral thesis at Oxford, published in 1964.

With the prime minister’s backing, Singh duly transformed India’s policy regime. The reforms ultimately included radical trade liberalisation, deregulation of industry, liberalisation of finance and a shift to a more modern monetary regime, without direct monetary financing of the government by the Reserve Bank of India.

The subsequent transformation in Indian economic performance is dramatic. Over the 41 years from 1950 to 1991, real GDP per head (measured at purchasing power parity) increased by 108 per cent. Over the shorter period of 32 years from 1991 to 2023, it rose by 360 per cent. This was a jump from trend annual growth of 1.6 per cent to one of 5.2 per cent. Roughly speaking, the post-1991 trend and the broad policy regime have persisted ever since.

The past three decades, then, have transformed India. Whether this will be sustained in the decades ahead is unknown. Whether India will become the developed country it aspires to be in 2047, a century after independence, is also unknown and, in my view, rather unlikely. But India’s population is the largest in the world, at 1.4bn and rising. If growth continues, it will be an economic superpower by then.

Yet China’s real GDP per head rose by 1,150 per cent between 1991 and 2023, — an astounding trend annual rate of 8.4 per cent. Moreover, surprisingly, the share of manufacturing in Indian GDP has fallen, according to the World Bank, not risen, as one would have expected, from 16 per cent in 1991 to 13 per cent in 2023. Again, while ratios of trade to GDP soared after the reforms, they have fallen back somewhat more recently.

Inequality also seems to have risen. According to the World Inequality Database, the share in income of the top 1 per cent soared from 10 per cent in 1991 to 23 per cent in 2023, while the share of the top 10 per cent jumped from 35 per cent to 59 per cent. Meanwhile the share of the bottom 50 per cent fell from 20 per cent to 13 per cent. This data is contested. Yet even if true, this would still imply an increase of 180 per cent in the real incomes per head of the bottom 50 per cent over the period. Moreover, by 2023, the average real incomes of the bottom 50 per cent were slightly above the all-India national average in 1991. The absolute number of people in extreme poverty and so the proportion, too, have collapsed. Fast growth is, as always, the most powerful way to eliminate poverty and improve opportunity.

Singh’s period as prime minister from 2004 to 2014 is more controversial than his period as finance minister. He was appointed by the leader of the Congress party, Sonia Gandhi. Indian democratic politics are deeply tainted by money. Yet he remained untainted. Moreover, as Pratap Bhanu Mehta argues, his achievements are underrated, partly because of the defeat by Narendra Modi’s BJP in 2014. Yet they were substantial. They include the nuclear deal with the US, which ended the long-standing friction between the two countries. They also include the national rural employment guarantee scheme of 2005. Not least, in 2009 his government invited Nandan Nilekani of Infosys to launch India’s unique identification system (Aadhaar), on which many of the BJP’s reforms have been based.

Singh was a global asset for India. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, a friend of mine since I joined the World Bank and a close associate of Singh in Indian policymaking, spoke recently about something former US president Barack Obama said of him in the G20 meetings: “When the prime minister speaks, the world listens.”

Singh achieved what he did because he was a special man at a special time. Ultimately, however, technocrats only succeed if those with power trust them with it. India benefited from the fact that people with power were willing to trust him to use it well at critical moments. He, in turn, provided something that today’s populists increasingly despise: knowledge, wisdom and experience. He also knew the importance of brilliant colleagues. A recent paper from the Mercatus Center describes him as “India’s finest talent scout”. In some quarters today, all this would condemn him as an embodiment of the “deep state”. That is because these people lack belief in the ideal of public service. Singh did believe in it. He believed, too, in a thriving democracy. Indeed, he thought India could not survive without one.

The economically dynamic India of today is his legacy. So, too, is his example of service to the cause of a prosperous India in harmony with the world.

martin.wolf@ft.com

Follow Martin Wolf with myFT and on X

​Letters in response to this article:How corruption dogged Singh’s second term as PM / From Pradeep S Mehta, Secretary General, Consumer Unity & Trust Society International, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India

​Singh showed reform was possible without autocracy / From Ismail Kenessy, Dakar, SenegalPraise for Indian taxpayer boondoggle is misplaced / From Nathan Punwani, Scottsdale, AZ, US

Singh’s record does not fit easy left-right pigeonholing / From Pritam Singh, Professor Emeritus, Oxford Brookes Business School, Oxford, UK



Retail investors in India are pouring money into defence stocks after Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s push for domestic arms manufacturing drove the sector index up nearly 56 per cent in a year.

At least four large asset managers have launched sector-specific funds as experts forecast India’s defence production will grow by as much as 20 per cent a year until the end of the decade.

India shares a long, tense border with an increasingly assertive China, and with ongoing conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine, there is strong demand for weaponry both at home and abroad.

But whereas New Delhi has been the world’s largest arms importer for more than two decades, Modi is now pushing for the military to buy more weapons at home. He hopes that defence will help to turn India into a global manufacturing hub.

The drive for indigenisation has led to burgeoning order books at large local companies such as Hindustan Aeronautics, which produces fighters, helicopters and jet engines; Bharat Dynamics, which makes ammunition and missiles; and Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders, the country’s largest naval shipyard.

Long the domain of state-owned groups, which still account for 85 per cent of arms production, Modi has opened up the sector to private companies, including Adani Group, Larsen & Toubro and Tata Sons. The prime minister has set an annual target of nearly $35bn by the end of the decade for domestic defence production, from about $20bn currently.

A Balasubramanian, chief executive of the asset manager Aditya Birla Sun Life — which launched a defence fund in August — said the “very large and growing order book” at the top companies was a “selling point” for investors.

But he noted that state-owned companies still dominated the sector and the government maintained a shareholding of about 80 per cent in some of the largest companies.

“Unlike most other spaces that are truly open, this is not an entirely open space,” Balasubramanian said.

The limited free float in the defence sector means there is a risk that stocks can be squeezed higher by relatively small amounts of investor buying.

With a market capitalisation of $31.9bn, Hindustan Aeronautics now trades at almost 10 times book value, on a trailing price-to-earnings multiple of 36 times. That implies investors must pay 36 rupees for one rupee of current profits.

HDFC, one of the country’s largest asset managers, was the first to launch a defence-focused fund in June 2023, and has given its investors an annualised return of nearly 73 per cent since then.

The fund generated so much interest that HDFC closed it for fresh investments this July, due to risks from the “current market valuation, volatility and the narrow universe”, it said.

Three more asset management groups have launched similar schemes after HDFC, tracking the only index for the sector managed by the National Stock Exchange. Motilal Oswal, a stockbroker and asset manager, promotes its fund by asking: “India is investing in defence, are you?”

With returns of nearly 56 per cent in 2024, the Nifty India Defence index has drastically outperformed the 10 per cent return on the wider Nifty 50 benchmark during the same period.

India is slowly upgrading its ageing military hardware and desperately needs to buy new fighter jets, tanks, warships and artillery guns, as nearly two-thirds of its military equipment is classified as vintage.

The government allocated about $20bn for military modernisation for the fiscal year ending March 2025 — marginally up from $19bn last year — of which 75 per cent is earmarked for the domestic industry.

A banker managing one defence fund said the total market cap of the sector was minimal 18 months ago, but since then, “we have seen a very sharp jump, not just in the valuation, but even the number of funds that are tracking”.

Apart from the significant financial returns, retail buyers also latch on to an emotional, nationalistic motivation, even when the banks choose not to advertise it. Investors feel that indirectly funding the domestic arms makers will “help you protect our borders”, the banker said.



Good morning. The government has released rules to govern its data protection regulation: we take a look at some central provisions. I’ll also be keeping an eye on earnings season, which kicks off later this week, starting with Tata Consultancy Services on January 9. Plus, India’s forex reserves dip to an eight-month low. But first, where will our data reside?

A year and a half after passage of the digital data protection bill, the government on Friday published the draft rules that will govern it. There were two surprises. First, the government has brought back the data localisation requirement, which prevents technology companies from transferring certain kinds of data out of the country; and second, children under 18 will need parental consent to use social media. However, the details remain vague and bureaucratic.

According to its new rules, the government will set up a committee to determine what kind of personal data can be processed by large companies (identified as “significant data fiduciaries”) such as Meta, Google, Apple and Microsoft. Export of personal data will be subject to restriction by a “general or a specific government order”.

The government has gone back and forth on the data localisation requirement through various drafts and versions of the bill. In the version that was published in 2020, data localisation was a mandatory condition but after significant lobbying by big tech, the act passed in 2023 merely created a black list of countries for data export. The new draft rules are open for public comment until February 18, and it will be interesting to see if large technology companies manage to push back once again.

The other significant area is on how minors can use social media. Users who are under 18 will need parental consent and companies must carry out due diligence to establish that the parent is indeed an adult. Yet the entire premise of this regulation hinges on children self-identifying themselves as minors, after which the onus is on technology companies to obtain “verifiable consent” from the parents, who will (presumably) have to upload some kind of government-approved identification to prove their credentials. Companies are prohibited from targeting advertisements at children or tracking their behaviour.

The government’s intent is to protect children while preserving their access to information online, but the process suggested in the rules is severely flawed. Offenders are liable to strict penalties of up to Rs2bn, so perhaps the government’s strategy is to leave it to technology companies to come up with a solution. However, even they are unlikely to be able to get an errant child to own up to their age online.

Do you have any ideas on how this will work? Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

India’s foreign exchange reserves have declined to an eight-month low. This is largely due to the gradual but continuous depreciation in the value of the rupee, which has been falling to new lows every week in the last month. Overall, the rupee lost 3 per cent against the dollar in 2024. The Reserve Bank of India has sold dollars from its reserves to prop the rupee up. In December alone the reserves declined by $17.8bn, and now stand at $640.28bn.

The central bank has a difficult task at hand. It wants to manage the value of the rupee to avoid the economic shock from a sharp fall, and global conditions are not helping. US markets are rallying ahead of a Donald Trump presidency. In China, the government announced a slew of economic stimuli. These measures prompted global investors to sell their holdings of Indian equities and route that money to more lucrative markets abroad. I mentioned previously in India Business Briefing that in October and November, foreign investors sold $13.7bn of Indian equities.

Analysts expect the dollar to continue to strengthen in the weeks ahead, and most Asian currencies remain weak. A change in trajectory for the rupee is unlikely in the near term.

China’s stock market has had a terrible start to the year. Here’s a quick look at where the indices closed on the first day of trading.

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Which Indian IT major do you think will post the best results this quarter? Take part in our poll here.

On Friday we asked: Which herb is becoming a new favourite in the global fragrance industry?

The answer is . . . coriander! (I am as bewildered as you are.)

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



The stuccoed facade of an old palazzo at the top of Via di Ripetta is unassuming by Roman standards. Sure, there’s a handsome stone portico and nicely restored window shutters, but nobody strolling south from the nearby Piazza del Popolo, with its remarkable twin domed basilicas, would have given number 246 a second glance.

They might now, at least if they were to peek inside.

After a 12-year transformation by a Neapolitan multi-millionaire and the late Zaha Hadid, in what would be one of the Iraqi-British architect’s last projects, the palazzo has been reborn as a 74-room luxury hotel. Just before Christmas, I am the first journalist to check in. I’m stunned by what I find — and not always in a good way.

The Romeo Roma, which is due to open fully this month after years of delays, is the second hotel from Alfredo Romeo, a 71-year-old entrepreneur, newspaper proprietor, lawyer and property tycoon. His first hotel — Romeo Napoli — landed in his hometown in 2008, in a converted 1950s shipping company headquarters.

By then, Romeo had already set his sights on Rome and in 2012 he spotted the palazzo for sale. Originally developed in the 16th century by the Serroberti family of Perugian apothecaries, it then housed the Capponis until the death in 1746 of Alessandro Gregorio Capponi, a noble collector of literature.

After an inheritance feud, the house was altered, rented and then sold off in 1818. It steadily lost its grandeur and most of its original features as it hosted residents as diverse as a deposed Portuguese king and the offices of the National Institute for Insurance Against Accidents at Work.

The location appealed to Romeo. The area around the Piazza del Popolo, at the northern end of Via del Corso, Rome’s most famous shopping street, had become a high-end hub for the capital’s fashion crowd. Hotels were already part of the draw, with the Palazzo Ripetta and the more famous Hotel de Russie just yards from Romeo’s new doorstep.

The obvious solution for a neglected old palazzo would have been a restoration, perhaps with a hint of the contemporary. But Rome is not short of lodgings inspired by its rich lasagne of history. With an undisclosed budget that I suspect would have given Nero pause, Romeo was determined to look forwards.

The Italian says Hadid was intrigued when he first met her in 2014, two years before her sudden death, aged 65. “She hadn’t created a hotel interior and I wanted her to think of an exclusive design that has never been done before,” Romeo tells me via a translator. His elegant navy blazer and silk tie do not hint at his interest in the avant-garde.

The results of their brief and at times fraught partnership are startling. I’m talking to Romeo in the hotel bar, which looks out on to a transformed courtyard. He says it’s his favourite space, and it epitomises the wider approach. Which is to say, we are enveloped by extraordinary quantities of expensive, lustrous surfaces.

Ebony is the dominant material — tonnes of it. In many spaces, the ceilings, walls and floors are bedecked in macassar ebony veneer. Its black-and-brown grain flows in curves, ridges, spines and slashes, in a modernist, very Hadidist take on the forms of classical vaulted ceilings. Some of the craftsmanship is breathtaking.

Where there isn’t ebony, there is enough polished white Carrara marble to have sunk Caligula’s giant barge. In a recurring motif, raised sculptural fireplaces burst out of the walls like huge slashed blisters. Inlaid seams of stainless steel flow along floors and leap up walls. Draped folds of brass shingles shimmer behind twin reception desks, which look as if they have been pulled up from the ground in great basalt fists.

Of the building’s original features, only a marble staircase and a clutch of rooms on the piano nobile had survived intact. There are now five “fresco suites”. In one, a staircase in Krion, a kind of matte porcelain that has also been used extensively, curves around an enormous sculptural bath tub to a space-age mezzanine bedroom. The bed sits right under centuries-old frescoes and an ornate ceiling. It’s a dizzying juxtaposition.

Romeo Roma is nothing if not original, and anyone who cocks a snook at the corporate safe-playing of much of the luxury hotel market is to be admired. But it’s also, well, a lot. I’m told the wood’s marine topcoat was applied to protect Romeo’s investment (he nods when I ask him if his ebony bill alone would have been enough to build a very nice hotel). But the high gloss adds to the overall, slightly claustrophobic feeling of entering a sheikh’s superyacht.

Those sculptural fireplaces are all fake, meanwhile, and have been equipped with remote controlled fake fires with fake logs and a tinny, crackling sound effect. They seem irredeemably naff. But when I diplomatically ask Romeo if he is happy with the way form and fake fire sit together, he says the question hadn’t occurred to him.

Romeo collects benches, and some are comically incongruous (I’m thinking in particular of a bright red metal number in the courtyard that is shaped as a musical stave next to a giant guitar). Then there are the water features. In the palazzo’s now covered original courtyard, where carriages would have disgorged nobles, Romeo has installed a computer-controlled water curtain against the principal wall. A row of dozens of nozzles creates a noisy kind of water screen, lit up with coloured lights, that fleetingly displays the words “Romeo” and “Welcome” as the water falls. It would be a bit much at a Disney resort in Dubai, never mind in the middle of Rome.

Behind the palazzo, a larger new courtyard is bordered by a more recent wing housing a spa and most of the rooms. It includes a remarkable Hadid staircase that rises to a drinks terrace like the rib cage of some cubist whale. But there’s also more rainbow-lit water, flowing from a marble fountain, and down the walls beside a fresco of the Virgin Mary.

Romeo freely admits that, while he admired Hadid greatly, their thinking often diverged. The ebony was his idea, and so were the fireplaces. “It was mainly the materials we argued about,” he says. “To her, it was unthinkable that anyone would spend so much to create such structures.”

Perhaps such differing views contributed to the delays; Romeo had hoped to open in 2016. He says it had more to do with a Roman ruin discovered under the modern wing and new courtyard. For almost five years, archaeologists excavated a suspected taverna, along with crates of artefacts. A small bust of Livia Drusilla, wife of Emperor Augustus, now surveys the old courtyard. A swimming pool in the new courtyard incorporates a glass floor above the ruin.

For all its quixotic vigour, the Romeo triumphs in many areas. Alain Ducasse has done amazing things in the main restaurant, only his second in Italy (the first opened in Romeo Napoli last June). A tasting menu executed by the French food wizard’s protégé and head chef Stéphane Petit, who is 29, is a much defter marriage of old and new, as well as Italian and French (charred puntarelle with anchovy and a delicate pot-au-feu stand out).

The dining room itself, which looks out on to Via di Ripetta and is mostly clad in ebony, is also remarkable. Square columns flow into vaulted canopies that are backlit through long, slashed perforations. Marble walls and a gleaming open steel kitchen bring more light to the space.

Parts of the Sisley spa are also spectacular, including a relaxation room clad in bricks of pink Italian rock salt, and a gym in shaped wood that benefits from having escaped the high-gloss treatment. Lacquered ebony dominates my bedroom, meanwhile, which is nonetheless a masterpiece of modernist cabinetry — fake fireplace and all.

Whatever one thinks of his vision, Romeo was wise to recruit two creative heavyweights to bring it to life; a rash of openings at the top end of the market in the past five years has included a Six Senses, the Rome Edition, a W, and the Bulgari Hotel, which occupies the hulking 1930s former headquarters of the Italian social security agency (I’ll have your most ironic cocktail).

They are all modern spaces competing for the same international market, yet none can claim a Hadid or a Ducasse in its marketing. That the Romeo thinks it has an edge is clear in its prices. They start at €2,450 per night for the smallest digs (rising to €37,000 for the largest), which is a chunk higher than any of the above properties.

Perhaps Romeo, who plans to open his third hotel on the Amalfi coast later this year, is also trying to claw back some of the money he has poured into the place. At one point, he whispers the total bill, before later asking me not to share it. Let’s just say that, on a per room basis, I suspect you would struggle to find a costlier hotel.

“It seems unsustainable from a financial point of view,” Romeo tells me with half a smile, before supervising the repositioning of a new sofa near his digital water curtain. “But beauty is always an investment.”

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning

Letter in response to this article:

A hotel so appealing it’s hard to tear yourself away / From Michael Webb, Architectural Writer, Los Angeles, CA, US



Good morning and happy new year. In a move that will significantly widen and deepen the digital payments ecosystem, WhatsApp will now be allowed to roll out its payment service to all users. In today’s newsletter, I also look at whether India’s two-year stock market run is coming to an end. In cricket, the fifth test match of the Border-Gavaskar series started in Sydney today, and your social media feeds are probably already full of Rohit Sharma drama. But first, what’s up on WhatsApp?

India’s robust digital payments infrastructure is set to explode now that WhatsApp is being given a free run by the country’s digital payments regulator, the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI). Until Tuesday, the popular messaging service had not been allowed to offer its payment service beyond a fraction of its users (100mn). With this restriction now lifted, WhatsApp can proceed to roll out the service to its full base, estimated at more than 500mn users. This move will widen the base of transacting accounts for the Unified Payments Interface — the technology that enables digital payment transactions in India — and increase its depth.

On Tuesday, the NPCI (which was clearly busy at work on the last day of 2024) also extended the deadline to comply with a market share cap that restricts digital payment firms from accounting for more than 30 per cent of the volume of transactions processed through the UPI. Firms now have two more years to meet this requirement, good news for Walmart-backed PhonePe and Google Pay, which have 47.8 per cent and 37 per cent of all UPI transactions respectively. Both of these companies would have had to clip back their service after Tuesday had this extension not come through.

Clearly, the governing body’s intent is to build on the early success of UPI and significantly expand the market. There is no doubt that the pervasiveness of digital payments, their ease of use and widespread acceptance, has helped transform our everyday financial lives. However, fraud remains a concern. Rolling out payments to all WhatsApp users leaves a large chunk of people who are financially or technologically inept vulnerable to scams.

Other than running vague advertisements that put the onus of caution on users, WhatsApp parent Meta has done little to educate users about safe in-app digital payments. I have myself been surprised by how quickly WhatsApp pay options pop up on my screen every time I click on a QR code from my image gallery, despite the fact that I have neither signed up nor used the service. Frictionless transactions will also enable fraud in the blink of an eye. While opening up the market, it is imperative that the regulator imposes strict guidelines on WhatsApp to minimise fraud, educate users, and insure them against dubious transactions.

Am I being overcautious? Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Is the two-year bull run in the Indian stock market coming to an end? Foreign portfolio investors sold a record $11.2bn of Indian stocks in October and a further $2.5bn in November. There were both push and pull factors at play here. In September 2024, China announced a series of stimulus measures, which led to investors liquidating their India positions to invest in Shanghai. On the push side, slowing consumption and GDP growth in India are real concerns in the economy. These, added to the high valuation that stocks were at, made Indian stocks a difficult buy.

December was a slightly different story though. Foreign investors were net buyers during the month, even if the amount was relatively modest, at $1.97bn. And there was even more heartening news this week when auto sales numbers were published. Maruti Suzuki reported a 30 per cent increase in total sales compared with November and Mahindra & Mahindra sold 16 per cent more vehicles. Hyundai Motor reported a dip of 2.4 per cent in December sales, but the company achieved its highest-ever annual sales in the year. Are these signs of green shoots? It’s too early to tell. But in times like these, perhaps we should celebrate these small wins — and keep our fingers firmly crossed.

Bullish or bearish — what is your view on the Indian stock market for 2025? We’d love to hear. Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Urban India partied hard on New Year’s Eve. Quick commerce companies posted some interesting facts about what people ordered on December 31. Here are some highlights.

Do you have any new year resolutions? An interesting survey I saw on Statista suggested that in the US, the top trending resolution for 2025 is to save more money (21 per cent). This was followed by the usual suspects — to eat more healthily (19 per cent), to exercise more (17 per cent)  and to lose weight (15 per cent). Some 9 per cent want to quit smoking, but an equal number want to reduce their spending on living expenses such as food and energy costs (how?!). And the biggest chunk of people? They have no resolutions at all (43 per cent).

I don’t often make resolutions myself, although I give myself some goals to chase. I have two for this year — reduce my screen time as reported by my iPhone every Sunday and take the metro to work (instead of driving) at least three times a week. For the first quarter of the year, in solidarity with a friend’s resolution, I will not be buying any non-essentials. That will be the hardest one.

Have you made yours? Tell us your resolutions at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Which herb is becoming a new favourite in the global fragrance industry? Hint 1: People either love it or hate it. Hint 2: It is ubiquitous in Indian vegetable markets.

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

On Tuesday, we asked how confident you were of sticking to your new year’s resolutions for the whole of 2025. Here are the results. You’re mostly optimists, I see.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



India has enjoyed a historic stock market run over the past two years, as investors bought into the south Asian giant’s strong economic growth narrative and sought to reduce exposure to China.

But much of the shine has come off Indian markets in recent months as a spate of weaker data and persistently high inflation has raised questions about the fundamentals underpinning the world’s fastest-growing G20 economy.

Foreign investors sold off about $11.2bn of local equities in October, a record monthly net outflow. A further $2.5bn was offloaded in November.

Analysts say that “pull” factors were at play, with China’s recent stimulus measures luring back some foreign investors. Many foreign investors had also struggled to buy into the India fervour because of lofty stock valuations.

“There is a wide acknowledgment that there is a slowdown,” said Aditya Suresh, head of India equity research at Macquarie Capital. “What people are grappling with is [the] duration: how long?”

International markets had cheered India’s economic resurgence since the Covid-19 pandemic, with Franklin Templeton in 2023 anointing the world’s most populous country the “next China”. Morgan Stanley foretold “India’s decade”, pointing to an “economic boom” led by offshoring, manufacturing, green energy and advanced digital infrastructure.

Indian companies rushed to sell shares, buoyed by domestic investors ploughing savings into exuberant public markets, while the world’s fifth-largest economy joined benchmark bond indices in 2024.

But India has begun to lose some of its momentum. GDP growth in the quarter ended September came in at just 5.4 per cent year on year, the lowest rate in nearly two years. The Reserve Bank of India in November cut its growth forecast for the 2024-25 financial year from 7.2 per cent to 6.6 per cent.

Core industries such as mining, manufacturing — the focus of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s flagship “Made in India” push — and construction also sagged in the quarter.

Gross value added growth, which measures actual production value, for manufacturing dropped to 2.15 per cent, from 14.3 per cent rate in the September quarter last year. Construction sector GVA also slowed.

Macquarie analysts pointed to a series of factors behind India’s slowdown, including weaker government spending during an election year, following a yearlong infrastructure drive, and severe monsoon rains that disrupted economic activity.

They also noted that Indian households were increasingly struggling as wage growth has failed to keep pace with high inflation, while a central bank crackdown on unsecured loans and retail credit has weakened spending, forcing many families to dip into savings already depleted by the pandemic.

In October, headline inflation accelerated to more than 6 per cent, above the RBI’s target band of 4 to 6 per cent. Despite moderating in November to 5.5 per cent, the RBI has continued to hold its key lending rate at 6.5 per cent since early 2023 — drawing outcry from ministers in New Delhi, who say high borrowing costs are hurting businesses.

India’s finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman said in December that the drop in economic growth was a “temporary blip”. But many economists believe the slowdown is not just seasonal, pointing to a drop in spending among overleveraged urban and middle-class Indians.

Sales growth for fast-moving consumer goods slowed to just 2.8 per cent in the September quarter, from 11 per cent in the same period last year, according to NielsenIQ. Largely poorer rural areas are now outpacing urban growth rates.

The RBI has also voiced repeated concerns over the past year on the rapid growth in consumer loans and credit card debt, and demanded lenders allocate more capital against their exposure to rein in bank borrowing.

“There is a moderation in income, there is a moderation in credit availability,” said Sonal Varma, a Singapore-based economist at Nomura.

“Urban consumption is important because if it doesn’t pick up and exports are weak, then capacity utilisation is not going to move up . . . [and] the private investment cycle that everybody has been hoping to take off for many years now will not be able to by next year.”

Macquarie’s Suresh said the cumulative impact of a more than 35 per cent rise of food and beverage inflation since 2020 has also eroded spending power among hundreds of millions of India’s poor.

“I don’t think there’s a quick fix here for this,” he said. “Even if there was a shot in the arm, it’s a sugar rush rather than a lasting solution. The duration . . . may not be as straightforward as one quarter or two.”

Sluggish investment by Indian companies, which reported a weak set of earnings in the third quarter, is another factor, impeding the creation of much-needed formal jobs, economists said.

“Since investments have been very low for a fairly long time, the economy has not generated enough jobs of the good kind that lead to a bump in consumer spending,” said Mahesh Vyas, chief executive of the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy.

Corporate investments’ share of GDP has declined in recent years, dropping from about 25 per cent in the 2008 fiscal year to about 13-14 per cent since the 2020 fiscal year, according to analysis from financial group Motilal Oswal.

Nomura’s Varma believes demand has not picked up to a level to “trigger new capacity expansion” and that cheap imports from neighbouring rival China have provided a disincentive for Indian corporates from investing to expand domestic output.

Going into 2025, many economists expect an easing of monetary policy as a new RBI governor takes the helm, as well as an increase in government spending.

Nevertheless, “momentum is going to be softer”, said Varma. “We think this is going to last for at least another six months.”



Good morning. On the last day of the year, it is tempting to gaze into the future and make big predictions. But I’ll resist adding to the slew of “outlook 2025” reports out there (some FT favourites: what investors need to look out for; FT Alphaville fed ChatGPT some investment outlook reports; and what to read in 2025). Instead, let’s take a look at three big dates in the first quarter of the coming year that will have a significant impact on our businesses and economy. Mark your calendars!

Donald Trump’s inauguration day, and perhaps this time the headlines will not be about the size of the crowd. For India, the big issue at this stage is Trump’s threats to impose reciprocal tariffs. The US is India’s biggest trading partner, accounting for $77.5bn worth of goods and 18 per cent of total exports. Without knowing the specifics of what Trump plans to do (this will probably be a common tune for the next four years), it is difficult to predict how exactly it will impact the Indian economy. Analysts predict the damage to be anything between 0.3 and 0.8 per cent of GDP. The government is trying to stay one step ahead, with officials running sector by sector analyses and drawing up negotiation strategies to minimise the damage to the economy.

For Indians, the other main area of concern will be the H-1B visas the US issues for foreign workers in “specialty occupations”. As of 2023, nearly 73 per cent of H-1B visa holders were Indians. Since the programme is tilted towards technology and software jobs, providing onshore IT professionals has been a reliable business model for software companies as well as a robust career path for Indian software professionals. But battle lines over the number of Indians in the US with H-1B visas have already been drawn. While Trump’s adviser, “First Buddy” Elon Musk, sees it as a critical route to recruit talented engineers, the president-elect’s Maga base has hit out at what it sees as more jobs going to immigrants. Trump has backed Musk — but for how long?

Much like an Indian Premier League match or a Diwali blockbuster, excitement about the Union Budget is a uniquely Indian thing and we are here for it. With lower than expected GDP growth and higher than anticipated inflation, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman has her task cut out for her. Preparations are in full swing. Last week, the prime minister met economists and policy experts at Niti Aayog (formerly the Planning Commission) to thrash out strategies for the Budget, and Sitharaman chaired the fourth pre-Budget consultation with experts from various industry sectors.

February’s Budget will set the tone for Narendra Modi’s third term as prime minister, and it will be interesting to see what the government prioritises. I’m betting on three central areas: one, sectors that will generate employment, including those that require a large number of gig workers; two, expansion of the government’s capital expenditure plans in order to restart growth momentum; and three, some tax sops for the middle class, whose grumbles about paying money and not getting much in return have only grown louder in recent years.

The challenge of balancing the books continues to be tricky, with an ever-widening current account deficit. On social media, Sitharaman gets a lot of criticism for her stern expression and straight talk. But who can blame her? Her job sounds like it will rob anyone of all joy.

Newly appointed Reserve Bank of India governor, Sanjay Malhotra, will announce his first decision on interest rates. The government wants the central bank to cut rates to jump-start growth. Last week, a finance ministry report directly attributed the recent slowdown in demand to the RBI’s monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures. This lends credibility to the whispers early in the month that former governor Shaktikanta Das was denied an extension of his term because of his reluctance to cut rates, but let’s not get bogged down by arguments of correlation and causality now.

The RBI’s December meeting was the 11th consecutive time the central bank decided to hold rates in order to battle soaring inflation. It is reasonable to expect that Malhotra will want to keep the finance ministry happy; who among us has not strategised to establish early success in a new job? But the question is whether the inflation gods will be kind to him. To my mind, it is unlikely that there will be a sharp drop in the headline number. Further, global uncertainties are only worsening, and who knows what a fortnight of Trump’s America will unleash. These conditions are not ideal for a rate cut, but as my last act of bravado for 2024, I’m going to stick my neck out and say there will be one. (Will I crow about this or eat crow? Be here on Feb 11 to find out.)

Send us your prediction about a rate cut in February. Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Health insurance claims and denials are in the spotlight, especially after the fatal shooting of UnitedHealthcare’s chief executive in the US. India’s insurance regulator has now released the data for the 30mn claims amounting to Rs1.2 trillion that were registered in financial year 2024.

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Let’s get real. How confident are you of sticking to your new year resolutions for the whole of 2025? Take part in our poll here.

Tomorrow is 2025! Here’s wishing you good health and great happiness in the new year. Party safely and see you on Friday.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Gautam Adani’s conglomerate will divest its 44 per cent stake in a joint venture food business with Singapore’s Wilmar International to focus on its core infrastructure arm, weeks after the US indicted the Indian billionaire and company executives over an alleged multimillion-dollar bribery scheme.

Adani Wilmar, a 25-year-old joint venture between Adani Group’s companies and Lence, a Wilmar International subsidiary, has a $5bn market valuation.

The roughly $2bn raised through the sale will ease funding pressures faced by the Indian conglomerate since the US charges, according to a person familiar with the matter.

It comes after Adani Group this month pulled out of a more than $500mn loan agreement with the US International Development Finance Corporation for a strategic ports project in Sri Lanka.

The group said it would use the fresh capital to “turbocharge” growth of its core business in energy, transport and logistics, along with adjacent businesses.

The move marks a shift from plans by the conglomerate, run by India’s second-richest tycoon, to diversify deeper into a range of consumer-facing industries.

Before the US charges, Adani Group had sought to expand and integrate far-ranging arms of its business empire including NDTV, the Indian broadcaster it acquired in 2022, and Adani Wilmar, which sells food oils and staples such as rice and wheat.

“We’ve been hearing for a while that consumer goods were not super core for [Adani’s] business . . . it was really Wilmar that was driving the thought process on how to go about it,” said one Mumbai-based banker.

“It’s core for Wilmar,” they added. “If there was any overhang of the Adani name on the valuation this will go away in a matter of time.”

The transaction, expected to be completed by the end of March, will help shed the group’s “liquidity perception overhang”, the person said.

Under the deal approved by Adani’s board on Monday the group will sell 13 per cent of Adani Wilmar publicly, with Wilmar buying the Indian group’s remaining 31 per cent stake.

Explaining its rationale for the deal, Wilmar said in a statement that Adani Wilmar was India’s largest food oil company with 100 per cent urban coverage and a presence in more than 30,000 rural towns. It also exports to more than 30 countries.

The divestment comes as Indian food companies have struggled with weak demand among hundreds of millions of poor and middle-class households, who have been hit by heightened inflation and scaled back their spending.

Adani Wilmar’s operating income fell 41 per cent in the last financial year to about $90mn after it was hit by declining food oil prices and losses at its Bangladesh subsidiary, although its latest quarterly earnings have since shown a recovery, according to Indian credit rating agency Care Ratings.

But the company’s stock has also fallen 12 per cent this year, compared with the 8.8 per cent gain of India’s blue-chip Nifty 50 index.

Neither Adani nor Wilmar referenced the US charges in their statements on the decision.

The Adani Group has denied any wrongdoing in response to the US allegations, while Gautam Adani said “every attack makes us stronger” after the indictment.

Adani Group’s international ventures have come under increased scrutiny since the US indictment, with Kenya’s President William Ruto cancelling $2.6bn in proposed deals and Bangladesh probing a cross-border electricity deal.

This article has been changed since publication to give a correct figure for Adani Wilmar’s operating income.



It was heralded as the year of democracy. With more than one and a half billion ballots cast in elections across 73 countries, 2024 offered a rare opportunity to take the social and political temperature of almost half of the world’s population.

The results are now in, and they have delivered a damning verdict on holders of public office.

The incumbent in every one of the 12 developed western countries that held national elections in 2024 lost vote share at the polls, the first time this has ever happened in almost 120 years of modern democracy. In Asia, even the hegemonic governments of India and Japan were not spared the ill wind.

Incumbent or otherwise, centrists were frequently the losers as voters threw in their lot behind radical parties of either flank. The populist right in particular surged forward, fuelled in significant part by a rightward shift among young men.

The results paint a picture of angry electorates stung by record inflation, fed up with economic stagnation, disquieted by rising immigration, and increasingly disillusioned with the system as a whole.

In a sense, the year of democracy produced a cry that democracy is no longer working, with the younger generation, many voting for the first time, delivering some of the strongest rebukes against the establishment.

On average across the developed world, incumbents’ vote share fell by seven percentage points in 2024, an all-time record and more than double the decline as electorates punished elected officials in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.

The range of countries producing similar results points to a common undercurrent, with inflation the obvious culprit.

Coming into 2024, high and rising prices were the public’s top concern in the vast majority of the countries going to the polls. While recessions are deeply unpopular, their impacts are unevenly distributed. Inflation stings everyone.

But if the cost of living crisis acted as a handicap on incumbents, a closer look across different countries and regions shows that it was far from the only driver of discontent.

The biggest backlash against a sitting government came in Britain, where the Conservatives’ charge sheet included not only high prices but a corruption scandal, a crisis in public healthcare provision, a self-inflicted economic shock and a sharp spike in immigration.

Across the channel in France, president Emmanuel Macron’s attempt to fend off the populist right by calling snap legislative elections backfired. The resulting political chaos is yet to be fully resolved months later.

In India, Narendra Modi’s formidable Bharatiya Janata party machine secured a narrow victory but lost its parliamentary majority, struggling to hold back the tide of dissatisfaction over the increasing disconnect between strong economic growth and weak job creation.

This was particularly pronounced among young people, whose unemployment rate climbed to almost 50 per cent ahead of the election, according to data from the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy.

Even the exceptions to the anti-incumbent wave are less anomalous when considered in the context of other central themes of the year’s political shifts.

In Mexico and Indonesia respectively, Claudia Sheinbaum and Prabowo Subianto each improved upon the margin of the sitting president. In both cases, they ran broad campaigns pledging continuity with their anti-elitist predecessors, illustrating the near-universal success of populists over the past twelve months. Prabowo also leaned heavily on dominance of the new social media landscape, another common theme.

Viewed across the world as a whole, the weak performance of centrist parties and the march of populists, particularly on the right, was just as strong a theme as the anti-incumbent wave, perhaps stronger.

Even the Labour party’s victory in Britain is no exception here, as it won this year with fewer votes than in either of the two previous elections it lost. And just months after a landslide victory, opinion has turned sharply against both party and leader.

The French public’s souring on Macron and his centrist party, meanwhile, reflects the wider global mood of disillusionment with the political establishment, and the sense that elected officials either don’t know or don’t care what ordinary people think.

Although ultimately falling narrowly short of its hoped-for victory, the 15-point swing achieved by France’s Rassemblement National in parliamentary elections was the largest recorded by any party in any developed country this year. The second, third and fourth-biggest gains of the year were all by fellow rightwing populists in the form of Austria’s Freedom party, Britain’s Reform UK and Portugal’s Chega.

This speaks to the fact that immigration has been a rising concern across the developed world in recent years, and was one of the key issues on voters’ minds as they went to the polls.

Where conservative parties lost ground, it was generally parties outflanking them on the right who were the main beneficiaries. The success of Nigel Farage’s Reform UK in peeling off Conservative voters in Britain has been widely attributed to the latter’s failure to meet its promise to reduce immigration numbers.

But anti-establishment successes were not limited to the right. The Greens in the UK were one of a smattering of radical leftwing parties that also gained ground as voters disillusioned with a stale centre broke in both directions.

While the timing and magnitude of the anti-incumbent wave point primarily to the short-term shock of higher prices, the populist surge looks more like the continuation — or perhaps acceleration — of a trend that has been playing out in a growing number of countries over two decades at least.

One prominent theory for why we’re seeing this unfold was laid out in an influential paper published earlier this year by a team of Harvard economists, who found that people who grow up against a backdrop of weaker economic growth and less progress between generations are more likely to view the world as zero sum, where one person’s gain must come at someone else’s cost.

The steady decrease in upward economic mobility in rich countries could thus explain much of the rise in these views, which tend to be associated with support for parties and politicians on both left and right that promise to tear up the existing system or to protect against external threats.

One further possibility is that the dramatic changes to the media landscape over the past two decades have played a part in eroding previously long-standing norms against populist rhetoric and talking points. The emergence of social media has made it easier for political outsiders to speak directly to the public, levelling a playing field that had previously tilted towards established figures and parties.

Beneath the surface of the headline results, one of the most striking patterns seen in country after country has been the rise in support for the populist right among young men.

In Britain, support for Reform is now higher among men in their late teens and early twenties than among those in their thirties, and a marked gender gap has opened up among the youngest voters. A very similar pattern can be seen in the US, where young men also swung sharply towards Donald Trump in November, and the same pattern appears across much of Europe.

Notably, there appears to be plenty of room for this trend to continue: the share saying they would consider voting for the radical right is even higher than those who already have.

Such a pronounced shift is startling, but is not without plausible explanation. If discontent with economic stagnation drives zero-sum attitudes, few groups have experienced such a flatlining as young men, whose relative socio-economic status has been in steady decline across the west.

But it’s not only young men moving to the extremes. Young women in the US also swung towards Trump, while in the UK they shifted heavily to the Greens.

This fits with research from the polling company FocalData earlier this year, which found young people far more likely than their elders to support a hypothetical national populist party, and a 2020 study which found satisfaction with democracy in the developed west plummeting further and faster among young adults than any other group.

All indications are that both defining trends of 2024 are set to continue next year. The latest polls show the incumbent governments of Australia, Canada, Germany and Norway all on course to lose power in the coming months.

And in most of these countries it is once again the populist right that looks set to make the biggest gains. Norway’s rightwing populist Progress party currently leads after finishing fourth in 2021, and Germany’s AfD are currently polling in second place.

The acute inflation crisis may have passed, but with stubbornly weak economic growth, a widening generational wealth gap and a fragmented media, 2024 may prove to be less an anomaly than one particularly jagged point on a downward trend.



The writer is the founder and chief executive of AlphaGeo and author of ‘The Future is Asian’

The November COP29 summit ended predictably: a last-minute, watered-down commitment to support developing countries in their urgent climate adaptation efforts was delivered. India’s delegate then led the equally predictable outcry with a fiery diatribe against the paltry sums promised. India is right to worry: it is facing a combustible mix of climate volatility and demographic vulnerability from being an overpopulated poor country.

There is a widespread consensus that India will be the world’s fastest-growing large economy for the next decade and perhaps beyond. The World Bank recently upped its growth forecast for the country from 6.6 per cent to 7 per cent in the fiscal year to next March 31. Yet India still faces major economic headwinds such as slow structural reforms, trade barriers, too heavy banking sector regulation and high youth unemployment.

And almost entirely ignored in the heady growth forecasts is the role of climate change. This is in spite of environmental shifts beginning to bite into India’s corporate sector. Leading food delivery app Zomato cited heat stress in explaining its lower-than-expected Q1 earnings, and infrastructure giant Larsen & Toubro is shifting working hours to adapt to searing heat. Ironically, during the COP summit, India’s air pollution reached record levels, with schools closed and flights grounded.

Asia as a whole — and south Asia in particular — is bearing the brunt of global climate volatility. Asia now accounts for more than half of global greenhouse gas emissions, which have in turn led to record-breaking heatwaves, droughts, floods, hurricanes and rising sea levels. More than 80 per cent of India’s people live in districts that are at risk of climate-induced disasters, according to the World Bank.

In October, the Asian Development Bank warned that climate change could hit India’s GDP by as much as 25 per cent by 2070. This is not unrealistic: a third of India’s GDP is linked to nature-related sectors. Increasingly frequent droughts are threatening agricultural output, a “day zero” water event, in which all water sources dry up, has already hit Chennai and heatwaves are stressing the electricity grid. India’s most recent official Economic Survey claims that the country is spending more than 5 per cent of GDP on climate adaptation.

It is also important to note that one of India’s most significant exports is people. Climate stress will only accelerate the brain drain to countries with a more temperate climate and labour shortages. That will in turn have an economic impact.

It is clear that climate-neutral growth forecasts for India need a systematic correction. The nascent field of climate econometrics is making welcome progress on this more generally. Swiss Re has issued dire warnings about the aggregate hit to global GDP from increasing climate stress. S&P considers climate hazards — sea level rise, extreme heat, flooding — to calculate GDP at risk and the ability of countries to avoid and respond to some of these losses based on their economic and institutional strength.

But the impact of climate change on India’s growth prospects also needs to be looked at more from the bottom up. At AlphaGeo, we have calculated a revised GDP outlook for each state, considering factors such as population density, the sectoral composition of its economy, climate hazard exposure and a composite of metrics such as the reliability of energy grids and flood control measures.

We estimate that India’s GDP will rise up from $3.97tn today to $7.75tn by 2030. This represents a climate correction of about $500bn from the Ministry of Finance’s projections for state-level growth that suggest an aggregated trajectory to $8.26tn at the end of the decade — a substantial penalty for a developing country, to say nothing of the human toll it represents.

India needs climate econometrics that capture more granular data on the real-time impact of natural disasters on supply chains and commercial activity. This is possible by methods such as collecting satellite imagery of night-time lights and real-time commercial transaction data. But even a perfect digital twin of the economy is less useful than pragmatic measures such as flood controls, water desalination and communal cooling centres that ensure population health and infrastructural resilience.

Living up to India’s dreams of superpower status will require nothing less. India may yet remain the fastest-growing large economy, but this will only remain the case if climate adaptation becomes a strategic priority for the government, corporates and investors.



India’s former prime minister Manmohan Singh, who died aged 92 on Thursday, launched a transformative liberalisation of the state-controlled economy during a 1991 currency crisis, putting the country on a long-term trajectory of faster growth and rising global influence.

As finance minister from 1991 until 1996, Singh overcame entrenched political resistance to end decades of isolation and stagnation, open India’s doors to greater foreign trade and private investment, and begin its integration into the global economy.

The Oxford-trained economist, known for his mild, self-effacing manner and personal integrity, was subsequently tapped by Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born Congress party leader, to serve as premier after the party’s shock electoral victory in 2004.

Singh was considered by Gandhi a safe, technocratic choice to lead India, who would not emerge as a political rival to her or her young son, Rahul, whom she was grooming to eventually take over the party leadership.

During his premiership, Singh’s hope of continuing India’s economic reforms was thwarted by Congress’s coalition partners, which objected to many of the measures he wished to pursue.

His second term in office from 2009 was seen as opportunity to press ahead with more dramatic reforms. But he ended up weak and isolated within his party as high-profile corruption scandals plagued his administration.

Born in 1932 in a rural village in what is today part of Pakistan, Singh, a member of the Sikh faith, migrated to India when British-ruled India was divided into Hindu-majority India and Muslim-majority Pakistan.

He attended university in India, then obtained a degree from Cambridge and a PhD in economics from Oxford, writing a thesis and book entitled “India’s Export Trends and Prospects for Sustained Growth”.

It challenged India’s then pervasive export pessimism that was to blight its development for a further three decades. Singh subsequently worked for several years at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

In 1969, he returned to India to teach economics. Then in 1971, Singh took up a post as economic adviser in the commerce ministry, the start of a long career in government service in which he held many top posts, including governor of the Reserve Bank of India.

But his fundamental role in transforming India came in 1991, as it was facing a severe foreign exchange crisis, which had forced the country to fly some of its gold reserves abroad as security for an IMF rescue loan.

Singh seized the opportunity to break with the antitrade world view that had dominated India post-independence, and begin the process of opening up the country’s tightly controlled, socialist-oriented economy to greater private and foreign investment, bringing an end to an era of chronically low growth.

His steps, alongside prime minister PV Narasimha Rao, to dismantle the so-called “Licence Raj” of strict economic controls during his five-year tenure as finance minister laid the foundation for a rapid acceleration of India’s economic growth, hitting highs of nearly 9 per cent, up from an average of around 2 to 3 per cent.

In his first term as prime minister from 2004, Singh created debt relief and job creation schemes for farmers, and sought to establish social welfare programmes to assist those yet to benefit from India’s accelerated growth.

He also tried to bring more transparency to government by implementing a freedom of information law, similar to those in the west.

But the most significant achievement was his transformation of New Delhi’s relationship with Washington, which had imposed sanctions on India for its nuclear tests a decade earlier.

In 2008, he staked his political future on a quest to obtain parliamentary approval for a major civil nuclear agreement with the US, in spite of opposition from leftist former coalition partners and the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party.

The successful parliamentary vote buried the legacy of cold war animosity between the two countries despite India’s refusal to relinquish its nuclear weapons programme, while sealing Singh’s unlikely friendship with the then-US president George W Bush.

Later that year, after Pakistan-based militants launched a seaborne terror strike on Mumbai, killing 170 people, Singh showed considerable restraint by resisting calls for harsh retaliation, thus averting a potential regional conflagration.

With the benefit of hindsight, many of Singh’s advisers said he should have handed the premiership over to a younger leader after the election victory of 2009.

His second term was one of bitter disappointment and paralysis, marred by corruption scandals, unruly allies and an economy retreating from double-digit economic growth amid stubbornly high inflation.

However, during this time, he did empower Nandan Nilekani, cofounder of tech giant Infosys, to lead a team that built an advanced biometric identification system known as Aadhaar, which gradually led to vast improvements in the delivery of welfare payments for millions of poorer Indians.

Still, public disillusionment with Singh’s seeming inaction as economic and political conditions deteriorated paved the way for the 2014 election of the BJP leader Narendra Modi, who promised muscular leadership, faster job creation and accelerated growth.

Singh kept a low profile after retirement, though he did make occasional public criticisms of his successor’s performance. In 2019 he accused Modi of creating a “toxic” environment and “climate of fear” that had led to a sharp economic slowdown by undermining business confidence.

During his final months as premier, back in 2014, Singh predicted that “history will be kinder to me than the contemporary media, or for that matter opposition parties”.

Letter in response to this obituary:

When Manmohan Singh left me lost for words / From Richard Lambert, former FT Editor



India’s former prime minister Manmohan Singh, who liberalised the economy and then led the country through a period of strong economic growth, has died.

Singh, 92, was being treated for age-related medical conditions, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi said, as it announced his death on Thursday.

The Oxford university-educated economist set India on a path to becoming a fast-growing economy as finance minister from 1991 to 1996, when he opened up the country to more foreign trade and private investment.

Considered a political lightweight by some in India at that time, Singh was a surprise choice by the Congress party to be prime minister after it won parliamentary elections in 2004.

Alongside a growth rate of almost 7 per cent, Singh’s decade as premier was marred by allegations of widespread corruption against his party’s leaders, although his personal integrity was rarely questioned.

Singh was accused of inaction and opposition parties claimed he was subservient to Sonia Gandhi, Congress’s chief at that time.

Shortly before Congress lost elections to Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party in 2014, Singh said in a speech to parliament that “history would be kinder to me than the contemporary media, or for that matter opposition parties”.

Prime Minister Modi on Thursday described Singh as one of India’s most distinguished leaders, saying he left a “strong imprint on our economic policy over the years” and had “made extensive efforts to improve people’s lives” as premier.

Rahul Gandhi, a senior member of the Congress party, paid tribute to Singh, saying he had lost a “mentor and guide” whose “humility and deep understanding of economics inspired the nation”.

A member of parliament for more than three decades, Singh retired from active politics earlier this year.

The mild-mannered Singh, who belonged to India’s minority Sikh community, was born to a humble family in 1932 in a village in India’s Punjab province prior to the country’s independence, which is now part of Pakistan.

Singh rose to become one of India’s most successful economists, serving the government in various capacities, including as head of the central bank in the 1980s.



India has eclipsed China as Asia’s top market for company listings this year, as buoyant stock prices spark a boom in initial public offerings.

Propelled by companies including Swiggy and Hyundai Motor, India will be the world’s second-largest equity fundraising market behind the US for the first time, according to data from Dealogic for 2024. The National Stock Exchange of India is set to be the number-one venue for primary listings by value, ahead of Nasdaq and Hong Kong Stock Exchange, KPMG figures show.

The rankings herald a shift in 2024 in Asian finance, as a tightening of regulations leads to a relative listings drought in China. Meanwhile, companies have rushed to take advantage of high valuations following a multiyear rally in Indian equities, despite concerns over whether the market can weather an economic slowdown.“It’s been one of the most busiest times in the history of Indian capital markets,” said V Jayasankar, a managing director at Kotak Investment Banking, which worked on some of the country’s biggest IPOs this year. “India is certainly getting noticed — China needs to probably do a lot more to really consistently attract that business.”The market has been buoyed by “very solid” Indian domestic flows thanks to a significant “democratisation of investment” as households increasingly pour money into local equity markets, Jayasankar added. “The overall activity has taken us by a positive surprise.”

The value of primary and secondary listings in mainland China, which in 2023 was the world’s largest market, fell about 86 per cent from more than $48bn to just $7.5bn in 2024 by early December, according to Dealogic.

Analysts said that a weaker economy coupled with restrictive regulation on company listings has held up the pipeline of Chinese companies looking to enter public markets, although the announcement of monetary and fiscal stimulus plans in September has helped to stabilise markets after a sell-off earlier in the year.

China’s IPO slowdown was in line with Beijing’s policy aims, according to Scarlett Liu, Apac equity and derivative strategist at BNP Paribas.

“It’s a regulatory attempt to achieve balance between primary and secondary market,” she said, adding that authorities were concerned that too many listings could drain activity from secondary market trading.

Hong Kong, China’s offshore financial hub, saw a relative increase in equity raising activity to more than $10bn by December from $6bn in 2023, including some large transactions such as electronics maker Midea raising more than $4bn in a secondary listing.

Analysts say Hong Kong will continue to benefit as a listing venue for mainland Chinese companies to raise offshore capital.

“For Chinese companies pursuing IPOs, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange remains a top venue offering a more streamlined listing process, market stability and transparency, and greater access to global capital,” said Frank Bi, partner and Asian practice head of corporate transactions at law firm Ashurst.

India, which had a large volume of relatively smaller deals in 2024, has been buoyed by companies seeking to raise funds while valuations remain sky-high, including by spinning off Indian units of multinational companies such as Hyundai.

“Obviously the number of transactions has gone up but the average ticket size per transaction is down about 75-80 per cent in the last two years,” said one Mumbai-based banker. “Now, what that tells me is [companies are thinking] ‘run for the hills, let’s try to cash in as quickly as we can, whatever we can while market conditions remain supportive’.”

But as the world’s most populous nation’s rapid growth slows, with corporates reporting weak earnings and GDP growth falling sharply to 5.4 per cent in the third quarter — the lowest rate in almost two years — foreign portfolio managers have turned cautious on its frothy equity market.They pulled more than $11bn out of Indian stocks in October, a record monthly exodus, as well as a further $2.5bn in November.

However, bankers think that the wider exuberance in primary and secondary listings in India is likely to be sustained into the new year. “Not to comment on the quality of the offerings,” a second banker in Mumbai said, “there is enough activity lined up so long as the markets are supportive and the liquidity is there.”

“Fair to say that the first two quarters of 2025 will see no change from where we are right now,” he added.

Global investment bankers too remain bullish on India, while warning that its relative growth may be eclipsed by a larger comeback in the US and elsewhere.

“Globally we expect the IPO market activity to normalise in 2025 and we will see a pick-up in volumes especially in the US and Europe and possibly also out of China. It would not surprise me if India continues to grow though,” said Gareth McCartney, global co-head of equity capital markets at UBS.



Good morning. It’s almost the end of 2024. It was a challenging year for Bollywood and we take a look at how the Hindi film industry is struggling to find its mojo. Also in this newsletter, the books, shows and places I most enjoyed this year. Plus, if you are planning your new year’s resolution, scroll down for Nandan Nilekani’s productivity tip.

Programming note: India Business Briefing is off the rest of the week. We’ll be in your inboxes next on December 31. Season’s greetings and happy holidays!

It has been a sad year for Bollywood. In the first 10 months of this year, Indian box office collections were $1bn, down 7 per cent from the same period last year. What’s more, 2024’s big hits were all from the south of the country, with Pushpa 2: The Rule and Kalki 2898 AD running to packed houses.

Viewer time and wallet share are severely fractured. There are a dozen Indian video streaming services, a few international ones, as well as competition from YouTube, Instagram Reels and other user-generated content vying for eyeballs. Watching a film in a multiplex is not a cheap exercise; the tickets are pricey and the popcorn pricier (scroll down for the appropriate tax rates). A large chunk of the audience now prefers to wait for the movie to land in a streaming service than watch it in cinemas.

At the same time, the costs of movie making have only increased. Despite the astronomical price tags that come with Bollywood’s A-listers, big names are no longer guaranteed to draw in crowds. In October, director Karan Johar, who had managed to seize the zeitgeist for the past two decades, sold a 50 per cent share in his Dharma Productions to vaccine billionaire Adar Poonawalla. The press release announcing the merger was telling; it talked about the challenges of the digital future without saying how the company planned to navigate it — only that it would need the resources to do so.

There are no simple fixes. It’s becoming increasingly difficult to tear people away from their devices and into theatres — and the Hindi film industry is suffering a crisis of confidence. As budgets bloat, production houses are playing it safe by falling back on the same old formula and not taking any creative risks.

Ajay Bijli, the head of India’s largest multiplex operator PVR Inox, told the FT that Bollywood’s content makers were still “grappling with what the consumer wants”. Cinemas are instead counting on big Hollywood films to fill up seats next year, and who can blame them? Just the names of major Bollywood releases for 2025 are enough to tell you their creative drought endures: there’s War 2, Jolly LLB 3, and Housefull 5.

Do you have any thoughts on how Bollywood can break its jinx? Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

And just like that, 2024 is nearly over. I am always a little shocked and more than a little sad to close the book at the end of a year. As I grow older I worry that I didn’t get as much done as I should have — the books that I didn’t read, the holidays I didn’t take, the stories I didn’t write. This was a difficult year for me. Perhaps that’s why, for a change, I can only remember the things I enjoyed. Here’s a short list.

The three books I loved reading:

I watched way too much TV this year, catching up on decades of missed shows and films. I came late to both Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul, but boy am I glad I got to them. I am hard pressed to think of another popular work of art that is a more complex meditation on good versus bad.

I travelled quite a bit this year, and was left awestruck by Muir Woods in California and the fairy chimneys at Cappadocia. I also closed my eyes and plunged into the delightful madness that is New Orleans and lived to tell the tale. (My liver probably disagrees).

My intent for 2025 is to read and watch a lot more Indian regional content. Let me know if you have any recommendations, or send me your favourite bits of 2024 at indiabrief@ft.com.

Last week’s GST council meeting decided on three different tax rates for popcorn, a move that launched a thousand memes. Here’s a quick primer if you’re writing your own jokes for the holiday party. (We are not alone. Earlier this year, the UK went through its own snack-related tax controversy.)

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

The rupee has been falling to new lows for the past several weeks. Do you think the currency will strengthen in 2025? Take part in our poll here.

On Friday we asked: Which beverage was invented as a livener for travellers arriving at Foynes airport in County Limerick?

The answer is . . . Irish coffee! Here’s HTSI’s top tips for making the festive drink.

Rohanshi Vaid, research manager at the Hinrich Foundation was the first to send us the right answer. Congratulations!

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Bangladesh’s interim government has asked India to return exiled former prime minister Sheikh Hasina to face legal proceedings, a request likely to heighten tensions between Dhaka and New Delhi.

A Bangladeshi domestic criminal tribunal in October issued arrest warrants against Sheikh Hasina, who fled to India after being toppled by student-led protests in August, and more than 40 others.

A spokesperson for Bangladesh’s foreign ministry said it sent a diplomatic note to India’s government on Monday requesting the return of Sheikh Hasina, who remains in New Delhi, so she could face a “judicial process”.

The Bangladeshi tribunal accused the authoritarian former prime minister of orchestrating massacres and “crimes against humanity” during the protests that lead to her ousting, in which hundreds of people are thought to have died. Sheikh Hasina has denied the allegations.

The diplomatic request will fuel tensions between New Delhi and Dhaka just weeks after India’s foreign secretary visited Bangladesh to try to mend relations between the neighbours.

A spokesperson for India’s foreign ministry confirmed it had received a “note verbale from the Bangladesh High Commission today in connection with an extradition request”, but declined to comment further.

Sheikh Hasina’s dramatic toppling roused suspicion and concern in New Delhi, which has historically supported her Awami League, Bangladesh’s oldest and biggest political party.

Rivals and rights groups have accused the Awami League of extrajudicial killings, bending state institutions to its whim and rigging elections. Many Indian officials believe the installation of Bangladesh’s caretaker leader, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate Muhammad Yunus, was the result of a US-backed regime change.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has also raised concerns about the safety of minority Hindus in India’s Muslim-majority neighbour. Yunus has acknowledged limited incidents of violence against Hindus, though human rights groups have not confirmed any mass atrocities.

Yunus told the Financial Times in October his government would not ask for Sheikh Hasina’s extradition from its dominant south Asian neighbour until a verdict had been reached by the investigative tribunal, which last week extended the deadline for its probe into February.

But last month, Yunus called for her return following the arrest of dozens of former Bangladesh government officials and regime associates. In an address he said: “We will seek the extradition of the ousted autocrat from India.”

While Sheikh Hasina has not been seen in public since she left Bangladesh, she made a broadcast address earlier this month accusing Yunus, with whom she has long feuded, of being the “mastermind” behind the violence and her removal. The Awami League also claims his interim government has “weaponised” the country’s institutions against them.

Sheikh Hasina denied she had ordered security forces to use lethal force against protesters and claimed the allegations against her were “false propaganda” and part of a “conspiracy against us to push us out of power”.

Her son Sajeeb Wazed, who has also previously denied any wrongdoing by his mother, did not respond to a request for comment.

A high court in Bangladesh earlier this month also ordered an investigation against Sheikh Hasina and her niece Tulip Siddiq, a UK Treasury minister, after their family was accused of embezzling $5bn. A UK government spokesperson has said Siddiq denies “any involvement in the allegations”.



India’s entertainment industry is banking on a solid line-up of local and Hollywood releases to drag it out of a blockbuster “famine” and get people back into cinemas after a series of flops.

Indian box office takings have fallen 7 per cent to Rs89.5bn ($1bn) from January to October, compared with the same period in 2023, according to Ormax Media.

But the Mumbai-based consultancy expects the strong performance from sequels and franchises, including Hindi-language horror-comedy Bhool Bhulaiyaa 3 and southern Indian macho thriller Pushpa 2: The Rule, to help reverse 2024’s relatively muted performance.

Ajay Bijli, the head of India’s largest multiplex operator PVR Inox, said the next financial year starting in April would see a “full slate” of domestic and international offerings, including the latest Mission Impossible and Marvel movies.

But Mumbai-centred Bollywood has been wrestling with a string of recent Hindi-language flops as viewers kept away from movie theatres following the pandemic.

Audiences have gravitated to high-testosterone action flicks from the country’s south, particularly those produced by the Telugu-language industry known as Tollywood.

Bijli said that the industry’s issues were to do with the “consistency of content connecting with the audiences”. Studios and cinemas struggled with either “feast or famine”.

“The volatility, the peaks and troughs, have become very, very pronounced post Covid,” Bijli said. “Content makers are grappling with what the consumer wants.”

In response to changing preferences, Bollywood has pushed out extravagant features that mirror some of the successful south Indian productions. Jawan, the highest grossing film of 2023 starring the country’s biggest actor Shah Rukh Khan, was directed by south India’s Arun Kumar, known professionally as Atlee.

This year, Jio Studios — the Indian film house owned by Asia’s wealthiest person Mukesh Ambani — has had a run of hits, including Singham Again, the latest in a cop action series that heavily references the Ramayana, a Hindu epic. Jio’s horror comedy Stree 2 had been one of the highest grossing Indian films of 2024.

Following a series of titles for digital-only release, more Indian studios are focusing on theatrical releases.

“For at least a couple of years, most of these [streaming] platforms were saddled with dead snakes around their neck and massively overpaid for content,” said Jyoti Deshpande, Jio Studios chief and president of the media and content division at Ambani’s conglomerate Reliance Industries.

“I think that correction has happened,” she added. “One must produce carefully, produce for theatrical [release] unless commissioned in advance by some platform.”

India’s box office revenue is now expected to expand at a 14 per cent compound annual growth rate to Rs237bn by 2028, according to a PwC report published this month.

Jio Studios is hoping to expand globally and is targeting deals with Hollywood. Deshpande said talks are on with US studios to collaborate more widely “on various tracks”, including co-production, distribution and superstar crossovers — whether big US names in Indian productions, or vice versa.

“Our talent in their films, their talent in our films . . . I think that’s the next phase,” Deshpande said about collaboration between Bollywood and Hollywood. “We haven’t scratched the tip of the iceberg.”

So far only a few Indian megastars, such as Alia Bhatt, Priyanka Chopra Jonas and Deepika Padukone, have acted in big-budget US features. Chopra Jonas has appeared in Hollywood flicks such as 2021’s The Matrix Resurrections and the 2017 cinematic remake of Baywatch. Bhatt made her Hollywood debut in the 2023 spy thriller Heart of Stone, while Padukone starred in the 2017 Vin Diesel vehicle xXx: The Return Of Xander Cage.

Deshpande predicted that India’s fragmented entertainment industry would enter a period of consolidation.

In October, Indian vaccine billionaire Adar Poonawalla marked his first foray into the film business. He spent $199mn to buy a 50 per cent stake in Dharma Productions, the studio headed by Karan Johar, the powerful Bollywood director behind blockbusters including romantic comedy Kuch Kuch Hota Hai and family melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham.

“It’s going to be survival of the fittest,” Deshpande said. “It’s going to be a big boys’ game.”



It was 5.30am, a week before Diwali, and a crescent moon hung horizontally above Jaipur railway station. It looked, my son said, “like a smile”. People in suits and bright saris rolled wheelie bags along the platform, stray dogs slept through the plinky departure announcements and the growl of locomotive engines. The air smelled of dust and chai.

My husband, our children, aged nine and eight, and I were here to board the fourth and final train of our tour of Rajasthan, the five-hour Jaipur to Jodhpur Express. Two weeks on the beach in Greece is our usual holiday speed, so travelling around India was a major step up. I’d approached the trip with some trepidation, worried we’d get ill — an Indian friend even suggested we take Imodium prophylactically — and that the multiple destinations and sensory overload would be too much for our kids; and to start with, it was.

Negotiating Kolkata’s steamy, marigold-strung Mullick Ghat flower market 10 days earlier, my daughter clutched my hand so hard I developed a bruise. But now, she and her younger brother strolled confidently ahead with their red and yellow backpacks.

We’d come to India to visit Shuktara, a Kolkata-based charity my husband is involved with, and had decided to explore Rajasthan while we were here. When I heard that Original Travel was launching a new tour of the region by rail, using the sorts of local trains millions of Indians take every day, I was keen to try it: I hoped it would ​i​ntroduce us to Rajasthani life in a way that criss-crossing the state in a hermetically sealed minibus might not.

The trip would take in the temples, palaces and forts of Rajasthan’s Rajput and Mughal past, as well as exposing us to its rapidly changing present, with bespoke, family-friendly activities — including, we hoped, encounters with ​a​ couple of apex predators.

As well as booking our train seats (having read Monisha Rajesh’s Around India in 80 Trains, I knew this was no mean feat) in air-conditioned carriages, and providing drivers and guides, the company’s Delhi concierge would ​always be on the end of a WhatsApp. If we were going to leave our sandcastle​-building comfort zone, this was the way to do it.

The rail journeys, it turned out, were high points of the holiday, not just for the hubbub of the stations and the views, but also because of the people we met. As the train left Jaipur and the sky turned a hazy pink, the city gave way to farmland dotted with haystacks that looked, we thought, like the straw houses from The Three Little Pigs.

A samosa seller began his rounds and a couple across the aisle giggled through YouTube videos as the vast, milky Sambhar Salt Lake hove into sight. Later, I struck up conversation with a man on his way home for Diwali. “My brother likes crackers,” he told me, when I asked him if he’d be lighting fireworks. “I prefer beer.”

Our train trip began in Delhi, where we stayed at the Imperial hotel, its marble and teak hallways decorated with photos of elephants leading processions, military regiments, and busts of King George V and Queen Mary. The next day, we swapped the hotel’s jasmine-scented interiors for a rickshaw ride around the hectic streets of Old Delhi with our polymath guide, Robinson.

So much for food poisoning — the greatest health hazard of the holiday came in the form of a rampaging bull that spun around in front of us before collapsing from dizziness. Somehow, my husband and I managed not to convey our terror to the children, for whom the experience was a holiday highlight.

The following morning, we boarded the Gatiman Express for Agra, en route to the Taj Mahal. I found the sight of the white marble mausoleum at dawn, when it glowed like a pink pearl, spellbinding. But again, animals were the biggest draw for the junior members of the party, my son grabbing my phone to snap two Egyptian vultures perching on a minaret.

Our next hotel also had royal connections. On the edge of the Aravalli hills, Six Senses Fort Barwara is an exquisite conversion of a 14th-century fort​​ built by the Chauhan Rajput clan. Ancient frescoes line the walls of the women’s temple, now part of the spa, and though most of the building is new, including the swimming pool, with a raised platform on which my children lounged like mini maharajas, it melds elegantly with the original crenellations and domes.

Most of our fellow guests here and at our other hotels were Indian tourists: the Covid pandemic, we were told repeatedly, persuaded prosperous Indians to discover their own backyards, just as it had for British holidaymakers in the UK.

Fort Barwara was our jumping-off point for Ranthambore National Park, an hour’s drive west, where we went in search of tigers. The closest my children had been to a safari was Whipsnade Zoo, and they were agog at the mongooses, sambar and spotted deer, and peacocks we saw on our afternoon drive.

An hour in, our 4x4 stopped, and our guide Jyotirmoy Chaturvedi pointed out tiger tracks​. A series of ​loud barks followed: warning calls from a sambar deer​. We clung on as the vehicle shot off at high speed, pulses soaring. The tiger eluded us, but no one minded: being on a mission, binoculars clapped to our eyes, the rolling green-and-ochre landscape darkening as the light faded, was enough of a thrill.

In fact, our favourite part of the day came when we left the serene park in our open-top 4x4 and entered a maelstrom of daily life on the outskirts of Sawai Madhopur. Motorbikes hooted and swerved around marauding warthogs, goats and families of monkeys; children waved from balconies strung with neon Diwali lights as the smells of evening meals being cooked drifted by.

From Sawai Madhopur, the closest station to Ranthambore, it was a two-hour train ride to Jaipur. That evening on our hotel’s terrace: we were stunned to see over 100 kites swinging high above the Old City’s rooftops, practice for Jaipur’s centuries-old kite festival.

Built at the start of the 19th century, Samode Haveli became a hotel in the 1980s​,​ and members of the ​aristocratic Samode family still live there: ​s​taff walk their dachshunds under a 200-year-old banyan tree​.​ Jaipur’s royal family still occupies its City Palace, too, as we saw first-hand: one minute we were admiring a photograph of 25-year-old Princess Gauravi Kumari, the next she was zooming past in a golf buggy.

The following day, we were driven ​to the village of Bagru, where the 400-year-old craft of block printing is going strong. We were shown bubbling vats of natural dyes and the pomegranate flowers used to fix the colours, before being invited to have a go. My daughter loved it, stamping her fabric ​​so vigorously with the leaf blocks she’d chosen that I was surprised we weren’t printed head to toe by the time we left. Back at home, she used her new skill in a school art project, carving potatoes instead of wood.

My son is less interested in crafting but obsessed with cricket — no gender stereotypes here — and Original Travel had arranged for him to have a game with boys from Blue Heaven School, outside ​Jaipur. While he picked up spin-bowling tips from Nardeep Rajawat, school director and former cricket pro, I chatted to his teenage teammates about their career plans. Most were would-be entrepreneurs; true Modi citizens, keen, they told me, to capitalise on India’s raw materials and infrastructure. India’s GDP grew by about 7 per cent in 2024, a trajectory it was easy to imagine continuing as we chatted.

But as the economy has grown, wealth and income inequalities have widened, and we saw plenty of evidence of that during our trip, too. Before coming to India, my husband and I debated whether we should be exposing our children to the country’s appalling poverty. “India’s got riches,” my daughter observed, “but they’re not shared out.” If nothing else, I hope our trip made them realise how lucky they are with their cosy London lives, food in the fridge and drinkable water in the taps.

After exploring Jodhpur’s Mehrangarh fort, a feat of Rajput engineering that hovers 120 metres above the Thar desert and had the best arsenal of any fort we’d visited — “Arms & Weapons” signs, I’d discovered, are catnip to eight- and nine-year-olds — we drove to three hours to our last stop. Suján Jawai is a spectacularly beautiful camp with just 10 tents, each with a terrace, bathtub and marble shower, in a wilderness area known for its leopards.

Leopards are notoriously hard to spot, and after the tiger no-show we were prepared to be disappointed. Our intrepid zoologist-ranger, Siddarth Waradkar (“Sorry I’m late, I was rescuing a 12-foot rock python,” was his introduction), refused to be drawn on our chances either.

But within five minutes of leaving the camp, we found Baliraja, a dominant male leopard, beneath a tree. It was an emotional moment: we were so close we could see his chest rise and fall. “He winked at me,” said my daughter. That same afternoon, we watched a hefty eight-month-old cub stretch and yawn on a rock. Suján’s rewilding efforts, which began a decade ago and included uprooting an invasive species of acacia, have helped increase the leopards’ prey, and their population has risen by about 50 per cent.

The animals are now comfortable with humans — as long as they stay in their vehicles — hence our ​up-close sightings. The property has a community-focused approach to conservation: 90 per cent of the camp’s staff, including its red-turbaned Rabari guards, come from local villages, and it sponsors 10 nearby schools.

The following morning, Sid received a call from one of the camp’s spotters, and we sped towards Jawai dam (“this is literally like Mario Kart,” said my son appreciatively as we rollercoastered over the granite rocks), where we found another cub, rolling on its back as if asking to be tickled. On our last dusk drive, cicadas chirping as loudly as alarm clocks, we were escorted back to Suján by a leopard that strolled six feet in front of our vehicle. “He’s saying goodbye,” said Sid.

In the end, it was the constant gearshifts I’d worried about that made our tour of Rajasthan so magical. “Everything’s so different,” said my children again and again: different from yesterday, and different from home. Hopping between cacophonous, kaleidoscopic cities and pristine wildernesses where big cats roamed hadn’t just been electrifying, it had stretched our holiday horizons.

As the kids stuck their train tickets in their journals and I put four unopened packets of Imodium in the bathroom cupboard, I ​wondered if we’d ever be content with two weeks on the beach again.

Kate Maxwell is the author of ‘Hush’ (Virago)

Note: this article has been corrected. The original version wrongly said that Mehrangarh fort in Jodhpur was a feat of Mughal rather than Rajput engineering.

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life & Art wherever you listen



Good morning. Even as Elon Musk’s Starlink awaits government clearances to operate in India, its devices seem to be popping up in various parts of the country. In other news, a mostly unproductive winter session of parliament ends today; the only notable event is that the “one nation, one election” bill will be moved to a joint parliamentary committee. But first, one in three senior executives lie on their résumés!

Even those at the very top lie in their résumés. KPMG carried out a million background checks on job applicants in India over a year and found that 30 per cent of senior management and C-suite candidates had misrepresented themselves during the recruitment process. As a group, executives had a discrepancy rate comparable to applicants in real estate and infrastructure — the industry with the highest share of errant candidates (31 per cent). The average across different industries was 11 per cent.

This is not good news for companies. At the senior executive level, they found candidates misstating the actual reason for leaving a job, not mentioning legal disputes, as well as interpersonnel issues around how senior managers were treating their staff members.

Video interviews, that enduring post-pandemic legacy, also make it hard to assess candidates, especially on softer issues such as alignment with the company’s culture and values. But technology is catching up, with digital tools that help detect interview impersonation (!) and document tampering. For senior managers, companies also conduct extensive background checks, gathering “human intelligence” to ensure the candidate is the right fit for the job.

Job hunt experts and interview coaches emphasise the importance of crafting your résumé for the job description. But that only means highlighting the roles and accomplishments that are most relevant for the job, not adding falsehoods. Hiring is an expensive process for corporations and rectifying wrong decisions even more so. Consequently, the use of sophisticated tools (now backed by AI) will only grow. Taking creative liberties with résumés will be counter-productive.

Do you have a story about fantastical résumés or hilarious interviews? Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

Elon Musk’s Starlink has not had an easy time in India. Just this week, the billionaire rejected claims that the satellite communication devices were used in strife-torn Manipur, the second time in a fortnight that Starlink has been accused of facilitating criminal activity in the country. Earlier this month, officials in the Andaman and Nicobar administration had sent a legal demand to the company’s headquarters, seeking the name of the customer of the device used by smugglers who were caught in the island with $4.2bn worth of methamphetamine, according to news reports. Musk took to X to clarify that Starlink’s satellite beams were turned off in India and that its use would not have been possible.

These accusations aside, the company, which registered its India operations in 2021, has long been seeking approvals from the Indian government to start its service. Currently, only Jio Satellite communications and Bharti-group backed OneWeb have licences. Security clearances are, rightly, a long and difficult process and it has been an especially fraught wait for Starlink. However, in October, the company got a boost when the government said it would not be auctioning spectrum for satellite broadband and instead would award it administratively. Jio’s Mukesh Ambani and Airtel’s Mittal were pushing for an auction. The whispers in New Delhi’s corridors suggest that Musk will get a licence sooner rather than later. But this is a fight among giants — it’s premature to predict anything. I will do a deeper dive into this story after the telecom regulator completes its consultation and submits its recommendations.

R Ashwin announced his retirement from international cricket this week. He notched up some mighty numbers in his 14-year career.

It’s nearly the end-of-the-year holidays. My daughter is home from college and we have already started our big tennis and badminton tournaments on the Nintendo Switch. I love that all the jumping and swinging makes me feel virtuous about spending time playing video games. For those with younger kids, Moana 2 is in cinemas now, it’s a visually joyful sequel.

Heads up: Ed Sheeran is coming to India with his +-÷x tour in February and tickets are open now. Also, not to be a nag, but the Mumbai marathon is one month away and if you haven’t begun your training (something I totally regret the couple of times I ran the half), it’s still not too late to lace up.

Which beverage was invented as a livener for travellers arriving at Foynes airport in County Limerick? Hint: Prithvi Café in Mumbai was famous for it.

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

On Tuesday, we asked if you thought “one nation, one election” was a good idea. Here’s how you voted.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Good morning. India’s stock market regulator would like to bring the benefits of algorithmic trading to all investors — it is currently restricted to foreign funds and proprietary traders. I’m also keeping an eye on parliament, where there’s talk that the One Nation One Election bill could be introduced this week. We’ll know more today. Plus, the cost of India’s huge spam call problem.

Last Friday, after holding out for years, India’s stock market regulator, Sebi, signalled that it was likely to open algorithmic trading to retail investors. In September, the board published a study that showed that algo trading was responsible for 97 and 96 per cent of the profits in the futures and options segment of foreign investors and proprietary traders respectively.

Sebi’s draft guidelines are tight: each algorithm will have to be approved by the stock exchanges, and all orders will be tagged by unique identifiers so they can be traced and audited accurately. Even individual “tech-savvy” investors will be able to approach the exchanges through their brokers to register their algos. Sebi has split algos into two categories: white box, whose logic and rules are public, and black box algos, which are closed to external scrutiny. The regulator has codified specific rules for each, and mandated that stock exchanges have access to a kill switch in order to ensure that rogue algos don’t result in price manipulations in the market.

The regulator is right to temper enthusiasm with caution in opening algo trading to all investors. The past few years have witnessed tremendous participation by retail investors — many of whom are young and technologically knowledgeable — in the stock markets, and it would be unfair to deprive them of the opportunities that large fund houses can enjoy. At the same time, the fast-paced nature of these transactions leaves investors vulnerable to big losses, especially in the futures and options segment. Additionally, there is the ever-looming shadow of fraud (which is inadvertently turning out to be the word of the day in today’s newsletter) and it is the board’s responsibility to protect investors from unscrupulous operators running dubious algorithms.

Initial responses to these rules have criticised their tedious nature. Registering each algorithm with the stock exchange will most certainly be a time-consuming process. White box algos will be prone to easy duplication and institutional investors continue to have an edge because these restrictions do not apply to them. But Sebi is probably investing in the wisdom of taking baby steps. I don’t blame them.

The draft guidelines are open for public comments until January 3. If you have any ideas or suggestions, head over to Sebi’s website and record them.

Do you think Sebi’s rules are good for retail investors? Let me know at indiabrief@ft.com

Over the past seven days, I received four spam calls on average each day. This is nearly three months after my mobile service provider, Airtel, launched its sophisticated AI-powered spam call filtering system. Last week, Airtel said the filter had flagged 8bn calls and 800mn messages in the 10 weeks since it was rolled out. That’s a million spammers every day, which accounted for 6 per cent of all calls, the company said.

These numbers are staggering. Spam calls are not just a nuisance (anyone who has tried to take a nap on a weekend afternoon will use a stronger word than that), they are also the feeder system for cyber fraud. Indians lost Rs113.3bn to such frauds in the first nine months of this year, according to data reported from the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre. Stock trading and other investment scams constituted the largest chunk of this, accounting for more than 325,000 complaints filed. “Digital arrests” — a scam where uniformed (fake) law enforcement officials appear on video calls to extort victims — accounted for the second-highest share, with more than 63,000 people losing Rs16.16bn. They have become so prevalent that even Prime Minister Narendra Modi cautioned people against them in his radio programme. In most of these cases, the scamsters approached their victims through spam calls or messages.

In an interconnected world, it is not easy to wipe out cyber fraud. But it is puzzling why this is not a priority for the government and the telecom regulatory authority. There is, understandably, a high degree of suspicion about data security in India, and a leak-proof Do Not Disturb (DND) registry is step one in building trust in the system. It is also baffling that a year and a half after India’s data protection act was enacted, the government has yet to notify the rules that will govern the legislation. With the success of UPI and the wide acceptance of digital payments, India is seeking to be a global leader in providing mass-market digital solutions. It is imperative that we get our act together on data security sooner rather than later.

India’s D Gukesh beat Ding Liren to become the youngest world chess champion. Here is how old he was for the big milestones in his career.

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

The One Nation One Election bill proposes simultaneous elections to be held for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies.

Do you think “One Nation One Election” is a good idea? Take part in our poll here.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Good morning. It’s Friday the 13th, but I’m feeling lucky to have received all of your feedback and suggestions after Tuesday’s inaugural newsletter. Thank you for the messages, and please keep them coming.

For today: should India Inc look beyond the balance sheet and contribute to nation building? Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman urges companies to blend commercial considerations with the nation’s priorities. I am also keeping an eye on the winter session of parliament, where chaos continues with the BJP and opposition parties butting heads on the political situation in Manipur, as well as the role of American billionaire George Soros in “destabilising India”. Plus, how will Adani Group pay its big bills?

In a familiar admonishment, the finance minister told Indian CEOs this week that their commercial considerations should blend with the nation’s priorities and strategic needs.

While she elaborated on the requirement for large corporates to work with small and medium enterprises and focus on job creation, her primary bugbear is capital expenditure. In public and private, Sitharaman has expressed her frustration that Indian companies are not investing enough, and that the responsibility for capital expenditure is overwhelmingly carried by the government (although this has recently slowed; official figures showed that government capex grew only 5.4 per cent in the second quarter, a further drop from 7.5 per cent in the previous quarter).

Corporations are not going to be let off easily. According to several news reports, the government has asked the National Statistical Office to conduct a survey of private capex, the results of which will be published in March. With high inflation and low GDP growth, the Indian economy is in a tight corner and the government needs all the help it can get. But shaming corporations into increasing their capital expenditure is not a sustainable way to grow the economy. It is the government’s responsibility to ensure that conditions are favourable enough for private capital to be deployed.

The government wants India Inc to step up on the demand side, too. Last week, chief economic adviser V Anantha Nageswaran urged companies to hire more and pay better. Listed companies are making higher profits while their wage costs are shrinking. It’s self-destructive that there isn’t adequate demand in the economy for the companies’ own products to be bought, he pointed out.

Corporate pay scales are determined by market forces and the low wage scale is a reflection of high unemployment. Even if they are responsible citizens, CEOs are paid to focus on their balance sheets and it is inevitable that if they can reduce wage costs, they will. You can either be a capitalist or socialist; it is difficult to be both.

Do you think companies have a responsibility to the nation and not just their shareholders? Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com or hit reply.

This week Adani Group said it would no longer tap $500mn in US development financing for the port the conglomerate is building in Sri Lanka, and will instead use internal accruals and its capital management plan to fund the construction. Adani had secured support for the project from the US International Development Finance Corporation in November 2023, after the short seller Hindenburg Research published its report accusing the company of manipulating its stock price. A US federal agency’s backing was seen as a ringing endorsement of the company and its business practices.

A year later, Adani is in even bigger trouble after US prosecutors announced their decision to indict Gautam Adani and seven others. The big question now: how is Adani Group going to raise money? It has significant debts to service, with $1.7bn reportedly due in March, as well as high working capital requirements.

Last month, after the news of the indictment broke, the company abandoned its $600mn bond offering for Adani Green Energy and reassured investors that the group’s companies have enough cash to service their debts for the next 12 months. Infrastructure projects are expensive businesses to fund and even if the group has enough internal accruals to continue the port project and service its debts until March, it will have to find ways to raise funds soon. Watch this space.

Catch up on our recent Adani coverage:

This week Omnicom announced its decision to buy Interpublic to create the world’s largest advertising agency. Here are some important post-merger facts.

Bryan Adams is touring India, with performances in four cities and Goa. I expect I’ll be spending the weekend watching my friends endlessly scream ‘18 til I die’ on my Instagram feed. When I tire of that, I’ll switch screens and watch Netflix’s newest hit, Black Doves, a spy thriller starring Keira Knightley.

Former SoftBank president Alok Sama’s book The Money Trap: Grand Fortunes and Lost Illusions Inside the Tech Bubble is all over the airwaves. I might give it a go. Have you read it? Let me know what you thought of it.

Nothing to cheer about. Which “asset class” plunged 40 per cent in value this year because of a weakening global economy?

Send your answer to indiabrief@ft.com and check Tuesday’s newsletter to see if you were the first one to get it right.

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



India’s second-largest renewable energy company ReNew is planning to leave the Nasdaq after losing more than 30 per cent of its market value since listing in 2021.

ReNew, which has a market capitalisation of just over $2.4bn, was founded in 2011 and now has more than 10 gigawatts of renewable capacity, split roughly half between wind and solar.

It is part of a group of companies led by Adani Green Energy that are pursuing India’s target to more than double its non-fossil fuel power generation capacity to 500GW by 2030 as the coal power-dependent country attempts to meet growing energy demand.

India’s renewable industry is reeling after US prosecutors last month accused Gautam Adani and seven others of orchestrating a $265mn bribery scheme to secure green energy deals with Indian officials. Adani’s conglomerate has rejected the charges, with the billionaire telling an audience last month that “every attack makes us stronger”.

ReNew is planning to offer $7.07 a share, compared with Tuesday’s closing price of $6.34, in a buyout deal with a consortium of companies, according to a US Securities and Exchange Commission filing dated December 10.

The consortium includes Masdar, the state-owned UAE renewable energy company, and other strategic investors such as the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, one of the world’s biggest pension funds, and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority. ReNew declined to comment.

“There is a high probability the consortium will be able to buy out the other shareholders and take ReNew private, although they might have to make a better offer,” Bernstein India analysts wrote in a note. “Subsequent to that it won’t be surprising to us to see the stock listed back in India with a capital raise to help ReNew realise its full potential.”

Sumant Sinha, a former investment banker and chief executive of ReNew, told the Financial Times this year that markets were undervaluing renewable energy companies and hampering the green transition.

He added that ReNew was considering moving its listing from the Nasdaq over the prospect of Donald Trump’s re-election hitting clean energy stocks.

In August, ReNew signed a supply contract to provide Microsoft in India with nearly 440MW of green electricity.

“The biggest challenge is the US listing itself,” said a Mumbai-based energy analyst, who added that the “low liquidity” company makes it a relative minnow for US investors. “The target market for the stock is very small.”

The analyst added that ReNew’s “high” debt levels and costs had put pressure on profitability. “You cannot have a lot of overheads,” he said. “It is a low-returns business.”

In a research note in September, analysts at Morgan Stanley downgraded ReNew to “equal weight”, saying that while the company was likely to report strong earnings growth, its revenues would be volatile because of its large wind portfolio and that it had significant levels of debt.



Gautam Adani’s conglomerate has said it will no longer tap $500mn in US development financing for a Sri Lankan port project after the group’s billionaire chair was accused of orchestrating a multimillion-dollar bribery scheme.

Backing from the US International Development Finance Corporation for the project was announced in November 2023, months after Adani Group had been accused of “brazen” corporate fraud and stock price manipulation by short seller Hindenburg Research.

At the time, the conglomerate described the funding for the Colombo West International Terminal, the DFC’s largest infrastructure investment in Asia, as “a ringing endorsement” of the company. Karan Adani, the billionaire’s son who heads the ports business, said the loan was “a reaffirmation by the international community of our vision, our capabilities and our governance”.

But the conglomerate has pulled out of the loan deal as it wrestles with allegations of bribery brought by the US in November. The terminal “will be financed through the company’s internal accruals and capital management plan”, Adani Group’s ports business said in a statement released late on Tuesday. “We have withdrawn our request for financing from the DFC.”

The withdrawal shows how the Indian conglomerate may be hit by funding constraints in the wake of criminal and civil charges. The company has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing, and Gautam Adani said last month that “every attack makes us stronger”.

The DFC did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Last month, the development financing agency said it had yet to disburse the $553mn loan and was still conducting due diligence.

The loan for the Adani port in Sri Lanka was part of a broader US push to counter China’s expanding influence in south Asia. Officials in Washington have publicly criticised Beijing’s funding of infrastructure projects in various countries for being debt traps. In a visit to Sri Lanka in 2020, Donald Trump’s secretary of state Mike Pompeo called China a “predator”.

Adani, who has been accused by Indian opposition politicians of enjoying favoured treatment from Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has previously criticised China and insisted the investments were designed to meet Sri Lanka’s needs.

The Colombo terminal project, which was due to be operational this month, “is progressing well and is on track for commissioning by early next year”, Adani Ports said.

Still, Adani Group’s investments in Sri Lankan ports and green energy projects during the country’s debt crisis have been criticised by local politicians, who have argued that the deals lack transparency.

The government of Sri Lanka’s new leftist president Anura Kumara Dissanayake has opened investigations into Adani’s projects across the island nation.

The group’s overseas business interests are also coming under scrutiny in other countries. Kenya’s President William Ruto cancelled $2.6bn in proposed deals after the US charges were brought against Adani and his associates. Bangladesh’s caretaker government is also probing cross-border electricity deals with Adani’s power company.



Welcome to India Business Briefing. My name is Veena Venugopal, and I’m delighted to bring you news and insights from the world’s fastest-growing large economy every Tuesday and Friday. A bit about myself: I started my career looking after European mergers and acquisitions for an IT company, before shifting gears and moving into journalism. In the two decades since, I’ve covered everything from the Ambani brothers’ feud to Elon Musk’s acquisition of Twitter, and also written three non-fiction books.

As you will know, in India news is often noisy and distracting and it’s difficult to keep up with everything. I’ll use my years of experience to sift through the headlines and dive deep into the stories that really matter to make sure you are ahead of the curve. I’d also love your feedback, so please write to me at indiabrief@ft.com, or just hit “Reply”.

On to today’s agenda. The government announced yesterday that Shaktikanta Das, whom local media had expected to stay on as Reserve Bank of India governor, will be replaced this week — more on this below. I’ll also be keeping an eye on protesting farmers, who have paused their “Delhi Chalo” (Let’s go to Delhi) march and are deciding on the next course of action. Plus, is the sheen wearing off the CFA certification? But first: five companies are set to float this week, including fintech MobiKwik tomorrow and Blackstone-backed International Gemological Institute on Friday; we take stock of the surge in India’s initial public offerings.

IPO fever has seized India all year. According to S&P Global, 298 companies have gone public this year and raised Rs1.4tn ($16.6bn) in total, a 140 per cent increase from last year. Riding on this euphoria, predictions for IPOs in 2025 are off the charts. The Indian unit of consumer electronics group, LG, is planning a big offering in 2025, following in the footsteps of Hyundai, the other South Korean major that listed its Indian subsidiary this year. News reports suggest even Walmart-majority owned Flipkart is headed to the primary market next year. Each new interview with investment bankers seems to yield larger numbers of both volume and value of deals.

But colour me sceptical. Audacious optimism and animal spirits are one thing, but ground reality is quite another. Global markets are entering the new year with a whole bunch of uncertainties — the security situation in the Middle East is volatile, in Europe governments are falling like ninepins, and going by everything announced so far, Donald Trump’s presidency will keep everyone’s nerves on edge. Volatile markets aren’t the best IPO vessels, as we have seen during and in the aftermath of Covid. Even in the buoyant markets we witnessed this year, IPOs haven’t had a very smooth run. Hyundai, which was the largest offering, closed its first day in the bourses 5.73 per cent down, and the stock is still trading below its listing price. MobiKwik, which floats tomorrow, has had to cut down its issue size three times since it first started planning an IPO in 2021. The debacle that was Paytm’s listing is still fresh on everyone’s mind and unlike in the pre-Covid era, investors are quicker to punish companies that value themselves too highly.

It is in the interest of investment bankers to be optimistic about the IPO market, but I’ll be taking their projections for 2025 with a bagful of salt. If markets hold, it is likely that we will see a handful of big listings and a bunch of smaller ones. But liquidity and macroeconomic concerns will keep all exuberance in check. Companies and their bankers will have to get the timing and the valuation absolutely right. Even Bollywood cannot count on guaranteed blockbusters these days, much less capital markets.

Do you think 2025 will be a record year for IPOs? Write to me at indiabrief@ft.com.

It’s December, which means it’s the season for Spotify Wrapped. The music streaming platform published some mind-boggling stats about what users loved around the world.

A chartered financial analyst certification once granted easy entry to top investment houses, attracting high numbers of candidates hoping to get jobs in the US and Europe. But the qualification is now struggling to find takers. There were 163,000 exam registrations last year, down 40 per cent from the peak of 270,456 in 2019. In particular, the number of Chinese students taking the exam has fallen as the country’s economic downturn affected demand.

So should Indian finance aspirants be eager to take the exam? The CFA Institute expects India to be the fastest-rising market for investment professionals, growing 33 per cent in the next decade. But don’t bring out the party hats yet. The Indian education system, which tends to create technically qualified but not very well-rounded individuals, plays spoilsport here too. The report makes a cautionary note that many Indian candidates who have completed all levels of the CFA exams fall short of industry requirements because they lack soft skills. The other threat is posed by technology. As machine learning and artificial intelligence advances, many of the quantitative aspects of financial analysis can be run without human expertise. The CFA Institute is racing to stay relevant in the light of these structural changes, and it is not optimistic about “hyper growth” in the future. It does have some words of advice: If you are young and just starting out, make yourself technologically savvy, and for those in middle management, be better communicators and leaders. If you are a successful top analyst, you don’t need their advice — you have it all figured out!

— Uday Kotak, founder and director, Kotak Mahindra Bank

Each week, we invite a top Indian business leader to tell us their mantra for work and life. Want to know what your boss is thinking? Nominate them by replying to indiabrief@ft.com.

Last week, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos said he preferred meetings that are messy, that wander and run overtime. What do you think? (I’ll show my hand: meetings that deviate from the agenda drive me mad.)

Write to us at indiabrief@ft.com

Thank you for reading. India Business Briefing is edited by Tee Zhuo. Please send feedback, suggestions (and gossip) to indiabrief@ft.com.



Sixteen climate activists will call for judges to reduce their prison sentences on Wednesday in a rare mass appeal, which their supporters argue will define Britain’s approach to peaceful protest for years to come.

The Court of Appeal in London will review the jail sentences related to four separate cases given to activists from climate protest group Just Stop Oil between July and September 2024, who claim the terms were excessive and breach international human rights.

This includes a five-year term for Roger Hallam, 58, co-founder of Extinction Rebellion (XR) and JSO, for taking part in a Zoom call to plan a protest on the M25 motorway that brought the London ring road to a standstill over four days.

The two-day appeal comes as activists, lawyers and academics warn of a legislative and judicial clampdown on climate protest that has spread from the UK across western nations.

A study by academics at Bristol university last year found that environmental protesters in the UK were arrested at three times the global average rate, with 17 per cent of such protests leading to arrests compared with 6.7 per cent internationally.

The court’s ruling is being watched closely by other countries, according to Tim Crosland, an ex-government lawyer and director of Plan B, the climate-focused legal charity. “If the UK can get away with lengthy jail sentences for peaceful protest, other countries will think they can, too,” he said.

The increasingly confrontational climate protest movement, frustrated with the slow pace at which countries are addressing global warming, has drawn hundreds of thousands to marches around the world. Some groups have gained notoriety for headline-grabbing stunts, from throwing soup at works of art to breaking bank office windows.

The restrictions on protest and longer jail times across the world have sparked fears among academics and civil rights organisations of far-reaching consequences that could limit not just climate activists but the ability of any citizen to protest against any government, business or policy in the future.

The UN’s rapporteur for environmental defenders Michel Forst told the Financial Times: “Disproportionate sanctions for protests . . . have a significant adverse impact on the most fundamental freedoms.

“Not only of those who are personally criminalised for protesting, but also on every person concerned who would like to take part in protests but is deterred from doing so, by fear of being fined, tried, arrested or imprisoned for that.”

The appellants argue that their “conscientious motivation” should have been taken into account during sentencing under both common and European human rights laws, while also questioning whether throwing soup at glass is an act of violence.

The UK has been at the forefront of attempts to curb protesters, according to academics, activists and non-profits. Until the emergence of activist group XR in 2018 and later JSO and Insulate Britain, which campaigns for greater energy efficiency, the country had little history of jailing non-violent climate protesters.

Oscar Berglund, a lecturer at Bristol university and specialist on climate activism, said protesters had been “targeted because they are effective to some extent”.

The initial “great wave” of climate protests in 2019, with the emergence of XR and Fridays for Future, played a strong role in raising political and public awareness of climate change, said Andrew Firmin of Civicus, a non-profit group focused on strengthening citizen action.

The UK target to reach net zero emissions by 2050 was at least partially influenced by the climate protest movement, he said.

But critics say the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act of 2022 and the Public Order Act of 2023 have made it increasingly difficult to hold non-violent but disruptive protests, while also allowing for longer sentences.

A report led by Lord Walney, commissioned by the previous government, called for a ban on extremist protest groups, arguing the “battle against climate change [has] been hijacked” by those “determined to bypass democratic norms and cause maximum disruption to society”.

The Labour government declined to comment. Before being elected, Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer said he backed stiff sentences for climate protesters who blocked roads.

Among those appealing against their sentences this week are 78-year-old grandmother and retired teacher Gaie Delap. Last year, she was jailed for 20 months for climbing on to gantries over the M25, but later released early. Before Christmas she was recalled to prison after no electronic tag — a condition of her early release — was available to fit her wrist.

Phoebe Plummer, 23, who threw soup at the glass covering Van Gogh’s “Sunflowers”, is also appealing against her two-year sentence.

In other cases, protesters have been jailed without being found guilty of their alleged crimes. This includes 39-year-old Amy Pritchard.

During her trial for public nuisance for blocking traffic, the presiding judge banned the defendants from mentioning climate change — Pritchard defied the order, intending to explain to the jury what had motivated her actions.

While jurors failed to reach a verdict, the judge, Silas Reid, sentenced her to seven weeks in jail for contempt of court.

“There are people who say that what he did was completely . . . justified, to separate the law and motivations,” said Pritchard, but she felt the ban was “outrageous”. “For my understanding of the legal process, you go there to explain why you did what you did.”

Pritchard received another jail sentence for criminal damage last year for cracking a window at a JPMorgan office.

A report from Climate Rights International, a non-profit, in September also warned of heavy-handed treatment of climate protesters in Australia, the US, Germany, France, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Sweden.

“We are seeing this [crackdown] in global north countries that have positioned themselves internationally as climate leaders,” said Firmin. “Governments have closed down the space for protest.”

But other senior figures said there was a balance to be struck. “There is a very wide envelope within which people can protest legitimately and lawfully,” said Sir Robert Buckland, former lord chancellor and Conservative justice secretary.

“The interests of freedom of speech are very important, but so are the rights and freedoms of other people who find their lives are disrupted.”

While officials argue that the crackdown is needed to deter protesters, it is also making some activists more resolute, said Linda Lakhdhir, legal director at Climate Rights International.

“Many protesters are going to worry more, think twice . . . [but] some people will think: ‘If I have to go to jail, I will go to jail. I am doing this for the future of my children’,” she added.

That urgency has increased following the re-election of US President Donald Trump, who called climate change a hoax, said Dana Fisher, director of the Center for Environment, Community and Equity at American University. The US is the world’s largest historical emitter of greenhouse gas emissions.

“Movements actually work better when they’re pushing back against a common enemy,” she added.

Fisher said that historically social protest movements either “peter out and give up”, often as their cause becomes less of an issue, or they “radicalise until they achieve their goals”, as was seen with the suffragettes and the civil rights movement.

Just Stop Oil said the group expected more people to take to the streets as the effects of climate change became more apparent, and that Labour was not doing enough to tackle climate change.

“As the consequences play out, as farming collapses, as millions are flooded and social order breaks down, as the risk of ruin becomes apparent the number of those prepared to act to defend our traditions, heritage and hard won rights will increase,” the group said.

More than 1,000 people are expected to occupy the Strand outside the Royal Courts of Justice, where the appeal is being heard on Thursday lunchtime. Television personalities Chris Packham and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and singer-songwriter Billy Bragg are among those due to attend.

Ahead of the appeal, XR spokesperson Zoe Cohen said: “It is shameful that the new government has not yet repealed these laws and restored the right of ordinary people to effective protest. We can push back against this repression when we come together to peacefully resist.”



UK ministers are drawing up plans to subsidise electric car purchases by guaranteeing consumer loans, as they look at ways to drive up sales that remain stubbornly below official targets.

The government has opened private discussions with the auto finance sector to try to increase the availability of low-interest or interest-free loans to help boost the take-up of electric vehicles, according to government and industry figures.

One option being discussed is for the state to underwrite private sector loans to reduce the monthly repayments to help bring EV purchase costs to levels closer to petrol or diesel vehicles, the people said.

The move would be welcomed by the car industry — which has struggled to sell EVs in volumes required by government targets — and would be tantamount to an admission that the consumer subsidies scrapped in 2022 were phased out too early.

Although EVs remain more expensive to buy outright than traditional engine-driven vehicles, more than 80 per cent of the new cars in the UK are bought using finance or lease deals, according to the Finance & Leasing Association.

Carmakers have been urging ministers to introduce new demand-side measures to encourage consumers to buy more electric cars, as well as to accelerate the rollout of charging points.

Sales of EVs are growing in the UK, but remain far below official targets, and are concentrated in the company car sector, where generous tax incentives still exist.

Car manufacturers such as Volkswagen, Ford and Renault are under pressure to hit stretching targets for EV sales under the government’s “zero-emission vehicle mandate”, which requires a certain percentage of each carmakers’ annual sales to be zero-emission vehicles.

The percentage is set to rise from 28 per cent this year to 80 per cent in 2030, with companies facing fines of £15,000 for each missed vehicle.

Stellantis last year said the costs of complying with the scheme was partly behind its decision to close its Luton van factory, putting 1,100 jobs at risk, while Ford also blamed the mandate as it cut 800 UK roles last year in a wider European restructuring.

EVs accounted for 19.6 per cent of new cars sold in the UK last year, which was below the required 22 per cent target, according to figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.

The government is currently consulting the auto industry on how to improve the “arrangements and flexibilities” in the scheme to try to give manufacturers more breathing space.

Ministers are unlikely to bring back cash incentives for EV purchases because of the direct cost to the Treasury. The previous plug-in car grant scheme, which paid out £5,000 for an EV, was reduced over time and eventually scrapped in 2022 by the Conservative government.

The potential intervention on EVs comes after Labour chancellor Rachel Reeves weighed into a Supreme Court case to prevent the motor finance sector having to pay out billions in compensation to consumers.

The rise of pay-monthly deals for car purchases has transformed the country’s auto finance sector. The most popular finance deal is called a “personal contract purchase”, which is a pay-monthly scheme that sees motorists finance the value a vehicle loses over three years rather than the total cost of the car.

The collapse in used prices for electric vehicles in the past two years means that EV repayments are typically higher than for petrol cars.

Adrian Dally, FLA’s motor finance director, said zero-interest loans would not fully equalise the cost between EVs and internal combustion vehicles, but he added: “If there was a way where the government could underwrite cheaper loans . . . that would be extremely helpful.”

The impact of the scheme on the public finances will depend on how the UK decides to structure any support. Ministers hope that a change in the government’s debt target to a new measure called “public sector net financial liabilities” — that counts more assets alongside public liabilities — could help the proposal.

A Department for Transport spokesperson declined to comment on the Financial Times report, but said 2024 was a “record year for switching to electric” with 382,000 EVs sold and nearly 20,000 public chargers added to the network.

“We’re investing over £2.3bn to support industry and consumers make the switch.”



Sir Keir Starmer’s plan to agree a security pact with the EU is being blocked by French and other member states’ demands over fishing rights and a youth mobility scheme, complicating hopes of an early win in “reset” talks with Brussels.

In recent weeks, UK efforts to sign a bilateral security and defence partnership with the European Commission have met growing opposition from EU capitals that want to link it to a broader package of agreements, officials from both sides said.

A senior UK government official said: “Over the last four or five weeks it has become clear that it won’t happen without early assurances on fish and mobility. We’re back to the ‘nothing agreed until everything is agreed’ world.”

EU officials confirmed that member states, led by France, had bogged down the talks over the reset, refusing to engage on the security pact unless the UK offered guarantees on the bloc’s demands for continued fishing rights and a youth mobility deal.

“Everything is now seen as a quid pro quo,” said an EU official with knowledge of preparations for the opening reset summit that is expected in the first half of the year.

Another EU official said: “[Member states] largely expect that a form of security and defence relationship with the UK will only advance in tandem with other parts of any reset package.”

The stand-off between the two sides emerged as Starmer prepared to attend a meeting of the European Council’s 27 EU leaders on February 3, for an informal gathering in Brussels devoted to defence and security co-operation.

The meeting will be the first time a British prime minister has met with all EU leaders since Brexit.

The UK had hoped to secure the security partnership — a legally non-binding deal of a type the EU has with six countries, including Norway, South Korea and Japan — as a launch pad for other negotiations covering trade, energy and fishing.

One UK official acknowledged that fishing rights would be a knotty issue in the talks, but said: “The French are in the minority — and they’re not what they once were.”

The mooted security deal was partly prompted by widespread concern over the future of Europe’s security architecture triggered by Russia’s war against Ukraine and a US pivot towards Asia.

It envisages establishing regular dialogues between the EU high representative for foreign affairs and the UK foreign secretary, as well as high-level political agreements to work together on matters such as Ukraine, the Balkans and the Asia-Pacific.

However, the EU has been clear that any rapprochement with London must be predicated on the UK guaranteeing the same level of access to British fishing grounds as under a current deal that expires in June 2026.

“Fishing is very important and very political for some member states,” said a third EU official. “It is also a litmus test. If the UK wants a reset and it cannot compromise on a sector that is not very economically important, then why would we give anything?”

The UK Labour party has promised to “tear down the barriers” to trade with Europe, but has set “red lines” ruling out rejoining the EU single market, customs union or a return to free movement of people.

“It’s a little perplexing for the Brits to claim things are stalled when they can’t tell us exactly what they want to achieve,” said a fourth EU official. “A defence deal as a first positive signal is fine. But a positive signal for what?”

UK ambitions have until recently been limited to signing a veterinary agreement to reduce border red tape for animal and plant products, a deal for recognising professional qualifications and an accord to make it easier for touring artists to play in the EU.

However, Britain has recently signalled it may go further, within its red lines, by looking to re-link the UK and EU’s carbon markets and being open to joining the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean convention, a customs agreement between the EU and 20 countries.

The EU has made clear that a youth mobility agreement to allow for 18 to 30-year-olds to study and work in the UK — which Brussels is calling a youth experience scheme — is vital to any wider reset with the UK.

Starmer has repeatedly ruled out such a deal, saying it would contradict Labour’s election manifesto promise not to return to free movement of people that Brexit ended, but some UK ministers are privately confident a “landing zone” will be found.

The UK Cabinet Office said it would not provide a running commentary on reset talks, while noting the EU and Britain faced a common set of security challenges.

“As part of resetting our relationship with our European neighbours we continue to work towards strengthening co-operation on areas of mutual benefit, such as on security,” a spokesperson added.

A French official said the position of Paris had long been that after Brexit the UK could not “cherry pick” parts of EU policy or regulation, and added that this stance was widely shared among member states.

“Security and defence cannot be separated from the rest,” said the official, citing migration, energy, mobility and fishing as issues that also needed resolution before any security pact with the UK.

Olof Gill, a European Commission spokesman, said: “We look forward to the UK defining its priorities, including on defence and security, and will engage on that basis.”

Additional reporting by Leila Abboud



The chancellor will on Wednesday declare that the UK’s low growth “is not our destiny” in a speech pledging to bolster the country’s economic potential.

Rachel Reeves’ initiatives will include a scheme to better link the high-productivity areas of Oxford and Cambridge, alongside plans for new rail projects and reservoirs.

But the backdrop to her speech is a decidedly gloomy one, after the economy flatlined in the second half of 2024 and business confidence ebbed in the wake of tax hikes in October’s Budget.

The UK is estimated to have failed to grow in the second half of last year, after a relatively strong start to 2024. Output is likely to undershoot the Office for Budget Responsibility’s outlook for 2025 as well, with the IMF predicting an expansion of 1.6 per cent in its latest outlook.

One of the factors dragging on growth was the UK’s “very poor international trade performance”, said Andrew Wishart, economist at Berenberg, with total exports falling while they held steady in other major economies. The UK’s high production costs weighed on the export sector, he added, as companies face some of the highest electricity costs in the developed world alongside unusually big increases in labour costs.

At the same time, the leading services sector stopped contributing to overall growth. Services lifted growth at the start of 2024, with an expansion of 0.9 per cent in the first quarter, but registered no growth in the three months to September and the three months to November, the latest available data.

Alan Taylor, a member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee, has warned of “ebbing confidence” due to a “cash flow squeeze” being felt by both businesses and households, in the form of tax hikes and continued high mortgage costs.

Business groups say that elements of Labour’s Budget in October made this uninspiring picture worse.

Reeves’ decision to raise £25bn via an increase in employer national insurance contributions, coupled with a sharp increase in the national living wage, has added to employment costs and dragged sharply on business sentiment.

There are increasing signs that businesses will shed staff as they attempt to keep costs under control. The S&P Global flash purchasing managers’ survey last Friday showed the net share of businesses reducing staff numbers in January and December was the highest since the global financial crisis in 2009, apart from the start of the pandemic in 2020.

Sushil Wadhwani, a former Bank of England rate-setter, said Reeves had “lost the growth narrative” partly as a result of the tax hike on businesses, adding that the decision had also muddied the labour market outlook for the BoE as it weighs how rapidly to cut interest rates.

“This is a lot about animal spirits, and she damaged animal spirits,” said Wadhwani.

All this comes in the context of a weak longer-term picture in the UK, in particular moribund productivity. Output per hour worked for April to June 2024 decreased by 0.9 per cent compared with the same quarter a year ago, according to the ONS.

Compared with Q4 2019, before the pandemic, output per hour worked rose only by 0.8 per cent, according to the latest figures, well below the 2 per cent previously estimated. This is particularly weak compared with the US, where labour productivity rose by 8.3 per cent over the same period, buoyed by factors including strong corporate investment and a booming tech sector.

Business investment has been lacklustre, particularly during a long period of stagnation following the Brexit referendum in 2016.

In the three months to September 2024, business investment was up 5.7 per cent compared with the same period the previous year, according to official data. But it was up by the same amount in the eight years since early 2016, reflecting the lack of growth after the vote to leave the EU and the contraction during the pandemic.

This is a much weaker rate than in the US, where private non-residential fixed investment has risen by 40 per cent since 2016. And in the eight years before the Brexit referendum, UK business investment rose by about 26 per cent.

Reeves has been pledging radical changes to the UK’s planning system to unlock more infrastructure projects and housebuilding, as well as reforms to better tap into pension savings.

She has been signalling her support for a third runway at Heathrow airport to boost connectivity, alongside support for a so-called Oxford-Cambridge Arc that would bolster output in the science-rich region.

An industrial strategy focusing on key sectors including advanced manufacturing, creative industries such as film and TV, and financial services will follow in the spring.

With Donald Trump vowing to slash regulation in the US, the UK government has also been promising business it will hack away at red tape, including easing constraints on mortgage lending and a change of leadership at the competition regulator.

A new National Infrastructure and Service Transformation Authority has been announced to get to grips with endemic project delays.

Jim O’Neill, a former Treasury minister and Goldman Sachs economist, said it was critical for the chancellor to convince the private sector that the UK’s trend rate of growth can be lifted, and that meant explaining the value of her strategy to boost investment.

The poor growth rate reflects weak investment and productivity, said O’Neill. “Her framework in principle is designed to deal with that but they have to be serious about it and make sure anyone who will be a co-investor believes it.”

Wadhwani said he doubted the short-term picture would improve unless Reeves “breaks the expectation” that taxes will have to go up again given the weak state of the public finances.

Progress in lowering barriers to trade with the EU, the UK’s biggest market, would deliver a positive jolt to sentiment, he added.

Michael Saunders, of Oxford Economics, said many of Reeves’ policies on public and private investment made sense, but did not go far enough. The government needed to focus on bolstering investment in intangible assets, not just physical ones, he said.

And it was likely to run up against shortages of construction workers given the breadth of its infrastructure and housing ambitions, he added, which meant devising a convincing labour force development plan.

“A broader strategy for potential growth is needed,” he said. That means “making the case for supply-side policies that pay off over 10 to 20 years”.

Data visualisation by Keith Fray



The UK government is to cut back a hugely successful programme designed to encourage teenagers to take up higher-level maths courses, causing dismay among charities and campaign groups.

The Advanced Mathematics Support Programme, which has been running since 2018, helps state schools in England teach A-level maths, further maths and a core maths programme that provides “maths for life” skills, such as statistics and finance.

Government officials said the “difficult decision” to reduce the programme budget had been taken as Whitehall sought to address the “£22bn black hole” in the public finances Labour said it inherited from the Conservative administration.

The plan to halve the budget of the widely praised scheme from April this year was described as a retrograde step by leading maths campaigners at a time when the government was promoting its new AI and digital technology strategies as the key to the UK’s growth prospects.

Jens Marklof, president of the London Mathematical Society, said the decision to pare back the scheme would harm the chances of children from poorer areas, where schools were less likely to offer further maths A-levels needed to access higher-tier universities.

“There’s no AI without maths and if the government is really serious about its AI strategy they have to significantly scale up the support for maths education at all levels,” he said.

“The big success of AMSP was to enable kids who went to schools that didn’t offer further maths to give them this opportunity,” he added.

Sir Adrian Smith, Royal Society president, said it would be “spectacularly short-sighted to pull funding from programmes designed to support teachers and schools to deliver better maths provision”.

“Our maths education is not up to scratch — too many young people are leaving school without the skills they need for life or the well-paid jobs that will drive economic growth,” he said.

Dan Abramson, chief executive of U-Maths, the umbrella organisation for university maths schools in England and professor of mathematics education at King’s College London, said cutting the scheme risked halting two decades of progress on the take-up of maths.

“For the UK to be at the forefront of AI and the data-driven modern economy, we need excellent mathematicians from all backgrounds, and we need more of them — that means more investment, not less,” he said.

The maths scheme, which had a budget of £17mn for the period July 2022-24, was part of a programme under the previous Conservative government to boost the take up of maths in schools.

The scheme, which is delivered by the charity Mathematics Education Innovation, provided assistance to schools to teach advanced maths, including online teaching support, training teachers and help for students to prepare for university entrance exams.

It was a successor programme to the Further Mathematics Support Programme established by Labour in 2009 to increase A-level maths participation. Both programmes are widely credited with a significant increase in the number of students taking A-level maths.

Entries for maths A-level in England have risen from 64,500 in 2009 to more than 98,000 in 2024, while the number of students taking further maths increased from 9,400 to almost 17,000 over the same period.

The AMSP also drove an uptake in the core maths programme, which is offered alongside A-levels

Since 2018, the number of students in England awarded certifications in core maths, a level 3 qualification for students who have chosen not to study A-level maths, has almost doubled from 6,600 to 12,500.

The Department for Education confirmed it was making the cuts, but said it was looking for alternatives. “We are looking at all options, including other sources of funding, to make sure that the most important parts of this programme can continue,” a spokesperson added.



My partner and I got engaged over Christmas and we’re excited to begin thinking about setting a date for the wedding. My wife-to-be is an entrepreneur and last year I invested in one of her small businesses through the Seed Enterprise Investment Scheme (SEIS), to help the business grow and for the tax advantages the scheme offers. I plan to make further such investments over the coming years. However, will being married to the owner affect my eligibility to invest via SEIS? Are there any alternative venture capital schemes I could use which offer tax relief?

Guy Wilmot, partner in the corporate and commercial team at law firm Russell-Cooke, says rules around SEIS are notoriously complicated, so it is right to think about this in advance. Unfortunately, it is likely that when you are married the previous relief will be disapplied and you will not be able to make further SEIS (or EIS) investments in your fiancée’s company.

SEIS relief is not available if an investor is “connected” to the company they invest in. An investor will be treated as being connected if they, together with their associates, hold more than 30 per cent of the company’s shares or voting rights.

An associate under these rules includes a spouse, parents and grandparents, children and grandchildren. As such, for the purposes of SEIS and EIS, a married couple are treated as a single unit. If that married unit holds more than 30 per cent of the company’s shares, the relief is not available. It is worth bearing in mind that extended family members, such as aunts, uncles and even brothers and sisters, may still be eligible to invest under EIS or SEIS.

Even if the shareholdings were below the threshold, it is still highly likely that the relief would not apply because employees of a company (and their associates) are also connected with that company.

The test of whether an investor is connected to a company applies for three years after the investment is made. If the test is breached within that period, then the previous relief may be withdrawn. As your investment was made last year, a delay in the marriage of potentially more than two years might be needed to avoid withdrawal of the relief, which perhaps takes tax planning to an extreme level, but is of course a personal choice.

As you plan your future with your fiancée, one option could be to consider becoming a part owner of the business. Gifts of shares between spouses do not attract CGT and there may be suitable strategies you could consider for supporting the growth of what will soon be a family business, including use of capital allowances.

Needless to say, couples considering merging business and financial interests on marriage will probably wish to take appropriate family law advice, potentially including putting in place a suitable pre- or postnuptial agreement.

It’s natural and common for entrepreneurs to turn to friends and family when getting their business ventures off the ground. But entering into a marriage does change the nature of the relationship, not only with the entrepreneur, but also with the business.

I am 75, living with my wife. We have two daughters, the younger one living and working in London. She is hoping to buy a flat and we are trying to downsize to help her fund the purchase. I am aware of the seven-year inheritance tax (IHT) rule.

However, to reduce IHT on the estate (of less than £1mn) we are also considering putting the house into trust for the two girls. If we did that, would that make the London daughter part-owner of the house and prevent her from gaining first-time buyer privileges?

Harry Cousens, an associate in the private client and tax team at Withersworldwide, says that with regard to your inheritance tax exposure, you should be aware that everyone has a “nil rate band” of £325,000 to set against the value of their estate. Also, where a residence or interest in it is inherited by children, an additional nil rate band (the “residence nil rate band”) of £175,000 is available, in certain circumstances, where the individual downsizes and assets of an equivalent value were left on death to direct descendants. This means that on your death, it may be possible for your daughters to inherit your estate IHT-free (on the basis that your estate is still worth £1mn or less).

Nevertheless, it is understandable that you may wish to make a lifetime gift to your daughter to help her on to the property ladder. For inheritance tax purposes, a gift to your daughter will be classed as a potentially exempt transfer (Pet).

Pets can become taxable at a maximum of 40 per cent if you die within seven years of the gift, with a tapering scale if you survive the gift by more than three years. You and your wife should consider which of you (or both) should make the Pet in light of this.

However, if you were to die within seven years of the gift, as outlined above, you should have your nil rate band of £325,000 to set against the value of the gift and the residence nil rate band may provide further relief. In addition, there is the ‘annual small gift exemption’ of £3,000.

If you sell your property, this will count as a disposal for capital gains tax, but provided the property is your only home that you have lived in throughout your period of ownership, principal private residence relief would apply and no capital gains tax would be payable.

Turning to the question of a trust, whether settling your home will create a stamp duty issue for your daughters depends on the trust’s terms. If the girls have a right to occupy the property and/or receive any rental income, then this would jeopardise the availability of first-time buyers’ relief and it would also result in the additional property surcharge (now 5 per cent, following the Autumn Budget) applying to the purchase of a property by your daughters.

However, settling your property on trust is unlikely to be a good idea for other reasons. First, to the extent the property is valued higher than £650,000 (assuming both you and your wife have your full nil rate bands available), an immediate 20 per cent inheritance tax charge would apply to the creation of the trust. Second, if you continue to occupy the property you have given away, anti-avoidance provisions would apply, and the property would be treated as remaining in your estate for inheritance tax purposes.

Under current rules, with a joint estate worth less than £1mn, your daughters are unlikely to have any further inheritance tax to pay if you survive the Pet of the excess sale proceeds by seven years. The opinions in this column are intended for general information purposes only and should not be used as a substitute for professional advice. The Financial Times Ltd and the authors are not responsible for any direct or indirect result arising from any reliance placed on replies, including any loss, and exclude liability to the full extent.

Do you have a financial dilemma that you’d like FT Money’s team of professional experts to look into? Email your problem in confidence to money@ft.com.



The UK government will inject £20mn into lossmaking Anglo-Danish rocket maker Orbex, via a loan aimed at funding the company’s small launcher through to lift-off in Scotland this year.

The company said the government would “become a shareholder” as part of its latest £40mn fundraising round. However, the investment is being made via a convertible loan note.

Neither the government nor Orbex would give details of the conditions that could result in the loan converting to equity, which would leave the state owning a share of the company.

Orbex is one of two British rocket companies that has been supported by the UK government in recent years as part of its strategy to develop launch capabilities in Britain. Its decision to inject £20mn comes amid a tough fundraising environment for space tech.

In October the government hired accountancy firm PwC to investigate Orbex’s financial health and to verify that “all levers including third party financing options, will be, or have been exhausted and addressed prior to evaluation of HMG intervention options”, according to a contract notice published online.

PwC declined to comment.

The UK’s support to Orbex is happening as start-ups across Europe prepare to enter the European Launcher Challenge to develop a medium- lift rocket capable of competing with Elon Musk’s SpaceX and Blue Origin, owned by Amazon billionaire Jeff Bezos.

Last December Orbex suspended plans to develop a spaceport at Sutherland in the Scottish Highlands to focus resources on developing the Prime microlauncher, designed to launch small payloads into low Earth orbit, and a bigger rocket, Proxima, which could be a contender for the European Launcher Challenge.

Science and technology secretary Peter Kyle said the investment signalled the UK’s determination to be “a key part of the new space revolution in Europe”.

Phil Chambers, Orbex chief executive, said the UK support would be “a strong signal to other private investors, and to the European Space Agency and the EU that we’re serious about being a part of the future of European launch”.

However, a government stake in Orbex could prove controversial after the state’s failed investment in satellite start-up OneWeb.

Having paid $500mn to buy the satellite company out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2020, the UK announced plans two years later to sell its stake to French satellite group Eutelsat in return for a 11 per cent holding in the enlarged group. Eutelsat shares have lost three quarters of their value since the deal was announced.

The UK’s government’s injection of funds into Orbex represents half the £40mn the company had been hoping for in a fundraising launched last year.

In total Orbex has raised £23mn in the series D round, including investments from the Export and Investment Fund of Denmark, Octopus Ventures and private investor Sohaib Abbas.

Chambers said having the UK government as “part of the consortium will really bolster” the final fundraising efforts.

The UK’s support for Orbex will be welcomed by the UK space industry, which has criticised successive governments for a failure to develop a clear space strategy.

Ian Annett, former deputy chief executive of the UK Space Agency and now an independent consultant in the industry, said he supported the investment. “It is a clear signal of the intention to support a competitive launch industry within Europe,” he said. “Having assured access to space, whether for security, economic prosperity or science, will be an important asset for the UK.”

In 2023, the latest year for which accounts are available, Orbex reported pre-tax losses more than doubled to £17.2mn. The company has raised a total of £129mn in public and private funding since it was founded in 2015.



Chancellor Rachel Reeves will promise to go “further and faster” to kick-start the UK economy in a major speech on Wednesday, as she tries to convince business that the government is committed to driving growth.

Reeves will signal she is prepared to have a “fight” with opponents — including environmentalists — who stand in the way of the government’s planning reforms.

The chancellor is under pressure to reassure companies and investors after her tax-raising Budget in October, the government’s package of employment reforms, and a rise in gilt yields amid fears about stagflation.

Reeves will confirm that the government is reviving plans for an “Oxford-Cambridge growth corridor” as part of a broader push to liberalise the planning regime and ensure more homes are built.

The chancellor will also emphasise progress on an industrial strategy and signal her support for airport expansion in Greater London.

“For too long we have accepted low expectations, accepted stagnation,” Reeves will say in her speech. “Low growth is not our destiny. But growth will not come without a fight.”

In an article for The Times, Sir Keir Starmer likened his government to Margaret Thatcher’s as he promised deregulation to boost growth.

The prime minister complained about a “morass of regulation that effectively bans billions of pounds more of investment from flowing into Britain”, adding that the government will “kick down the barriers to building, clear out the regulatory weeds and allow a new era of British growth to bloom”.

The UK economy expanded by 0.1 per cent in November, following 0.1 per cent contractions in both October and September, according to official data.

The Oxford-Cambridge arc would involve new transport links and housing between Britain’s two foremost university cities. It was shelved three years ago by then-Conservative prime minister Boris Johnson.

Reeves will highlight plans for a 4,500-home development around Cambridge and praise Cambridge university’s proposal to build an innovation hub.

The chancellor has stepped up her pro-growth rhetoric in recent months, ordering Whitehall departments and regulators to prioritise policies that will deliver economic benefits.

On Tuesday Starmer promised to “hardwire growth into all decisions in the cabinet” during a meeting with Reeves and senior executives in the City of London.

Downing Street confirmed a change to the Whitehall “write round” process, under which cabinet members are consulted on new policies, meaning ministers will have to set out new policies’ “growth credentials”.

In March, the government will unveil a planning and infrastructure bill to block protesters from using multiple judicial reviews, and to erode the power of environmental quangos to delay big housebuilding schemes.

The proposed legislation, along with Reeves’ enthusiasm for a third runway at Heathrow airport, has prompted jitters among some green groups.

Shaun Spiers, executive director of the Green Alliance, said Reeves’ speech looked set to “take a wrecking ball” to relations between the government and the environmental movement.

“Far from building the partnership needed to deliver the genuine programme of economic and social renewal at the heart of the clean power and growth missions, the government seems intent on torching a core part of its political coalition in pursuit of a series of high-risk, high-carbon, but ultimately, low-return projects,” he added.

Transport secretary Heidi Alexander is expected to approve expansions at both Luton and Gatwick airports before the spring in a quasi-judicial process.

Heathrow is still waiting for clear political support before it submits its application — potentially before the end of the year — to proceed with the third runway.

Expanding Heathrow was previously opposed by eight current cabinet members including Starmer himself.

Climate change secretary Ed Miliband is a long-standing opponent, but has indicated he would not resign from the cabinet.

But several backbench Labour MPs with west London constituencies criticised the potential expansion in the House of Commons on Tuesday.

A report published on Wednesday by the Good Growth Foundation, a new think-tank run by Praful Nargund , former Labour candidate for Islington North, will warn that lifting GDP will not be enough to keep voters happy.

“The cost of living is voters’ primary focus . . . success looks like ending the crisis and increasing disposable income,” the report will say. “The public must see the economy growing in a way that benefits them.”



UK defence secretary John Healey has told universities to ensure the safety of defence companies attending careers fairs amid rising industry fears over harassment from protesters.

Healey said companies were facing “harassment and intimidation”, with many forced to cancel events on campus.

“This is wrong. This attitude takes for granted the privileged position we enjoy in Britain — to live in freedom and security . . . security our defence industry guarantees,” he told an industry audience on Tuesday evening.

Healey said that, together with business secretary Jonathan Reynolds and education secretary Bridget Phillipson, he had written to Universities UK, the main sector lobby group, to demand assurances for companies’ safety.

The move comes after it emerged that several defence groups had been forced to withdraw from careers fairs in recent months after being advised to cancel over security concerns.

The scale of the protests had affected companies’ recruitment plans by putting potential recruits off a career in defence, said one industry executive. The situation risked exacerbating an industry-wide skills shortage, they added.

Britain’s aerospace and defence sector directly employs 164,000 people with an average salary of £39,900 — 14 per cent higher than the UK average.

While the war in Ukraine and suspected Russian and Chinese sabotage of deep sea cables in Europe have underlined the importance of defence resilience, industry executives believe the sector continues to lack wider support.

Anti-war protesters have stepped up their activities against the sector in recent months, notably in the wake of the Israel-Gaza conflict. Sites owned by BAE Systems and the UK arm of Italy’s Leonardo came under attack several times last year.

Defence companies were being ranked alongside tobacco and gambling in environmental, social and governance audits, said Healey, adding that pension funds were also divesting from the sector. While he had no doubt the intentions were “well meaning . . . they are fundamentally flawed”, he said.

“We don’t stop wars by boycotting our defence industry. We stop wars by backing it,” said Healey, adding that national security was a precondition for “economic security, investor confidence and social stability”.

Universities UK said it had recently convened vice-chancellors as well as university security staff to discuss “how best to ensure those students who wish [to] consider careers in the defence sector have the chance to do so, safely”.

Universities, it added, had a “vital role to play enabling all the key industries in the industrial strategy, including defence, to succeed, whether through the skilled graduates they teach or the research and innovation they pioneer”.



Lord Peter Mandelson is set to be confirmed as Britain’s ambassador to Washington, said multiple people familiar with the matter.

The US has approved in principle the Labour peer’s appointment, a key condition of him becoming taking up the post, they said.

Mandelson, a former government minister, is expected to travel to Washington to take up the post early next month, the people added.

In recent days he received “Agrément” from the US government to serve as the UK’s chief representative, which means he is unlikely to be blocked by Donald Trump’s administration even though the diplomatic process is still ongoing.

Good relations between the two nations are crucial at a time when Trump has threatened to impose tariffs on global imports, and has been overtly critical of Europe, especially on defence spending. The president recently praised Sir Keir Starmer, saying the UK prime minister had done a “very good job so far”.

The diplomatic process has been expedited to allow Mandelson to get started swiftly at the beginning of the new Trump administration, overriding the usual timeframe for approvals.

A recent precedent went in the other direction; the UK government sped up its approval of Jane Hartley — Joe Biden’s pick for US ambassador to the UK — in the summer of 2022 in order to allow her to attend the late Queen Elizabeth’s platinum jubilee festivities.

The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Downing Street declined to comment.

Starmer’s choice of Mandelson as ambassador has not been uncontroversial in Trump’s circle and the wider Republican party, in part because of his past business links to China.

Chris LaCivita, a senior campaign adviser to Trump, called the former cabinet minister an “absolute moron” last month, questioning why the UK government was installing him to replace a “professional universally respected ambo”, a reference to the outgoing UK representative Dame Karen Pierce.

She has been touted as a “Trump whisperer” for the close bridges she built with his team, which helped facilitate a phone call between the president and Starmer last July following an assassination attempt on Trump, as well as a trip by then-UK foreign secretary Lord David Cameron to Mar-a-Lago last April.

Mandelson will still hold shares in the lobbying firm he co-founded as he takes up his new post as the UK’s ambassador in Washington, despite the company’s work for Chinese clients such as TikTok, the Financial Times revealed earlier this month.

He is expected to sell his stake in Global Counsel over time but has not set a deadline for fully divesting.

Several US senators unhappy about Mandelson’s appointment on Tuesday handed a document to the FBI detailing his connections with China, according to Australian news website The Nightly.

The document, seen by the FT, was a compilation of open source information pulled from the Chinese internet and was drawn up by the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, a cross-party group of global lawmakers concerned about Beijing.

Mandelson will have an important role in trying to protect the UK from US tariffs, as well as handle potentially contentious issues such as the proposed deal on the future of the Chagos Islands, which are home to a crucial joint UK-US military base.

In their first phone call on Monday night, UK foreign secretary David Lammy and US secretary of state Marco Rubio discussed the proposed deal between Britain and Mauritius about the Indian Ocean archipelago, despite the subject not appearing in official readouts from the UK foreign office or US state department, said people familiar with the conversation.

While Rubio has been critical of the deal in the past, the UK and the US governments have both stressed the importance of protecting the military base on Diego Garcia in the long term.



The UK antitrust regulator has singled out Microsoft for using its dominance in software to stifle rivals in the £9bn UK cloud services market, as the watchdog warned competition “is not working”.

An independent panel acting for the Competition and Markets Authority said on Tuesday that a lack of competition in cloud services was “likely to be leading to higher costs, less choice, less innovation and lower quality of service for businesses and organisations”.

“Microsoft is using its strong position in software to make it harder for Amazon Web Services and Google to compete effectively for cloud customers that wish to use Microsoft software on the cloud,” the panel said in its provisional decision.

It also recommended the CMA use its new powers under the digital markets regime to decide whether Amazon and Microsoft should receive “strategic market status” as a result of their influence in the area.

Under new legislation, which came into force this month, the UK regulator can designate a small group of companies as having such status and impose certain conduct requirements to try to increase competition.

The decision comes as the CMA is under intense pressure from the government to show it is promoting growth, as Labour attempts to increase business investment in the UK. In an unexpected move last week, CMA chair Marcus Bokkerink was ousted by business secretary Jonathan Reynolds and replaced with former Amazon UK head Doug Gurr.

Writing in the Financial Times on Tuesday, Gurr said the agency would look to speed up its investigations to try to unlock greater investment in the country and bring in greater sector expertise so that businesses did not have to waste time educating the regulator about the industry.

The cloud services investigation has been continuing in various forms for more than two years. Ofcom opened a market study in October 2022 and published an interim report before referring it to the CMA a year later.

The CMA inquiry group said a general lack of competition was interfering with customers’ ability “to switch cloud provider or use multiple clouds, which may ultimately impact the price and quality of cloud services”.

Amazon and Microsoft are the two largest providers of cloud services, each with a share of up to 40 per cent of UK customer spend, followed by Google.

Rima Alaily, Microsoft’s deputy general counsel and head of its competition law group, said in a statement that the report “should be focused on paving the way for the UK’s AI-powered future, not fixating on legacy products launched in the last century”.

“The cloud computing market has never been so dynamic and competitive, attracting billions in investments, new entrants and rapid innovation. What could be better for UK businesses and government?” added Alaily.

Amazon Web Services said the CMA’s proposed intervention was “not warranted” and urged the agency to “carefully consider how regulatory intervention in other areas will stifle innovation and ultimately harm customers in the UK”.

“The evidence demonstrates the IT services industry is highly competitive,” AWS said. “Cloud computing has lowered costs for UK businesses with on-demand services and pay-as-you-go pricing, expanded product choice, and increased competition and innovation.”

Chris Lindsay, Google Cloud’s vice-president for customer engineering in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, said: “Restrictive licensing harms UK cloud customers, threatens economic progress and stifles innovation, and we are encouraged that the CMA has recognised the harm of these practices.”

The CMA must publish a final decision by August 4.



A pioneer of the listed law firm model in the UK has suspended trading in its shares and said it was unlikely to find the funding required to secure its future, following long-running disputes among its management.

RBG Holdings, which owns the law firms Rosenblatt and Memery Crystal, said on Tuesday that it had suspended trading on London’s Aim market after a “lack of progress regarding the various strategic options explored” to find the required funding.

RBG was among the first law firm groups in the UK to go public after the Legal Services Act opened the sector in 2011 and allowed law firms — traditionally structured as partnerships — to accept outside investment or float on the stock market. Midlands firm Gateley became the first to list in 2015, with RBG following suit in 2018.

The announcement signals an end to a turbulent period at the law firm group, whose shares have plummeted amid sinking revenues and management bust-ups. Rosenblatt founder Ian Rosenblatt attempted to oust RBG’s chief executive and two non-executive directors shortly before Christmas.

The group said this month that it had terminated Rosenblatt’s consultancy agreement with the firm because of alleged breaches and “offensive behaviour unbecoming of a solicitor and consultant to RBG”, which related to its understanding of Rosenblatt’s acquisition of another firm. However, RBG put out a statement days later correcting that understanding, and entered into a new agreement with Rosenblatt.

Rosenblatt did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

When the Legal Services Act came into force more than a decade ago it was dubbed the legal sector’s “Big Bang” and expected to overhaul the traditional law firm model that had been in place for centuries. However, there has been limited take-up, and some firms have subsequently delisted.

DWF, which was also among the first firms to go public, was taken private at the end of 2023 by private equity firm Inflexion. While there has been a lack of appetite for listings, private equity groups have been taking advantage of the fact law firms can now take external investments with a string of bets on the legal industry in recent years.

The developments come as KPMG is now attempting to prise open the US legal market to alternative business models, using an Arizona programme that allows non-lawyers to own law practices.



The UK’s population will rise by about 5mn to 72.5mn in the decade to 2032, according to new data, driven by more international migration than previously projected.

Over the 10 years to mid-2032, the population is projected to rise by 4.9mn, or 7.3 per cent, from an estimated 67.6mn to 72.5mn, the Office for National Statistics said on Tuesday.

The increase is projected to come entirely from net migration, while the natural change — the difference between births and deaths — is projected to be about zero.

The ONS said it now believed long-term international migration would be greater than in previous projections. Its latest forecasts also assume lower fertility and an increase in life expectancy.

The number of working-age people is projected to increase by 4.1mn, or 9.4 per cent, from 43.2mn to 47.3mn, over the same period.

Adam Corlett, principal economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “A larger working-age population means a bigger economy, more workers and higher tax receipts, which should deliver a fiscal boost of around £5bn a year by the end of the decade. If the OBR [Office for Budget Responsibility] uses these population projections, this will be welcome news for the chancellor given the wider economic pressures she is facing.”

James Robards of the ONS said the projections were “based on current and past trends, and aren’t forecasts about what may or may not happen in the future”.

He said the latest projections also highlighted an increasingly ageing population, with the number of people aged over 85 projected to nearly double to 3.3mn by 2047. “This is in part because of the ageing of the baby boom generation, as well as general increases in life expectancy,” Robards said.

The ONS clarifies that national population projections are not forecasts and do not directly account for recent and future policy or economic changes. They are based on an assumption of long-term net international migration of 340,000 people a year from mid-2028 onwards, up from previous projections of 315,000.

Jonathan Portes, professor of economics and public policy at King’s College London, said: “These projections are almost certainly overstated since they do not appear to take account of the sharp fall in net migration that is already under way, as we know from the separate statistics on visas issued.”

ONS figures published last November showed net migration to the UK exceeded 900,000 in the year to June 2023, the highest annual total on record, but fell by 20 per cent in the 12 months to June 2024.

Portes added that the ONS figures published on Tuesday assumed that fertility would stabilise “whereas in recent years it has been falling significantly”. The ONS now assumes a long-term fertility rate of 1.45, down from 1.59 in the previous projections.

The latest figures showed that the fertility rate in England and Wales fell to 1.44 children per woman in 2023, the lowest since comparable data began in 1938.

The number of children aged under 15 years is projected to decrease by 797,000, from 12.4mn to 11.6mn, by mid-2032, according to the ONS.

On the other hand, the number of people of pensionable age is projected to increase by 1.7mn over the same period, or 14 per cent, from 12.0mn to 13.7mn, taking into account the planned increases in state pension age to 67 years for both sexes.

The UK’s projected population growth contrasts with the population already shrinking in many countries, including Italy, Japan, and China. The German population is also expected to start shrinking in the next few years, according to UN population forecasts.

In the outlook to 2047, the ONS said that “net migration is projected to be the only source of population growth in the UK over the next 25 years”.



Running trains between Oxford and Cambridge to create a bigger research and development hub — as per plans revived by the UK government — is one way to foster economic growth. Easing the path for universities to spin out their innovations into business opportunities would be even smarter.

True, the UK beats its European peers when it comes to commercialising research birthed in university labs. The country’s universities have spawned more than 2,000 spinouts since 2011, according to the Royal Academy of Engineering. Stars include Carbon Re, an industrial artificial intelligence company, spun out of Cambridge and University College London.

But the path from ivory towers to commercialisation is fraught. Last year’s equity investment of £2.6bn, according to the Royal Academy of Engineering, ended a two-year decline but is still below the 2021 peak. That’s about a 10th of the equity raised in the UK capital markets.

Clearer ground rules would help. Universities, founders and investors clash frequently. All would agree that value resides in intellectual property, but where the IP itself resides is a knottier issue. At Cambridge, the university gets first dibs. Compare that with Sweden’s Uppsala University, which usually confers ownership on the originator. One case, involving the University of Oxford, wound up in court.

That is just one hurdle. Extricating spinouts can be laborious; academia moves slowly. As the UK government’s 2023 review noted, panels are composed of committees that only meet irregularly and lack commercial experts. The average spinout took 10-12 months; for 16 per cent it was more than 16 months.

Universities are reluctant to cede much of their innovations: one in four spinouts began negotiations demanding a 50 per cent equity stake. Investors balk at being accorded just crumbs. This is improving — the average university equity stake at spinout fell to 18 per cent in 2023, from 25 per cent a decade ago — but there is scope for further loosening of the reins.

Attracting and retaining human capital is a priority, and the UK is not alone in finding this challenging. Even the US, start-up central, is seeing STEM brains return to China; blockchain researcher Chen Jing is just the latest to forsake the US for Beijing’s Tsinghua University.

Structural challenges remain for the UK. Many universities are broke; nearly all lack the generous endowments that buoy the coffers of US institutions. There are limits to the amount of money that can be poured into the type of research projects that could be spun out.

But innovation is flourishing in the country’s seats of learning, as is the government will to overcome constraints. Add in the trains and the UK just might have found a recipe for growth.

louise.lucas@ft.com

Letter in response to this article:

Thriv­ing uni­versity spin­outs must not be an Oxbridge pre­serve / From Professor Nick Jennings, Vice-Chancellor & President, Loughborough University



Good morning. DeepSeek, a small Chinese artificial intelligence lab, has stunned the world and sent US tech stocks tumbling after unveiling its new R1 reasoning model. Its cheaper cost than rivals has called into question the business model of some of the big early players in AI.

But those lower overheads are good news for governments — including that of Keir Starmer — hoping that AI will allow them to trim the costs of public administration. If there is “no moat” in AI then governments stand to save money on paying for staff without having to lose the same money to high costs for one company’s large language model or another.

Ministers in the previous government of Rishi Sunak and that of Starmer rave about some private companies and the products they make. But Sunak recognised, rightly, that government needed to build its own sovereign capacity in AI, hence the thing likely to be his biggest positive legacy to the UK: the Incubator for Artificial Intelligence (i.AI). The AI unit in the Cabinet Office was launched in November 2023 in the hopes of expediting how information was compiled from different departments and allowing officials to make faster decisions. DeepSeek’s success is a positive indicator for the UK and for all governments that want to do the same.

In addition to costs, the development in AI will also involve some big cultural changes in government. Some thoughts on one of them in today’s note.

Last week, the government unveiled a series of new tools that, it says, will make government run faster for less. Consult is designed to use AI to reduce the cost of running consultations with stakeholders by cutting the time allocated to a civil service task that ordinarily requires hours and hours. Ministers launch about 700-800 consultations a year. Parlex and Lex (no, not that Lex) both support in researching legislation but also model how MPs might react to a policy issue.

All of these and more are designed to do the same thing: reduce the amount of time the civil service spends on administrative tasks that do not require a human brain and reduce the amount of policy work that gets done on projects that will never be signed off by a special adviser or a minister.

Although such technology is new, the spin is very, very old in that these are all the fruits of things that Sunak established as prime minister. Taking advantage of the good things your predecessor did is a long-standing political trick. The tools are also pretty much all in either alpha (ie “we aren’t sure if this works”) or beta stage (ie “we don’t know how much help it actually is now we’ve got it to work”).

Part of seizing the benefits of AI and digital government more broadly is transparency about what you’re doing, why you’re doing it and what is working and isn’t. And one of the unalloyed positives about digital government in the UK has been the capacity to not only publish data on the outcomes of government efforts but also to show its working.

A good thing about i.AI is that it has had a long history of failures: if you are not failing most of the time you either a) aren’t really innovating or b) aren’t being transparent about what you are doing or, worst of all c) you are releasing a lot of projects for public use that don’t work to save face.

There’s an inevitable tension here that goes right to the heart of why governments are less nimble than private companies. As a taxpayer I want both national and local government to innovate, experiment, and be prepared to get things wrong to deliver better public services. As someone who uses public services, I want those services to work first time.

And governments of all stripes are incentivised not to fail publicly, even at development stage. As a result, government programmes are often “doomed to succeed”: something that is announced, whether as an old-fashioned pilot programme or a newfangled beta test, is incentivised to progress to a proper rollout. That’s because governments are beaten up for failing.

The negative headlines arising from the government’s difficulties in getting AI models that actually work in the Department for Work and Pensions are a case in point (as reported by Robert Booth over at the Guardian). My concern here isn’t that the government has had many unsuccessful pilots: that is a good thing, and part of government seizing the benefits of AI is going to be trying things at pilot stage that don’t work. My worry is that the story emerged through a freedom of information request. Government needs to shake off its old, old addiction to failing in secrecy if it is going to get the benefits both of sharing knowledge about how AI works with households and businesses, and for us to trust how governments use AI.

This week, I mostly listened to Emma Rawicz’s Chroma while writing my column.



Sir Keir Starmer has promised to “hard wire growth into all decisions in the cabinet”, as he set out what he called a new approach to policymaking at a meeting with senior executives in the City of London.

Downing Street said that in future all cabinet ministers would have to “set out the growth credentials of new policies in order to get approval from their cabinet colleagues”.

The “growth impact of proposals will be subject to the same rigorous assessment that already applies to new public spending”, No 10 added.

Starmer’s change to the Whitehall “write round” process for cabinet decisions — in which cabinet ministers are consulted on new policies — is intended to focus attention on the growth potential of new policies.

“Everything has to be seen through the question of whether it is pro-growth,” Starmer told business executives on Tuesday morning.

The message came as chancellor Rachel Reeves prepared to give a speech on growth on Wednesday in which she will signal support for a third runway at Heathrow airport, a policy previously opposed by senior cabinet members, as well as the prime minister himself.

Starmer and Reeves on Tuesday met executives in the City of London, where both adopted a notably bullish tone on the prospects for the British economy, in stark contrast to their gloomy rhetoric last year.

Business leaders had warned that Reeves’ insistence that she had been handed by the Conservatives “the worst economic inheritance” of any UK government since the second world war had sucked confidence out of the economy.

They have also criticised the Labour government for introducing measures that executives say will hit growth, including a £25bn national insurance increase on employers and new labour laws.

At a round-table breakfast, Reeves adopted a markedly more bullish tone than last year. “It’s the role of government to shout about all the amazing things we are doing as a country,” she said.

“We want to partner with you in business to showcase all the great things we have going for us,” she added.

Reeves will use her speech on Wednesday to promise to go “further and faster” on growth, including greenlighting airport expansion in the south-east, a move that has caused unrest in Labour circles.

In the last House of Commons vote on a third runway at Heathrow in 2018, seven members of the current cabinet voted against it, including Starmer. The others were Ed Miliband, Steve Reed, Lisa Nandy, Darren Jones, Anneliese Dodds and Hilary Benn.

Miliband, climate change secretary, has previously strongly opposed Heathrow’s expansion, but has indicated he will not resign from the cabinet over the new policy.

Reeves told Labour MPs on Monday evening to back the government’s growth agenda, in spite of nervousness on the left of the party that she was neglecting consumer interests and getting too close to big business.

Meanwhile, the chancellor will also promise on Wednesday to simplify the planning system and confirm plans to relax rules over the release of some of the £160bn surplus in defined benefit pension schemes.

Corporate leaders at the City meeting included Charlie Nunn of Lloyds Banking Group, Marco Amitrano of PwC, Jennie Daly of Taylor Wimpey and Paul Golding of Pinewood.

Last week, a PwC survey of chief executives conducted in October and early November — mostly before Labour’s tax-raising October 30 Budget — found that Britain was the second most attractive country for investment behind the US.

Golding told reporters that his film production company would be able to ride out recent government increases in national insurance contributions and new employment laws, but urged Reeves not to increase business rates.

“Don’t tinker — steady as she goes,” he said. “The last thing we want is to see business rates deter investment into the industry.”



Why do we seek to understand what drives acts of extreme violence? One answer is that these acts shake our sense of what it means to be human. That Axel Rudakubana could murder three young girls at a Taylor Swift-themed dance class in Southport last year, or that Salman Abedi could blow himself up at a Ariana Grande concert in Manchester in 2017, killing 22 people, many of them children, is incomprehensible to most of us. That someone could set out one day with the intent to murder and kill isn’t something we can get our heads around.

Abedi’s horrific crimes are no easier to justify but they are, I think, easier to categorise and explain. Abedi was a jihadist extremist who believed that his murders would advance his cause. He was a man who convinced himself that his ends justified his violent and heinous means. Rudakubana is harder to understand: for him, his violent means were his ends. The Southport murders are shocking in part because we can’t categorise them.

Rudakubana confounds us because he is beyond our imagination. I think we can all imagine what it would be to be a fanatic. We all believe in something and we can at least conceive of, if not fully understand, what it means to be willing to kill the innocent in the service of an idea. We can imagine, too, what it might mean to lose our reason and to commit horrific crimes due to a psychotic break.

The idea of someone first convincing themselves of the rightness of their cause online and then turning to violent means to advance it does not lie beyond our comprehension. But we struggle to understand someone for whom viewing violent acts online is in itself a source of motivation — a person who could view the horrors of the world and decide that they wanted to add to them simply because of a fascination with violence.

Categorising extreme violence is also how governments degrade, undermine and defeat those who wish to commit it. In the UK, where Islamist extremism makes up 75 per cent of the counterterror caseload in Great Britain (together with a growing threat from the extreme right), understanding the ideologies that drive or justify acts of extreme violence is part of how we stop them. Doing so helps us decide when events might require extra security, or which individuals might need enhanced monitoring. It tells us where they might attack, and it helps our security services infiltrate and undermine organised terrorism.

That is part of how MI5 and the police have managed to foil 43 “late stage” terror plots since 2017. It is also how Prevent, another strand in the UK’s counterterrorism strategy, has diverted many more away from the cause of terrorism.

But it is much harder to work out how to tackle and stop someone like Rudakubana who commits violent acts seemingly for violence’s sake. His motivations are still further from our own than those of someone who commits horrific acts for an ideological reason.

So some — not least the UK prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer — think that the way to deal with what Christopher Wray, former director of the FBI, dubbed “salad bar extremism”, a pick and mix of incomprehensible rationales and ideological justifications for extreme violence, is to change the state’s definition of terrorism. How a state, particularly a liberal democracy, defines terrorism matters because states sometimes use that definition to suspend some or all of the safeguards that define liberal democracies in the first place. But as Jonathan Hall, the UK’s independent reviewer, has argued persuasively in these pages, one effect of expanding the definition of terrorism would be to significantly increase the number of areas in which we reduce and curtail the rights of individuals.

What really matters is not how the British state has categorised Islamist extremism and the extreme right, but its understanding of what drives them — what their centres of power are and how to undermine them. Such an understanding is what has allowed the security services to defeat extreme animal rights activists, whose activities used to blight and terrorise scientific researchers.

To defeat violence for violence’s sake, we need to understand what drives it in the way that we have at least begun to understand ideologically and religiously-driven acts of extreme violence. As strange and alien as extreme violence seems to us, we have to find a way to make it comprehensible if we are to protect ourselves from it. Although it will always remain hard for us to understand the acts of extremists, it is only through deeper understanding that we will be able to find greater security.

stephen.bush@ft.com



The UK’s competition regulator will speed up its investigations in order to try to unlock greater investment into the country, the newly installed chair of the regulator has said.

Writing in the Financial Times, Doug Gurr said the agency would make its merger and market investigations “as simple and rapid as possible”.

The CMA will also bring in greater sector expertise so that businesses do not have to waste time educating the regulator about their industry.

“We know it costs businesses when they have to deal with lengthy and uncertain investigations,” he said. “Good decisions, clear decisions, rapid decisions — that’s what you tell us you need and that’s on us to deliver.”

Gurr, the former head of Amazon UK, was named as the Competition and Markets Authority’s interim chair last week, after former chair Marcus Bokkerink was ousted by ministers.

He wrote that “a regulatory environment that encourages the greatest possible level of business investment” would be the agency’s new “north star”, while also stressing the need to protect consumers.

Gurr ran Amazon’s British operations during the tech group’s tussle with the CMA over its minority investment in Deliveroo and is expected to take a more friendly approach towards business.

The CMA was previously criticised for being too interventionist, with its delay in approving Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision seen as damaging the UK’s standing internationally.

“Last year, the UK again delivered the lowest level of business investment in the G7. This has been true for far too long,” wrote Gurr. “We want both domestic and international businesses to see the UK as a great place to invest.”

He added: “This means giving start-ups and venture backers the confidence to launch their businesses here, not elsewhere in the world. It means encouraging multinationals — who have a pretty much free choice to place their investments anywhere in the [Europe, Middle East and Africa] timezone — to choose the UK.”

Gurr was called by the government about the role shortly before Bokkerink was ousted last week. He has been appointed as interim chair for up to 18 months following the sudden departure.

As well as his CMA role, which is part time, he is the director of the Natural History Museum and chair of the Alan Turing Institute. In order to take up the CMA position he resigned from roles at UK Biobank, Genomics England and Permira.

He and CMA chief executive Sarah Cardell will on Tuesday host the CMA’s new “growth and investment council”, which features representative groups such as the CBI, to discuss the agency’s draft annual plan, which was published earlier this month before Bokkerink’s resignation.

The events of the past week have raised questions about whether the CMA’s draft annual plan, which already mentions ‘growth’ 111 times, will be overhauled to better align with the government’s objectives.

A finalised plan is expected to be published in March after the agency has been given its “strategic steer”, a document setting out the government’s expectations for the regulator.

The CMA is also looking to cut 10 per cent of staff, which it blamed last week on a “budgeting issue”.



Sir Keir Starmer is looking to relink the UK and EU emission trading schemes in a sign of the prime minister becoming more ambitious over his “reset” of relations with Brussels ahead of a key meeting next week.

On February 3 Starmer will become the first British leader since Brexit to attend a meeting of the European Council’s 27 EU leaders, an informal gathering in Brussels devoted to defence and security co-operation.

With a planned EU-UK summit in the spring to discuss a wider review of post-Brexit relations, Starmer and his ministers are discussing new ways of building co-operation with Britain’s biggest trading partner.

Since Brexit, when the EU and UK separated their carbon markets, UK permits have traded at a significant discount to those traded in the EU.

Relinking the schemes would deepen the liquidity of both markets and help both sides with the transition to net zero, according to consultancy Frontier Economics.

It would also make it possible to avoid border frictions caused by the EU and UK imposing carbon border adjustment mechanisms (CBAMs), a tax on carbon-intensive imports such as steel, cement and fertiliser.

Two EU officials with knowledge of the discussion said the UK had requested that ETS linkage and CBAMs be included on the agenda for the spring summit, expected in March or April.

Last week Nick Thomas-Symonds, Cabinet Office minister overseeing the reset discussions, said Britain would look to link to the EU’s emissions trading scheme to avoid disruption to UK business.

He told the House of Commons business and trade committee: “Linking our respective systems is absolutely what the ambition is.”

Meanwhile, chancellor Rachel Reeves signalled on Sunday that Britain would consider joining an EU customs framework with neighbouring countries. She has also supported Britain aligning permanently with EU rules in established industries such as chemicals.

She said she was “absolutely happy” to look at the idea of Britain joining the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean convention, a customs agreement between the EU and 20 countries, including in the Middle East and Balkans.

It comes as EU diplomats warned that unless Starmer showed more ambition, his reset would do little to boost the UK economy. “None of this would have any impact on growth,” said one.

Labour’s general election manifesto last year ruled out Britain rejoining the single market, customs union or adopting free movement, but Starmer and Reeves are now looking to show that the reset can yield economic gains.

One senior UK government official said: “British business wants to avoid any kind of cliff edge or extra costs. We are looking for win-win solutions to build confidence and relinking our carbon markets falls into that category.”

The UK government has been under mounting pressure from industry to announce it will align its ETS scheme with that of the EU in order to remove additional border bureaucracy. There are also growing concerns, for example in the steel industry, about the impact of a decision to introduce the UK’s CBAM in 2027 — a full year later than the EU tax.

Adam Berman, director of policy at lobby group Energy UK, said relinking the UK and EU carbon markets was “the only solution that protects British industry from the incoming EU CBAM. Divergence for the sake of divergence won’t do anything to bring down energy bills or make British businesses more competitive — problems that ETS linkage can help to solve.”

A government spokesperson said: “Under the terms of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement, the UK government and EU agreed to consider linking our respective carbon pricing schemes and to co-operate on carbon pricing.”

But the issue is likely to be the subject of a difficult negotiation. A leaked internal document setting out the EU’s negotiating positions last month said the majority of EU states were open to linkage, but on condition that the UK submitted to “full dynamic alignment” with EU law, which would require the UK to replicate relevant EU legislation on the UK statute book.

Donald Trump’s administration has indicated it views carbon border taxes as discriminatory and that they could be subject to retaliation under plans the US president has ordered to be drawn up “within 60 days”.

Sir Ed Davey, Liberal Democrat leader, has urged Starmer to be more ambitious with his UK-EU reset, and wants Britain to rejoin the customs union.

“It is clear they are ready to talk seriously, they are worried about Trump too,” he told the Financial Times. “This is the moment for Labour to take a risk, be ambitious and go for a deal that can actually jump-start the economy.”

Labour’s manifesto set out limited ambitions for a reset, including a deal to facilitate trade in animal and plant products, the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and a deal to allow UK artists to tour freely across the EU.

Brussels will demand a number of concessions from the UK in exchange for any deal, including continued access to British fishing waters. “There’s nothing without fish,” said one EU official.

The EU is also demanding a bilateral “youth experience scheme” to allow under-30s to be able to travel and work in the UK and the bloc. Starmer has promised not to reintroduce free movement, but British officials believe some kind of compromise may be possible.

Andrew Griffith, Conservative shadow business secretary, said: “We must avoid undoing Brexit by the back door by aligning with the EU’s low growth model.”



The writer is interim chair of the Competition and Markets Authority

The UK government has set out economic growth as its top priority and has done so for good and sound reasons. Without growth, there is no money to support the rebuilding of our vital public services and no prosperity for hardworking people and families.

But what drives growth? And how can a regulator like the CMA play a part? Well, we know that dynamic, competitive markets drive growth. But another thing we know for sure is that business investment drives growth and that here in the UK we struggle with business investment.

Last year, the UK again delivered the lowest level of business investment in the G7. This has been true for far too long. And this is where the CMA comes in — because in my experience, there are many factors in any investment decision but a big one is confidence in a stable, coherent and well-informed regulatory environment.

This is our north star: a regulatory environment that encourages the greatest possible level of business investment, subject to respecting the absolute importance of healthy competition and strong consumer protection. We want both domestic and international businesses to see the UK as a great place to invest.

This means giving start-ups and venture backers the confidence to launch their businesses here, not elsewhere in the world. It means encouraging multinationals — who have a pretty much free choice to place their investments anywhere in the Emea timezone — to choose the UK. And it means giving our domestic businesses the encouragement and confidence to get on and invest.

What does that mean in practice and what is the CMA going to do differently? Well, here are three simple — but powerful — things we want to drive forward.

First, efficiency: we have to make our investigations and processes as simple and rapid as possible. We know it costs businesses when they have to deal with lengthy and uncertain investigations. Good decisions, clear decisions, rapid decisions — that’s what you tell us you need and that’s on us to deliver. We’re already off to a great start with the “4Ps” framework announced by our CEO late last year. Proportionality, predictability, process and pace are all critical areas for us to dig into and I am confident we can make real progress in the near future.

Second, expertise: the CMA has a wealth of talent and a committed workforce. But we also know businesses can find it frustrating when they feel they have to spend their time educating us about their sector dynamics and issues. And, of course, the deeper our understanding, the better the decisions we make will be. So, once again, we’ve listened. We will build mechanisms to ensure we invest in, and can access, world class expertise to enable a rapid, meaningful and grown-up conversation with every sector we investigate.

Finally, engagement. Ultimately, we serve UK consumers. But our work has a direct impact on businesses across the UK and those looking to grow and invest here. So it’s essential we engage directly and meaningfully with the business community. Our commitment is an open door, open ears and open minds.

We’re not naive and we’ll never move away from a belief in the power of competition and consumer protection. But we want to hear what works for you — what’s going to give you the confidence to invest. We’re looking forward to the first meeting of the CMA’s Growth and Investment Council today to do just that. The council was launched at the start of this year and brings together the leaders of 12 major UK business and investor groups.

We love the UK. Now it’s time to work together to make it a brilliant place to invest, and to drive the productivity, growth and prosperity we all want to see.



Heathrow’s management is poised to relaunch plans to build a third runway at the airport, assuming the government signals its strong support this week, marking the return of one of the UK’s most expensive and controversial infrastructure projects.

Bosses at the UK’s hub airport are keen to seize on the sudden window of political opportunity that has opened up, with chancellor Rachel Reeves expected to signal her backing for the expansion in a major speech on economic growth this week.

Heathrow chief executive Thomas Woldbye has long said the airport would only press ahead with the full support of government.

The prospect of a third runway at Heathrow has alarmed residents, environmental groups and some Labour politicians, concerned about the prospect of higher carbon emissions as well as noise and air pollution in the local area.

But it is the scale and cost of the construction that could pose the biggest barrier to expansion.

People briefed on the airport’s plans said that if it went ahead, the current thinking would favour updating the pre-pandemic blueprint for a multibillion-pound megaproject outside the current perimeter.

As well as a 3.5km runway and taxiways on land to the north-west of the airport’s current boundary, the work would also involve diverting the nearby M25 motorway into a tunnel to make room for the expansion. In the process, 750 homes and a primary school would be demolished.

Other options, such as a smaller third runway within the airport’s current boundaries, are not being considered, the people said, in part because the northwestern runway project has been through six years of scrutiny and was backed by a government-appointed Airports Commission in 2015, parliament in 2018 and the Supreme Court in 2020.

The biggest unknown is the project’s price tag. A third runway at Heathrow would be one of the most expensive private sector infrastructure projects in the UK. The estimated cost was £14bn in 2014, but that number would now be far higher.

Noble Francis, economics director at the Construction Products Association, said the costs had been rising quickly, and there were now questions over whether the UK had the construction skills to deliver a project of that size.

A third runway would compete for workers with the government’s plans to build 1.5mn homes over five years, as well as more transport and water infrastructure, data centres and gigafactories.

The number of people working in construction has fallen by 366,000 in the past five years and is at its second-lowest level since 2001.

“The big question in construction is who will actually do all the work and how much more will it cost,” Francis said. “It’s very unclear whether we have the skills.”

Aviation industry executives believe the expansion is so politically and technically challenging that Heathrow will want Reeves to go beyond simply signalling her approval for the idea of a third runway this week.

The airport’s management will want clarity on how the government’s planning reforms could smooth the way, including potential delays caused by judicial reviews, and a commitment to redrawing the UK’s airspace to fit in all the new flights.

But, most of all, the government will need to agree to reform how Heathrow is financed.

As a regional monopoly, the airport is funded via the regulated asset base model much like the water companies, which raise equity and debt and recover the costs from consumers.

Heathrow is regulated by the Civil Aviation Authority, which agrees every five years on how much can be recouped from the take-off and landing charges it levies on airlines. These charges and the cost of servicing Heathrow’s debt, at present about £19bn, are passed on to passengers.

Heathrow and its airline customers agree the airport’s charging model needs to be reformed, but do not agree on how.

One option would be a far longer charging cycle — potentially as much as 25 years — to run alongside the current system to help pay for the runway.

Tim Alderslade, chief executive of lobby group Airlines UK, said carriers backed growth, but it must be “affordable, aligned with industry’s net zero commitments and deliver meaningful improvements in operational resilience”.

The airport’s next steps would be to submit a planning application for expansion, which would need to be granted a “development consent order” by the transport secretary.

While there are live DCO applications for the Gatwick and Luton expansions, Heathrow’s plans are not as advanced.

Some experts believe the challenges of building a third runway are so significant that the project will never get off the ground.

The government has previously said no runway expansion would be authorised unless it is compatible with meeting Britain’s climate targets, complies with noise pollution and air pollution limits and provides economic growth across the country.

Paul McGuinness, chair of the No 3rd Runway Coalition pressure group, said: “Expansions at other London airports undermine the case for Heathrow’s uniquely complicated and costly third runway, making it an even riskier, if not uninvestable proposition.”

Sir Keir Starmer, prime minister, voted against the scheme in 2018. Sir Sadiq Khan, Labour mayor of London, last week said that if Heathrow came back “with plans for a new runway that was supported by the government, I wouldn’t hesitate to launch, with partners and colleagues, another legal challenge”.

The airport’s new board met last week, following a change in its ownership, in which French private equity group Ardian and Saudi Arabia’s deep-pocketed sovereign wealth fund bought a 38 per cent stake.

The board was supportive of expanding the airport in principle, ahead of hearing more details from Reeves, said a person familiar with the matter.

Tony Travers, professor of economics at the London School of Economics, said it was a key moment for the government.

He said: “The scale of opposition to a third runway at Heathrow means the chancellor’s renewed interest in it poses the ultimate test of the government’s commitment to growth. Drive a third runway through, and pretty much any planning obstacle can be overcome.”



The Scottish National Investment Bank is at risk of missing its target of investing £2bn by the end of the decade by a fifth, after the government scaled back funding for the lender this year.

The state bank could fall short of its 2030 goal in three areas — net zero, communities and innovation — by as much as £400mn, according to previously unreported figures from its annual report.

Established in 2020, the bank has a mandate to fund projects that cut carbon emissions, reduce inequality and promote innovation. The institution has a target to lend £2bn to businesses over 10 years.

The bank has previously come under scrutiny for getting off to a slow start in its early phases and for previously failing to meet its annual spending targets.

The lender’s performance improved in the 2023-24 financial year, with it investing in green infrastructure and housing projects. The figure was £227mn up from £151.9mn the previous year, while its income exceeded operating costs for the first time.

The bank said it was a “long-term impact investor”, with 39 businesses and projects now in its portfolio.

“To date we have committed £696mn to business and projects that deliver against at least one of our three missions of net zero, innovation and community, crowding in over £1.4bn of additional investment alongside us,” it said.

In its annual report published in August, the bank’s projected spending by 2030 was between £800mn and £1bn on net zero projects, and £400mn-£500mn each on both communities and innovation projects.

At the lower end of the range, this suggests a potential shortfall of £400mn against the £2bn total target.

In its most recent business plan the lender said it was “aiming at the top end of each range and, where we can, exceeding it”. But it warned the targets were also “subject to real-world volatilities . . . and external or market factors beyond our control”.

SNIB chief executive Al Denholm said in its latest business plan: “Over the longer-term, significant investment from private sector capital is needed if we are to meet our missions.

“The bank cannot deliver its missions alone. So, in the years ahead we seek to manage private sector capital alongside the public funds entrusted to us.”

The Edinburgh-based bank was established in 2020 with a mandate to create long-term economic growth under then first minister Nicola Sturgeon.

The bank received just £174mn for the 2024-25 financial year, well shy of the expected £250mn, which it said was “clearly in the context of challenging public sector finances”.

A person close to the bank said the lender might not be able to invest the full £174mn allocation with just over two months left in the financial year. The funding allocated by the government varies annually, and is not set at about £200mn per year.

The person noted the bank was only in its fifth year, and that establishing a pipeline and a portfolio of investments took time.

Deputy first minister Kate Forbes said the bank’s performance showed it had an “increasingly promising future” following the publication of its annual report in August.

The bank has invested in ventures ranging from green infrastructure projects and rental home and venture capital funds, to a nanomaterial producer, a laser manufacturer and the company that turned an unused quarry into Europe’s largest inland surf resort.

Ross Brown, a professor of entrepreneurship at the University of St Andrews, said that meeting the £2bn goal was “mission impossible”, while accusing the bank of a “chronic underspend and lack of focus in [its] lending portfolio”.



Rental prices outside London fell quarter on quarter in late 2024 for the first time since before the pandemic, signalling a “key milestone” in Great Britain’s housing market after years of soaring rents.

The average advertised rent of properties beyond the capital fell 0.2 per cent to £1,341 between the third and the fourth quarter of 2024, marking the first drop since the end of 2019, according to data from the property portal Rightmove on Tuesday.

In London, a marginal 0.1 cent quarter-on-quarter growth in rental prices to £2,695 was the lowest since early 2021.

While modest, Rightmove said the drop marked a “key milestone” for the market as it brought an end to many months of record high rents, helped by weakened demand and improved supply of properties for tenants.

In the three years to the fourth quarter of 2023, rents in Great Britain excluding London rose 25 per cent, the data showed, boosted by higher borrowing costs and low availability of properties to rent.

“A first quarterly drop in rents is the culmination of several months of improvement in the balance between supply and demand,” said Rightmove’s property expert Colleen Babcock.

Demand pressures appear to be easing in the housing market, with Rightmove reporting a 16 per cent year-on-year decline in prospective tenant enquiries, as some renters opt to buy homes amid lower mortgage rates and rising wages.

Some tenants are also choosing to stay put rather than move because of costs, according to Rightmove.

Additionally, the supply of rental properties improved in the last quarter of 2024, with a 13 per cent increase in availability compared with the previous year, the research showed.

Rightmove said that while there was evidence of some landlords choosing to leave the market, other “perhaps larger” ones were continuing to invest.

However, the average number of applications per rental property was still in double digits at 10 — double the pre-pandemic average, indicating a still “very busy” market.

This comes ahead of the increase in stamp duty announced in the Budget and taking effect in the spring. From April 1, the level at which the property levy becomes payable reverts to £300,000 from £425,000 for first-time buyers and to £125,000 from £250,000 for others.

The renters’ rights bill, which aims to reform the private rental sector and end “no fault” evictions, could also affect the market. But Rightmove noted “no major signs of an immediate impact” from the legislation which could come into effect this year.

The Rightmove rental price tracker, as well as similar data from Homelet and Zoopla, provide a more timely indicator of rental trends than the official data, as they track new tenancies rather than all rents.

Rents outside London were still 4.7 per cent higher than at the end of 2023. However, price growth marked its slowest annual pace since early 2021.

In the capital, rental prices were up 2.4 per cent year on year, the lowest annual rate since early 2021.

Alex Bloxham, partner and head of residential lettings at the property consultancy Bidwells, said: “We’re seeing a cooling of what has been a ferociously hot rental market over the last year, where tenants have endured intense competition and consistent rental inflation.”



Sir Keir Starmer will promise on Tuesday to unlock some of the £160bn of surplus held in corporate defined-benefit pension schemes, in a bid to inject a surge of cash into the British economy and boost growth.

The UK prime minister will tell an audience of executives in the City of London that restrictions on the use of pension surpluses will be eased, a move praised by former Conservative chancellor Jeremy Hunt.

Starmer’s decision is intended to drive investment by businesses while also encouraging them to take more risk in their pension investment strategies. “Today’s changes will unlock billions for investment,” Starmer said.

The government estimates that about 3,750 corporate defined-benefit pension schemes are in surplus, holding £160bn of assets in excess of the payments they owe to their members. Less than £70bn is eligible to be returned to companies under current rules. Total assets in the system are £1.2tn.

“This reform has the potential to fundamentally change the way employers view their defined-benefit pension schemes, transforming them from liabilities to offload, into valuable assets worth running on for the longer term,” said Morten Nilsson, chief executive of Brightwell, which manages the BT pension scheme, the largest in the FTSE 100. BT’s scheme is in deficit.

After several weeks in which chancellor Rachel Reeves has made a series of growth-related announcements, Starmer’s move on Tuesday will be an answer to critics that he has taken a back seat on the economy.

“To achieve the change our country needs requires nothing short of rewiring our economy,” Starmer will tell the bosses of Lloyds, Nationwide and Tesco, along with other executives. “It needs creative reform, the removal of hurdles and unrelenting focus.”

The pension reforms follow criticism from some business leaders that Starmer and Reeves have undermined growth with a £40bn Budget tax rise, a thicket of new employment laws and gloomy rhetoric.

Hunt floated the defined-benefit pension reforms in his 2023 Mansion House speech but ran out of time to deliver them before last year’s election, which delivered Starmer and Labour into power.

“I may have my political differences with Rachel Reeves on business tax rises but I strongly welcome the momentum she has put behind the Mansion House reforms,” Hunt told the Financial Times.

Under Labour’s plans, DB schemes could change their rules to permit surplus extraction where the employer and the trustees of the pension scheme agree. The plans would require legislation.

Currently, DB scheme surplus can only be accessed where schemes passed a resolution by 2016 to retain the power, under a 2004 law passed by the last Labour government. Some schemes had large deficits and did not pass such resolutions.

Surpluses are also only accessible if they exceed the level needed for a business to sell its scheme to an insurer. The UK’s Pension Protection Fund estimates that £68bn of the £160bn of the total current surplus meets this threshold.

Around £180mn of surplus was accessed by companies between 2018 to 2023, according to government estimates last year. Businesses are taxed at 25 per cent on surpluses they receive.

Pension scheme funding levels have improved dramatically in recent years because higher government bond yields have increased expected returns on assets, therefore reducing the current accounting value of future liabilities.

Pension trustees welcomed the government’s announcement, provided member outcomes were protected.

“All trustees really care about is paying scheme members, but as a general theme we would be supportive of releasing surpluses in the right circumstances,” said Vassos Vassou, council member of the Association of Professional Pension Trustees.

He noted that in recent years, companies with large surpluses in their pension schemes had opted to sell them to insurance companies in bulk annuity transactions called buyouts. About £50bn of pension obligations have been sold in each of the past two years, according to consultancy WTW.

Some advisers are sceptical that many companies will make use of Labour’s reforms. “I just don’t think there will be many people who want to do it — either they want to do a buyout or just put more money into the scheme until they can,” said John Ralfe, an independent pensions consultant. He noted the 25 per cent tax levied on cash extracted from pension surpluses.

On Monday Reeves urged Labour MPs to get behind the growth strategy, with some backbenchers nervous that the party is damaging its environmental credentials and appearing to side with business over consumer interests.

“If we get this right — and I know we will — the prize on offer is immense,” she told the Parliamentary Labour party. Reeves, who has been criticised by business for appearing to talk the economy down, urged Labour MPs to be positive. “Now is the chance for us to shout about that potential and the brighter future ahead,” she said.

She added: “Over the past six months as chancellor, my experience is that government has become used to saying ‘no’. That must change. We must start saying ‘yes’.”



Robert F Kennedy Jr, President Donald Trump’s pick to be the country’s top health official, appeared unscathed after a grilling by US senators on Wednesday, as he sought to quell criticisms from both sides of the aisle over his record on vaccines and abortion.

In a sometimes heated Senate finance committee hearing, Democratic senators blasted Kennedy for his history of promoting vaccine conspiracy theories, pointing to his role in sowing doubts about measles, polio and Covid-19 shots, and for his involvement in anti-vaccine lawsuits.

Kennedy also sought to allay concerns from some anti-abortion Republican senators over his shifting stance on the procedure. On four occasions, Kennedy stressed that he agreed with Trump that “every abortion is a tragedy”, saying he would defer to the president’s policies on abortion pill mifepristone.

Kennedy’s reception at the three-hour-long confirmation hearing split along party lines, suggesting the panel is likely to back his appointment as Health and Human Services secretary, which would put him in control of a sprawling department with a $1.8tn budget. He will face questions from another Senate panel on Thursday.

In his opening remarks — which were briefly interrupted by a protester shouting “he lies” — Kennedy stressed that he was “not anti-vaccine or anti-industry”, but “pro-safety”. Kennedy noted that all his children were vaccinated, adding that he supported both the polio and measles vaccines. “I believe that vaccines play a critical role in healthcare,” he said.

Democratic Senator Ron Wyden said Kennedy had “embraced conspiracy theories, quacks, charlatans”, while his colleague Elizabeth Warren said “kids might die” because of Kennedy’s anti-vaccine stance while he “can keep cashing in” from his role in vaccine safety lawsuits.

Republicans James Lankford and Thom Tillis, both viewed as possible opponents to Kennedy’s confirmation, took a more conciliatory approach. Kennedy assured Lankford that he would back the president’s policies on abortion. Tillis said he expected the vote to split along party lines: “Some of these nominations are going to be shirts and skins.”

Kennedy said his “Make America Healthy Again” campaign would solve chronic disease in the US, which he claimed was costing the country $4.3tn a year.

Kennedy also said he had been labelled a “conspiracy theorist” to prevent him from “asking difficult questions of powerful interests”.

Kennedy also sought to downplay Republican concerns over his plan to shake up the food industry. “I don’t want to take food away from anybody,” he said. “If you like a cheeseburger — a McDonald’s cheeseburger and a Diet Coke like my boss — you should be able to get them.”

Kennedy was grilled by Republican Senator Bill Cassidy, another crucial vote in getting him confirmed, over his plans to reform the state-backed Medicare and Medicaid health insurance programmes. “I don’t have a broad proposal for dismantling the programme,” he said.



One of the hottest debates in the energy sector over the past year has been exactly how much power artificial intelligence was going to soak up — and what the impact of this was going to be. On suppliers: good. On the green transition: mostly bad.

DeepSeek has turned such conversations on their head. Following the Chinese group’s release of a massively more efficient large language model, the question now is how much energy demand forecasts will need to be revised down — and where that leaves the utilities in this space.

It’s mainly a US issue. While the need for rapid answers means that data centres required to use AI products are best located close to their clients, those needed to train the models can be built where power is cheap. Europe, with its expensive electricity, was always going to be a bit player here — and has hence been relatively insulated both from the excitement that gripped US utilities and from this week’s ructions.

Intuitively, it seems clear that US power forecasts are due for a cut. Training DeepSeek’s model required less than a tenth of the computing power required to train Meta’s Llama. The impact on power demand may not be entirely commensurate given data centres still need to be cooled, but this is game-changing efficiency.

Once up and running, DeepSeek may also be more efficient to use than, say, OpenAI’s ChatGPT, because it can apparently switch off the parts of its brain it’s not using. True, lower costs may result in higher usage — as chipmakers the world over hope. But the risks are clearly on the downside.

Such insights are hard to translate into new long-term forecasts — not least because US electricity projections looked a bit dubious anyway. There are a lot of them. And they say very different things. That makes it difficult to understand what assumptions were baked in in the first place.

More pertinently, even if one believes that cheaper and more efficient AI leads to more AI overall, that is not going to do much to reassure investors in the US power sector. After all, assuming DeepSeek really has changed the AI calculus, greater uncertainty over the eventual shape and location of demand ought to make so-called hyperscalers more wary of committing to long-term energy contracts.

Of course, while a slowdown would be bad news for energy stocks, it would be better news for the energy transition. A rapid increase in power demand would have been partly met by building new gas-fired plants. A more gradual approach gives renewables, batteries and nuclear power a better chance of filling the gap. One lesson from the DeepSeek drama is that AI can benefit the world even as it scorches some investors’ portfolios.

camilla.palladino@ft.com



Nvidia shares fell on Wednesday even as chipmakers in Europe and Asia rebounded following strong earnings from Dutch group ASML.

The US chipmaker fell 4.8 per cent in New York ahead of a flurry of Big Tech earnings later in the day, having rebounded nearly 9 per cent in the previous session. That followed a sharp sell-off on Monday that wiped close to $600bn off its market value, sparked by the release of a reasoning model from Chinese start-up DeepSeek.

Wednesday’s decline came despite retail investors ploughing more than $900mn into Nvidia shares this week. The S&P 500 index was down 0.3 per cent, while the Nasdaq Composite fell 0.6 per cent.

The sudden introduction of a cheap AI tool such as DeepSeek could affect the pricing power and market valuations of megacap US tech groups, say analysts.

“We expect elevated volatility as market participants re-evaluate the longer-term earnings potential of companies in the AI value chain,” said Deutsche Bank strategists in a note to clients.

“This may take weeks or even months as analysts readjust their earnings projections,” they added.

Shares in ASML, one of Europe’s biggest tech companies, closed up 5.5 per cent in Amsterdam as chief executive Christophe Fouquet hailed the emergence of DeepSeek as “good news” for the semiconductor industry.

ASM, another chip stock, closed up 3.5 per cent, while the Stoxx Europe 600 Technology index was up 2.4 per cent. The Stoxx Europe 600 benchmark gained 0.5 per cent.

“For AI to be everywhere, we need to see major progress on cost and energy consumption,” Fouquet said, alluding to DeepSeek’s claims that its artificial intelligence model required far fewer chips to build and is also cheaper to run than larger systems from the likes of OpenAI.

Investors are still trying to figure out the market implications of DeepSeek’s promise to develop AI tools at a fraction of the cost of US rivals, which has been called a “Sputnik moment” for the industry.

But analysts say Monday’s sell-off was exacerbated by the sheer scale of investors’ previous bets on Nvidia, the chief beneficiary of the AI boom in markets.

“What happened on Monday was an extreme overreaction that was amplified by extreme positioning,” said Elyas Galou, global investment strategist at Bank of America.

He pointed to crowded positions in global tech stocks heading into US President Donald Trump’s inauguration and ahead of this week’s earnings from tech bellwethers including Meta and Microsoft.

“We saw a lot of buying yesterday, including from retail investors, which is supporting the market today,” he added.

The rise in ASML’s shares came after it reported stronger than expected orders of its most advanced chipmaking equipment.

Fouquet predicted that there would be more DeepSeek-style shocks in the coming months or years. “You cannot have an industry with this amount of opportunity without the key players being challenged,” he said. “I don’t think you can define today who is the winner in 2030.”

He said new entrants such as DeepSeek would accelerate the rollout of the technology.

“Anyone that lowers costs is in fact good news for us,” Fouquet said. “Because lower costs mean AI can be used in more applications, more applications mean more chips. And we are in the business of providing equipment to people who make chips.”

Earlier, Japan’s tech-heavy Nikkei 225 closed up 1 per cent, helped by a rebound in semiconductor stocks and AI investor SoftBank.

In Tokyo, Nvidia supplier Advantest closed up 4.4 per cent while semiconductor company Tokyo Electron was up 2.3 per cent. SoftBank ended the day with a 2.4 per cent rise.



Donald Trump will meet Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu next week in Washington, becoming the first foreign leader to receive an invitation to the White House since the US president returned to office.

Israeli officials said the meeting was due to take place on Tuesday, and would mark the first overseas trip by the veteran Israeli leader since the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant against him last year over allegations of war crimes stemming from the Gaza war.

The two leaders are expected to discuss negotiations over a permanent ceasefire in Gaza, the Iranian nuclear threat and the prospects of a normalisation agreement between Israel and Saudi Arabia.

In a formal invitation sent to Netanyahu on Wednesday and shared widely in the Israeli media, Trump wrote: “I look forward to discussing how we can bring peace to Israel and its neighbours, and efforts to counter our shared adversaries.”

“It will be my honour to host you as my first foreign leader during my second term,” Trump added.

The US president has generated outrage across the Arab world in recent days after making repeated calls that Egypt and Jordan help “clean out” Gaza by taking in much of the shattered enclave’s population.

In his first public remarks on Trump’s proposal, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi said on Wednesday that moving the Palestinians from their land would be “an injustice in which we cannot participate”.

He said only the creation of a Palestinian state alongside Israel would lead to peace. Sisi has long argued that receiving a large influx of Gazans could threaten national security if it included militants intent on fighting Israel from within Egyptian borders.

“I assure the Egyptian people that we could never allow national security to be undermined,” he said.

Netanyahu’s trip to Washington so soon after Trump’s inauguration will mark a triumphant return to the White House after several years of tensions with the administration of former president Joe Biden.

Steve Witkoff, Trump’s Middle East envoy, arrived in Israel on Wednesday for meetings with Netanyahu and other senior officials. He also visited Israeli military positions inside Gaza to assess the fragile ceasefire agreement he helped to conclude this month, and which halted more than a year of fighting between Israel and Palestinian militant group Hamas.

According to the terms of the deal, six additional Israeli hostages held by Hamas are expected to be released in the coming days, along with hundreds of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. The first round of hostage releases is due on Thursday and is expected to include Arbel Yehoud, believed to be the last female civilian hostage alive in Gaza.

Hundreds of thousands of displaced Palestinians have also begun returning to their homes in northern Gaza after international mediators over the weekend were able to resolve a crisis and keep the US-brokered truce on track.

Biden did not host an Oval Office summit with Netanyahu after the Israeli premier returned to power in late 2022, reflecting concerns over far-right members in his ruling coalition and its efforts to undermine the country’s judicial system.

After Hamas’s October 7 2023 attack on southern Israel and the subsequent Gaza war, tensions grew between the two leaders over military strategy as the civilian death toll soared in the coastal enclave.

Yet US leaders across much of the political spectrum, including Biden, criticised the ICC’s decision to issue arrest warrants against Netanyahu and his then-defence minister, Yoav Gallant, over allegations of “crimes against humanity and war crimes” in Gaza. The US and Israel are not members of the court.

Netanyahu ultimately did meet Biden at the White House last July, but only after Republican lawmakers in Capitol Hill invited the Israeli leader to address a joint session of Congress.



Retail investors have ploughed more than $900mn into Nvidia shares this week as individual traders rushed to scoop up artificial intelligence stocks that sustained a heavy blow from fears over China’s DeepSeek.

Retail traders purchased a net $562mn on Monday, the most on record, and $360mn on Tuesday, according to data provider Vandatrack.

The rush into Nvidia and similar companies comes as Wall Street analysts hurry to assess how DeepSeek’s claims that it created an AI model on a par with US leaders such as OpenAI at a much lower cost will affect spending for advanced chips. Nvidia shares shed almost $600bn in a historic sell-off on Monday and have swung higher and lower over the following two days.

Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers, said there had been an “astounding” preponderance of Nvidia buy over sell orders on the trading platform on Monday.

“I don’t ever recall seeing an imbalance of that magnitude,” he added. “Has the active trader’s mantra become ‘the bigger the drop, the bigger the opportunity’?”

Charles Schwab, the largest US retail broker with $10tn of client assets, said it also saw increased buying across AI-related stocks, including Nvidia, while activity at Robinhood on Sunday night — as the AI sell-off began building steam — gave the online trading company its second-highest overnight volume, behind only the November 5 US presidential election.

“We saw buyers of Nvidia . . . our customers tend to take advantage of an opportunity to get into the names they like,” said Steve Quirk, chief brokerage officer at Robinhood.

One user posting on discussion site Reddit, a popular forum for individual traders to discuss strategies, called Nvidia’s fall a “Jevons Paradox buying opportunity” — a reference to the theory that demand for technology such as AI will increase as it becomes cheaper and more efficient.

“AI isn’t slowing, it’s expanding,” said another user. “[Nvidia] is still the backbone of the industry, and this dip is a buying opportunity for long-term investors.”

In contrast, hedge funds that had built up hefty positions in Nvidia were among the biggest sellers of the company’s stock on Monday, according to market participants.

“Most of the flow was classic long-only [hedge fund] clients selling into the move,” said Charlie McElligott, a derivatives strategist at Nomura. He estimated Nvidia on Monday accounted for roughly 10 per cent of all US cash equities’ notional value traded.



A surge in gold shipments to the US has led to a shortage of bullion in London, as traders amass an $82bn stockpile in New York over fears of Trump administration tariffs.

The wait to withdraw bullion stored in the Bank of England’s vaults has risen from a few days to between four and eight weeks, according to people familiar with the process, as the central bank struggles to keep up with demand.

“People can’t get their hands on gold because so much has been shipped to New York, and the rest is stuck in the queue,” said one industry executive. “Liquidity in the London market has been diminished.”

Since November’s US election, gold traders and financial institutions have moved 393 metric tonnes into the vaults of the Comex commodity exchange in New York, driving its inventory levels up nearly 75 per cent to 926 tonnes — the highest level since August 2022.

Total gold flows into the US could be far higher than the Comex numbers reflect, according to market participants, because there are likely to have been additional shipments to private vaults in New York owned by HSBC and JPMorgan. The two banks declined to comment.

Traders say the shipments are intended to avoid tariffs on bullion that some fear could be introduced by US President Donald Trump.

“There is a feeling that Trump could go across the board and impose new tariffs on raw materials coming into the US, including gold,” said Michael Haigh, head of commodities research at Société Générale. “There is a bit of a scramble among participants in the gold market to protect themselves.”

The shipments are also the result of higher prices on the futures exchange in New York than in the cash market in London. The unusual arbitrage opportunity has incentivised traders to send the metal across the Atlantic.

Trump has yet to spell out his trade policy and has not specifically mentioned a duty on bullion, although he has threatened to impose wide-ranging tariffs on US imports.

Gold prices have risen 5 per cent since the start of the year, and are just $30 shy of their all-time record of $2,790 per troy ounce set in October.

London and New York are two main global markets for trading, with most physical trading taking place in the UK, while the futures market is in the US.

Many market participants compare the current US gold rush with the situation during the Covid pandemic, when lockdowns and uncertainty over shipments of gold triggered a surge in stockpiling on Comex.

The BoE stores gold for third parties such as financial institutions, as well as for other central banks and the UK Treasury.

Governor Andrew Bailey played down the significance of the increased waiting times to remove gold from its vaults.

“London remains the major gold market in the world. If you are involved in that market and want to trade or use your gold, you really need to have it in London,” he said in response to questions from parliament’s Treasury Committee on Wednesday.

Comex gold inventories have shot up 36 per cent this month, with 244 metric tonnes of inflows — the highest monthly inflows since May 2020, at the peak of the pandemic. Traders said they needed access to gold to fulfil certain futures contracts, which allow the buyer to take physical delivery of gold.

“The movement of gold needed to make its way into New York, that is basically what has been driving ‘stockpiling’,” said Joe Cavatoni, market strategist at the World Gold Council. “That is leading a lot of people to say, ‘we want to get ahead of it’, and that is driving the futures market into a premium.”

However, Cavatoni said he was cautiously optimistic that the coming tariffs would most likely not apply to bullion. “We are not getting a sense from the rhetoric from the administration that it intends to go after the monetary metals,” he said.

Last week, June contracts for physical gold on Comex traded at a premium of up to $60 per troy ounce over the London price. The difference has since fallen back to $10 per troy ounce as traders have moved gold to New York.



Mark Zuckerberg is exploring buying a property in Washington, DC, according to two people familiar with the matter, as Meta’s billionaire founder steps up his efforts to shape US President Donald Trump’s approach to the technology sector.

A potential property had been identified, one of the people said. The 40-year-old already owns multiple properties in California, where Meta has its headquarters, as well as a compound in Hawaii.

The move signals Zuckerberg’s ambition to work closely with the Trump administration, the people said, as he seeks a role in influencing regulation in areas, such as artificial intelligence, that are of increasing importance to Meta, the owner of Facebook and Instagram.

Zuckerberg has said he is aiming to make Meta, which has a market capitalisation of $1.7tn, the “leader” in AI, battling rivals such as OpenAI, Google and Microsoft.

A Meta spokesperson declined to comment.

Acquiring a property in Washington would be the latest attempt by Zuckerberg to ingratiate himself with Trump, who threatened to jail the tech billionaire if he interfered in last year’s election and dubbed his company an “enemy of the people” for allegedly censoring rightwing voices.

This month, the company launched an unexpected overhaul of its content moderation, ending its third-party fact-checking programme in a move welcomed by Trump and his allies. It also accused the Biden administration of previously pressing the company to censor content related to the coronavirus pandemic, for example.

Zuckerberg also replaced Meta’s global policy chief Nick Clegg with prominent Republican ally Joel Kaplan, and appointed Dana White, a martial arts tycoon and friend of Trump, to Meta’s board.

The billionaire attended Trump’s inauguration, sitting behind the president alongside tech executives including Amazon founder Jeff Bezos.

Trump has returned to the White House at a critical juncture for Silicon Valley, as the biggest tech companies compete to be a powerhouse in AI. Zuckerberg said he expected to allocate between $60bn and $65bn in capital spending to bolster the company’s AI efforts, including expanding its teams “significantly”.

However, Trump’s attention has so far been focused on his rivals. Last week the president announced that OpenAI, SoftBank and Oracle were forming a $500bn US AI infrastructure joint venture called “Stargate”, lauding the initiative as “a resounding declaration of confidence in America’s potential under a new president”.

Some experts have noted a recent surge in the sale of luxury real estate in Washington in what has been dubbed a “Trump bump”, as business executives bet that property in the capital will help bolster their influence with the administration.

Venture capitalist and entrepreneur David Sacks, appointed as Trump’s new crypto and AI tsar after supporting his campaign, has bought a $10mn residence in the US capital, according to documentation seen by the Financial Times and a person familiar with the matter. Axios first reported the move on Monday.

Elon Musk, who is leading the Department of Government Efficiency and has been working out of SpaceX’s Washington office, has reportedly also been seeking to invest in a DC property, prompting a backlash from locals in the city’s Adams Morgan neighbourhood.

The precise contours of Musk’s role in the administration have yet to be outlined, but Trump last week denied that Musk would be getting an office in the White House itself.

Additional reporting by Joe Miller in Washington DC



What An eight-bedroom Pueblo-style house with more than 2 acres of grounds and views of the Sangre de Cristo mountains.

Where In the historic Camino del Monte Sol district in the south-east of Santa Fe.

Why Built in 1918, the house features original doors and windows, wooden beams and coved ceilings. Outdoors there is mature topiary, a fountain and historic casitas along winding walkways. The property is on the market for the first time in 40 years.

Who Todd Davis/Casas de Santa Fe

What A nine-bedroom house set within 7.48 acres of land bordering the Rio Pueblo.

Where Set against the vast landscape of the Sangre de Cristo mountains, five minutes’ drive from the centre of desert city of Taos.

Why A renovated adobe home with whitewashed walls; the modern furnishings and artwork can be bought with the property. The landscaped gardens include an outdoor adobe horno, bocce ball court, mature cottonwoods and apple trees.

Who Berkshire Hathaway Home Services New Mexico Properties

What A Pueblo-style property with seven bedrooms and 34 acres of land, including gardens, a swimming pool, equestrian facilities and a golfing green with several tees.

Where On the Old Santa Fe Trail in the Santa Fe Foothills, with views of the Jemez Mountains.

Why The equine facilities include an eight-stall stable, open riding space, multiple paddocks, exercise arenas and more than a mile of bridle paths.

Who Forbes Global Properties

What A 6,184 sq ft, three-bedroom house with four bathrooms and an outdoor swimming pool on 1.4 acres of land.

Where On the Old Santa Fe Trail, five minutes’ walk from the hiking paths up Sun mountain and 10 minutes’ drive from the centre of Santa Fe.

Why Renovated in 2021, the living space feels generous, with high ceilings and large windows offering views of the Jemez and Ortiz mountains. The main bedroom has its own floor, alongside two bathrooms and a balcony, while guest suites open on to a shaded terrace by the pool.

Who Sotheby’s International Realty — Santa Fe Brokerage

What A single-storey house with three bedrooms and bathrooms, and more than half an acre of lush gardens. A casita with a further bedroom, bathroom and living room can be used as a guesthouse or studio.

Where Santa Fe, in the foothills of Cerro Gordo. The centre of Santa Fe is less than 10 minutes’ drive from the house.

Why Traditional adobe walls and brick floors keep the building cool, and a shared well for irrigation maintains the garden and its water feature.

Who Forbes Global Properties

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @ft_houseandhome on Instagram





The US Federal Reserve is on a collision course with Donald Trump, economists say, with the central bank set to keep interest rates on hold despite the president’s calls to reduce borrowing costs by “a lot”.

The Fed’s decision on Wednesday is the first following Trump’s return to office, which has been marked by a flurry of executive orders as he seeks to impose his agenda on Washington.

Analysts say Fed chair Jay Powell will have to resist White House pressure if he is to retain the confidence of markets and avoid unleashing a new wave of inflation.

“When presidents start meddling in monetary policy decisions, it can often go very badly,” said Claudia Sahm, chief economist at New Century Advisors and a former Fed official.

“Cutting the interest rate when inflation is still not back down to target could create more inflation. There is a reason why the Fed is independent,” Sahm said, adding that she expected the central bank to “stick to its goals”.

Powell has helped steer the US economy towards a soft landing over the past year, curbing price rises without pushing the economy into recession.

But inflation remains above the central bank’s 2 per cent target, even though it has eased sufficiently for the Fed to cut interest rates last year by a percentage point to a range between 4.25 and 4.5 per cent.

While the market widely expects the Fed to keep rates on hold on Wednesday, Trump has made clear he wants much faster reductions.

“I think I know interest rates much better than they do, and I think I know them certainly much better than the one who’s primarily in charge of making that decision,” the president said last week. “I’d like to see [interest rates] come down a lot.”

Lawrence Summers, who served as Treasury secretary under president Bill Clinton, argued that such “public interventions by governments can easily be counterproductive”. He added: “The Fed won’t listen.”

Central banks across the world were granted full control to set interest rates after a wave of inflation during the 1970s and 1980s proved difficult to tame in an environment where political interference in monetary policy was rife.

Few elected leaders have interfered in rate-setters’ decisions since, with exceptions such as Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan undermining market confidence and stoking price pressures.

“Now that Trump has been calling quite vocally for lower interest rates, if the Fed eases monetary policy it will create the impression that they caved to him and forfeited their independence,” said Isabella Weber, economist at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.

The US central bank is already set to cut interest rates less aggressively than its counterpart in the Eurozone.

The possibility of several price shocks hitting the US economy — including ones instigated by the president himself — could also delay the two cuts that most Fed officials and markets expect this year.

Some think the Trump administration’s plans for tariffs and tax cuts, as well as a possible uptick in economic activity and in the markets, will prohibit lower US borrowing costs.

“Unless there is a collapse in financial market exuberance, which I think is a real possibility, my guess is that the Fed will have difficulty in cutting as much as it expects,” Summers said.

The central bank is keen to play down tensions with the White House. Powell is expected to duck questions on politics and avoid mentioning Trump by name in his post-meeting press conference on Wednesday.

“In the transcript for [the] December [press conference] the name of the president appears once in total. And that’s because a reporter used it,” said Vincent Reinhart, chief economist at BNY Investments and a former Fed official. “Powell doesn’t want to talk about politics.”

Economists expect that the Fed chief will instead stick to the central bank’s script, emphasising that rate-setters will follow the data, rather than trying to anticipate the impact of Trump’s policies.

Some see a danger that such an approach would result in the Fed underplaying the threats in bringing inflation down to 2 per cent, especially in the guidance it gives.

“They can’t act in advance of political decisions that are uncertain. So they cannot provide satisfying guidance about policy,” said Reinhart.

Despite his demands on the Fed chief, Trump has indicated that he would not remove Powell from his post before his term as chair ends in May 2026. Powell has signalled he would fight in the courts if the president attempted to oust him.

Some view the pressure on the Fed as part of the trade-off for being able to set rates as its officials see fit.

“The most persuasive argument for why politicians decided to make central banks independent is that they wanted somebody else to blame,” said Reinhart.

“That means the quid pro quo for being independent is being criticised. And chair Powell appreciates that,” he added. “A central banker is going to be disliked.”

Data visualisation by Joel Suss in London



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to Miami

Miami’s cocktail scene has never been short of vibrant. But these days it’s more abuzz than ever. When bars like Broken Shaker and Sweet Liberty opened around a decade ago, they demonstrated that tropical-inspired craft cocktails could go beyond the daiquiri and the mojito — and beyond the velvet ropes and stringent dress codes of South Beach. Their fun yet complex beverages — Broken Shaker’s Old-Fashioned infused with Cocoa Puffs, Sweet Liberty’s piña colada with coffee beans and PX sherry — are paired with come-as-you-are vibes. It’s a combination that has earned them both national and international accolades.

Following in their footsteps, Café La Trova, run by Julio Cabrera, opened in 2019 in Little Havana and put a spotlight on the Cuban cantinero-style of bartender — known for “throwing” cocktails, memorising more than 200 recipes and dressing formally in long sleeves, waistcoats and bow-ties. Cabrera trained as a cantinero in Cuba in the 1980s, and in 2023 he received an “industry icon” award from North America’s 50 Best Bars. He’s also one of the key inspirations for a new generation of impassioned bartenders and exciting cocktail bars, found in residential buildings, hotels and even a food hall. These are some of the city’s best.

Bar Kaiju sits on the mezzanine level of The Citadel food hall in the Little River neighbourhood. The glowing red space is decorated with posters of mythical creatures, and each cocktail is inspired by a monster in terms of ingredients, taste profile and strength.

“I themed Kaiju around monsters to celebrate the interconnectivity and creativity shared across cultures,” says owner and anime-fan Derek Stilmann. “These creatures symbolise indescribable moments, lessons and dreams, evoking nostalgia and connecting us to our childhoods. I aimed to link our guests to both old and new tales, allowing them to explore the world through the menu and bar.”

Stilmann has organised the menu into three core sections: carbonated, sour/tropical and spirit-forward/strong. Chukwa (the colossal “world turtle” from Hindu mythology) is a carbonated milk punch inspired by the Indian yoghurt-drink lassi, built with single malt whiskey, mango, cardamom and coconut. The ingredients may sound complex but they go together very smoothly. Güije (a creature said to dwell in rivers and lagoons in Cuba) is a tropical, slightly sweet and savoury rum cocktail spiced with mojo criollo (a citrus and garlic Cuban marinade), rounded out with mango and served in a hand-painted cup. And Yara-Ma-Yha-Who (a monster from Australia that preys on unsuspecting travellers) is a remake of the 1930s New Orleans cocktail Vieux Carré, with coconut-infused rye whiskey, cognac, sweet vermouth and fig, topped with a piece of white chocolate.

Classic Italian cocktails are done exceptionally well at ViceVersa, a dark- green aperitivo bar in Downtown Miami that opened its doors last June. “The first cocktails I ever made were negronis and americanos,” says Rome-born co-owner Valentino Longo, who in 2020 won the Tales of the Cocktail Foundation’s North America’s Most Imaginative Bartender competition. “In Italy, everyone has bottles of vermouth and amaro in their homes. I wanted to bring a little bit of my culture to Miami and offer a contemporary look at aperitivo.”

The house negroni has a base of its own-made dolce amaro blend, MI-TO (Milano-Torino), and is built with gin then garnished with a lime as well as orange and lemon twists, in a nod to Miami’s tropical locale. The savoury martini doppio is a slightly dirty Gibson, served with a powerful onion pickled in sherry vinegar, dry vermouth, juniper, oregano and thyme. The Vice President, meanwhile, is a potent rum Manhattan — with more fortified wine than rum — topped with a negroni-infused cherry.

Non-alcoholic cocktails are also available upon request, and Longo recommends the N/A spritz. “We make this with Martini Floreale, which has the same botanicals as a regular aperitivo — lemon and orange peels, rhubarb, Roman chamomile.”

The food here is created in partnership with the Sunny’s steakhouse team with the kitchen overseen by Carey Hynes — it’s run by executive chef Justin Flit (formerly of Jaguar Sun). Don’t skip the white-sauce clam pizza with middleneck clams. And on Mondays from 5pm they do a special ViceVersa burger that’s extremely popular with locals.

“I’m originally from Miami,” says Alexa Delgado, director of bars at The Miami Beach Edition hotel, home to chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten’s Matador Room restaurant and the adjacent Matador Bar. “I was born right before Hurricane Andrew — something that drastically defined the city.” It was also a reference point for her signature Cat 5 cocktail, a vodka-based refresher built with Sauvignon Blanc, guava, lemon and catnip. “It encompasses category-five hurricanes — it’s made of five ingredients — but it’s also served in a kitschy, bespoke white-ceramic cat cup. But more than that, I really wanted it to represent the resilience of Miami and South Florida after the storms.”

The rest of the drinks on the Matador Bar menu were crafted around various team members’ perspectives of Miami, most of whom have moved here from out of state. On paper, the negroni colada may give the impression that it’s a sweet blend of pineapple and coconut, but on the contrary, it’s a stirred-down, spirit-forward bitter cocktail. “It’s more the essence of tropical life,” says Delgado. The non-alcoholic options are no less refreshing, including Sowing Seeds, made with distilled herbal botanicals, cucumber, ginger and lemon. Guests can choose to sit in the cosy walnut-panelled bar — often busy during after-work hours — or on the airy terrace, which is especially pretty come sundown.

“Everybody thinks their martini recipe is the only martini recipe,” says Sunny’s co-owner Will Thompson. His choose-your-own-martini menu offers guests five kinds of gin, four kinds of vodka, whether they’d like it dry 50/50, dirty or filthy, and an assortment of garnishes (do try the house blue-cheese olives). “We have a martini that’s ‘Our Way’ with manzanilla sherry and frozen gin, but the point of this martini section is to get guests to give us the information to make the cocktail that’s right for them.”

This way of making people feel welcome, seen and heard while having a great time is a gift that the Boston-born Thompson possesses. It was the backbone of his first bar, Jaguar Sun in Downtown Miami, which received the Exceptional Cocktails award from the Florida Michelin Guide in 2023. While Jaguar Sun has closed its doors, its spirit lives on at Sunny’s, the permanent iteration of its pandemic pop-up, which opened in October. Some drinks were carried over too, including the signature Green Ghoul — a margarita made with poblano pepper-infused tequila and mezcal, cucumber, lime and salt — and the low-ABV Valiant, with gentian liqueur, Cocchi Americano, lemon, orange bitters and salt.

While steaks are the name of the game here — Aaron Brooks, formerly of Four Seasons Miami’s Edge Steak and Bar, is executive chef — Sunny’s also has an impressive raw bar. My favourites include the scallops served with aguachile negro and pickled chayote; and the Ko egg — soft-cooked, atop onion sauce and served with ossetra caviar and fingerling-potato chips, it’s inspired by chef-partner Carey Hynes’s time at Momofuku Ko in New York.

True to its name, The Champagne Bar at The Surf Club has one of Miami’s largest selections of champagne — more than 100 varieties — but people are also drawn to the storied, palm-fringed bar in the Four Seasons Surfside hotel for its extremely precise, elegant and dexterously crafted cocktails. The menu is a collaboration between director of bars Jonathan Gabbay, who oversees the entire beverage programme; head mixologist Leo Varona, who handles the creative side; and lead bartender Larry Olea, who manages the day-to-day operations — hailing from France, Colombia and the Dominican Republic respectively.

“[We drew] inspiration from Miami’s vibrant and diverse neighbourhoods, with each area represented through signature cocktails that celebrate its unique history, culture and flavours,” says Varona. Case in point, Lemon City is named after the historical district now known as Little Haiti; the refreshing tribute to the area’s abundant lemon groves features gin infused with lemon and lemongrass, hints of mezcal and coconut water, topped with a limoncello foam. Banana Cabana, meanwhile, is a playful take on the classic banana daiquiri and a homage to the poolside cabanas of Miami Beach, crafted with bourbon, rum, banana and coconut cordial and sherry. Most of the cocktails on the menu can also be enjoyed as a non-alcoholic option, while bar bites include Hokkaido-scallop skewers and saffron arancini with spicy bluefin tuna tartare by executive chef Marco Calenzo. Plus there’s live music on weekends, when the in-house DJ is joined by a saxophonist or violinist.

Who in your opinion does the best cocktails in Miami? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



The war in Ukraine sparked a sharp rise in demand for sanctions screening and compliance advice, with industry figures now closely monitoring Donald Trump for unexpected additions to the list.

The SIX Sanctioned Securities Monitoring Service, an offshoot of the SIX financial services and stock exchanges group, has reported a sharp increase in the use of its services. It assesses more than 10,000 ETFs and its latest data indicates that 7.7 per cent of them included securities sanctioned by one or more government, and that there has been a 700 per cent increase in the number of sanctioned securities over the past two years.

“With sanctions, to some extent, you have to try to predict the future,” said Sara Nordin, partner at law firm White & Case.

SIX SSMS said the majority of the ETFs holding sanctioned securities were domiciled in China, the US and Ireland, in that order, but this statistic did not mean the ETFs were in breach of any domestic regulations.

For example, the recent decision by the US to add to the blacklist of sanctioned Chinese companies deemed to have links to Beijing’s military resulted in the removal of a group of telecoms companies from global indices, but that does not mean domestic Hong Kong or Chinese investors cannot invest in them.

“Assessing exposure in ETFs is complex, and vigilance is just as paramount for issuers as it is for brokers and other investors,” said Oliver Bodmer, senior product manager at SIX Financial Information.

The complexity deepens because of the different rules applied by different jurisdictions.

“[ETF] Issuers need to stay on top of securities sanctioned in their jurisdiction, but also in the jurisdictions of the investors they intend to target for the instrument,” Bodmer said.

“Similarly, investors must ensure they are not investing in funds that hold sanctioned securities beyond the prescribed thresholds — which varies by jurisdiction and sanctions regime.”

Sanctions imposed by successive US administrations already include pages of orders limiting trading or other dealings with, for example, corporations identified as being involved in the Chinese military industrial complex as well as entities connected to Iran and Russia.

The EU has its own list that focuses strongly on Russia. The UK, too, has its own sanctions list.

But those working to advise the industry point out that risk assessment for fund managers and investors requires more than simply referring to a list.

“The chain of exposure to sanctions could potentially be endless, for example if a sanctions measure prohibits ‘indirect’ transactions, through one or more third parties, with sanctioned persons,” said Nordin, who has also seen a jump in demand for its sanctions-related advice.

“Whether a company would be liable for any sanctions violation that may arise as a result of indirect transactions with sanctioned persons generally comes down to diligence and risk management,” she added.

Risk management also depends on how likely a violation will be identified and pursued by authorities, as well as whether there can be any defence of an alleged violation and what the likely penalty will be.

Lawyers said that in the EU there are legal principles that mean that if you can show you have made reasonable efforts to carry out due diligence, such as by using a reputable screening service, then the regulator might accept this as a reasonable defence.

In contrast, the US Office of Foreign Assets Control operates on a so-called strict liability basis, which means that “a person subject to US jurisdiction may be held civilly liable even if such person did not have knowledge that it was engaging in a transaction that was prohibited under sanctions laws and regulations”, Ofac explains on its website.

Ofac also pursues so-called secondary sanctions, which can target non-US entities engaging in activities with sanctioned parties, even if those activities have no direct connection to the US.

The penalties can be severe. Last year EFG International, a Swiss private banking group, agreed to pay $3.7mn to settle an “apparent violation” of the US’s Cuban Asset Control Regulations. Ofac said the amount reflected the fact that EFG’s “apparent violations were voluntarily self-disclosed and were non-egregious” — in other words, the penalty could have been much higher.

Navigating possible exposure to sanctions risks falls heavily on asset managers and can affect the value of investments held by retail investors too.

However, Kenneth Lamont, principal at Morningstar, said there should be no surprises for end investors. “I would argue the very real potential for investment restrictions is less of a compliance issue and more of an investment risk baked into investing in some emerging markets,” he said.

“Broadly speaking, if we see a new wave of sanctions on companies Chinese or otherwise, this will increase compliance costs,” he added, though he pointed out these increased costs would “still pale in comparison” when compared with compliance costs around environmental social and governance factors and consumer duty.



Billionaire businessman Howard Lutnick will face a senate hearing on Wednesday for his nomination to be Donald Trump’s secretary of commerce, as questions swirl over whether his pledge to unwind his significant holdings will be enough to avoid numerous conflicts of interest.

If confirmed, the chief executive of Wall Street brokerage firm Cantor Fitzgerald and major Trump donor will be the president’s emissary to the business community he once helped lead — and will oversee a department with sway over many of his prior interests, including cryptocurrencies, the commercial satellite sector and the microchip industry.

Trump nominated Lutnick to “lead our tariff and trade agenda”, although the commerce department typically focuses on priorities such as patents and economic data, the national weather service, the census and, recently, chip manufacturing.

“We plan to end the decades of policies that threw American workers to the wolves,” Lutnick said in a speech during Trump’s inauguration festivities.

In a letter to ethics officials, Lutnick said he would resign from his brokerage firm and divest his holdings in a host of companies — including BGC Group, which has a joint-venture with a Chinese company — if confirmed as commerce secretary.

But while he pledged that his wife and young children would not purchase the divested assets, he did not give a similar assurance about his adult children, two of whom work for Cantor companies. Without this, Lutnick’s divestments mean “very little in practical terms”, said Tony Carrk, the executive director of the advocacy group Accountable.us.

Carrk said: “It’s what Lutnick didn’t say that speaks volumes . . . from what we see, Lutnick’s conflicts of interest will continue to loom over the department, and that could cost everyday consumers.”

Cantor declined to comment.

One of Cantor’s largest holdings — it recently reported a $1.2bn stake — is in AI chipmaker Nvidia. Under former president Joe Biden, the commerce department was delegated to investigate how Nvidia chips ended up in China, despite a US ban on advanced semiconductor exports.

A vocal cheerleader for crypto, Lutnick has a strong interest in the stablecoin Tether, in which Cantor has a stake of an undisclosed size. The financial services firm also manages a significant portion of Tether’s reserves, now primarily held in US Treasury bills.

Within the commerce department sits the Office of Space Commerce, which has jurisdiction over radio spectra used by satellites and exports of aerospace products, among other matters. Cantor is invested in Uruguay-based earth observation company Satellogic, which has a long-standing commercial partnership with fellow billionaire Elon Musk’s SpaceX, and has established a US presence in an attempt to win lucrative government contracts in its own right.

Lutnick resigned from Satellogic’s board in November, following Trump’s win.

Last month, Cantor agreed to pay a $6.75mn penalty to settle charges from the US Securities and Exchange Commission for allegedly making misleading statements to investors in the lead up to two public offerings that raised $750mn. The company has also had multiple run-ins with other federal regulatory bodies, including the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.

Although Lutnick plans to resign as Cantor’s chief executive and sell his stake within 90 days of being confirmed, some of his family will remain embedded in the firm.

The entrepreneur’s son Brandon, who previously worked for Tether, took the helm of Cantor’s newest blank-cheque company last month, according to regulatory filings. The special purpose acquisition company plans to raise $200mn and merge with a private enterprise.

Lutnick is expected to be confirmed by the Republican-controlled Senate.

Ted Cruz, who chairs the committee that will question Lutnick, said he was “an excellent choice” to lead the commerce department, and that “his vast experience will serve him well in his mission to promote America’s unlimited entrepreneurial spirit”.



Advances in artificial intelligence by Chinese start-up DeepSeek caused a frantic sell-off of energy and infrastructure shares, and Donald Trump’s Treasury secretary is pushing for new universal tariffs to start at 2.5 per cent. A study finds that ETFs make the market more efficient, and Boeing reports its second-biggest annual loss.

Mentioned in this podcast:

DeepSeek-driven sell-off puts power demands of AI in doubt, says IEA

Scott Bessent pushes gradual 2.5% universal tariffs plan

ETFs increase efficiency of the market, new study shows

Boeing reports second-biggest annual loss after tough 2024

ft.com/briefingsale

The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian, Lulu Smyth, and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



Mexico’s new president Claudia Sheinbaum is pursuing an ambitious agenda for her country. It promises a better standard of living for Mexicans. But investors in the country’s economy have their concerns – and now there’s a new threat on the horizon: US President Donald Trump. The FT’s Mexico and Central America correspondent Christine Murray explains how Sheinbaum will navigate the nation’s economic path forward.

Clip from Global News

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

For further reading:

Mexico’s new president digs in with radical ideas as Trump threat looms

Mexico pledges to shrink trade deficit with China in nod to Donald Trump

Mexico’s first female president to take power under mentor’s shadow

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Follow Christine Murray on X (@chrissiemurray). Michela Tindera is on X (@mtindera07) and Bluesky (@mtindera.bsky.social), or follow her on LinkedIn for updates about the show and more.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



The White House has offered redundancy packages to nearly all federal employees who do not wish to return to work in the office, giving them until February 6 to accept.

Its human resources arm sent a letter to more than 2mn government workers on Tuesday evening offering eight months of salary to any who resigned by next Thursday. It included a “deferred resignation letter” for anyone who wanted to participate.

Administration officials said the offer was available to all full-time federal employees except for members of the armed forces, the US Postal Service and positions related to immigration enforcement.

Federal employees may choose to return to work in the office full-time, but those workers could be cut later, according to a copy of the White House’s memo seen by the Financial Times.

“At this time we cannot give you full assurance regarding the certainty of your position or agency but should your position be eliminated you will be treated with dignity and will be afforded protections in place for such position,” the memo read.

The memo to employees follows a series of executive orders President Donald Trump signed last week requiring employees return to the office full-time, altering hiring processes and updating the system to assess senior government workers.

The move, less than two weeks after Trump returned to the presidency, comes while he rushes to slash federal spending as he implements an agenda to deregulate the US economy and downsize the government.

Trump appointed billionaires Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy to lead a new Department of Government Efficiency (Doge) with the job of finding federal programmes to slash. Ramaswamy has already departed from Doge.

On Tuesday, the White House issued a memo freezing federal payments to programmes, including those helping the country’s poor, but a federal judge blocked the plan just minutes before it was to take effect.

Last week, Trump’s administration halted foreign aid programmes and moved to scrap loans and grants for clean energy projects.

On Tuesday, secretary of state Marco Rubio approved an additional waiver for life-saving humanitarian assistance, which he defined as “core life-saving medicine, medical services, food, shelter and subsistence assistance”.

The Republican president expects that “the majority of federal agencies are likely to be downsized”, though some agencies and military branches could see increases in the size of their work force, the memo said.

The offer could affect large swaths of the federal workforce. A December report from the Office of Personnel Management found that 43 per cent of civilian federal workers engaged in telework on “a routine or situational” basis.

A senior administration official said they anticipated 5 per cent to 10 per cent of the federal workforce would take the redundancy offer. The programme could save as much as $100bn per year, the official said.



A federal judge blocked Donald Trump’s plan to freeze hundreds of billions of dollars in payments to federal programmes just minutes before it was set to take effect on Tuesday, capping a day of US political chaos less than two weeks into the new president’s term in office.

Loren AliKhan, a judge in the Washington DC district court, temporarily halted part of the Trump White House’s order to pause federal financial assistance, according to US media reports, and ordered the funding to continue until a hearing on February 3.

The judge’s decision came after hours of confusion, recrimination and panic around the country as recipients of federal loans and grants — including medical programmes for the poor and elderly — grappled with the scale of the president’s sweeping order to halt the assistance.

As a backlash to Trump’s impending freeze built in Republican and Democratic states on Tuesday, the White House scrambled to clarify its message and contain the fallout, saying the scope of disruption would be narrower than feared.

AliKhan’s judicial intervention was a response to a lawsuit filed by advocacy groups, including the American Public Health Association, which sought a temporary restraining order until the court had assessed the alleged “illegality” of the Trump freeze.

The plan would have a “devastating impact on hundreds of thousands of grant recipients . . . to fulfil their missions, pay their employees, pay their rent”, the groups said in their lawsuit.

The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on AliKhan’s order.

The freeze on federal financial assistance was intended to give the White House time to align the grants and loans with Trump’s conservative agenda.

But it triggered a broad explosion of bipartisan confusion and opposition, as politicians from both parties assessed the scale of the potential funding hit on scientific and medical research, and communities that depend heavily on federal support.

All 50 US states receive federal grants, which accounted for 36.4 per cent, or $1.1tn, of their combined revenue in fiscal 2022, according to the Pew Research Center.

State officials throughout the country, including Republicans, sought clarity and flexibility from the administration in the review.

Louisiana’s Republican governor Jeff Landry urged the Office of Management and Budget to “develop a responsible runway to untangle us from any unnecessary and egregious policies without jeopardising the financial stability of the state”.

More than 50 per cent of Louisiana’s revenue came from federal funds in fiscal year 2022 — more than for any other state, according to Pew.

In a second clarifying memo on Tuesday afternoon, the White House said that social programmes such as Medicaid, the health insurance scheme for low-income Americans, and food-assistance programme Snap, would not be paused.

The memo also added that funds would not be frozen for other important schemes such as those supporting small businesses, farmers and undergraduate students. Social Security and Medicare, the government healthcare plan for older people, would also be untouched, the administration clarified.

Democrats blasted the proposed freeze as an illegal power grab by the president and warned that it would potentially harm the US economy.

“Freezing federal funding that has already been allocated by Congress is unconstitutional; above all else, it’s inhumane,” said Dick Durbin, the Democratic senator from Illinois.

Two senior Democrats, Patty Murray and Rosa DeLauro, wrote to Matthew Vaeth, acting director of the Office of Management and Budget, saying: “The scope of what you are ordering is breathtaking, unprecedented, and will have devastating consequences across the country.”

A group of 23 state attorneys-general led by California and New York said they would file a separate lawsuit seeking to block the plan.

The online Medicaid portal used by states stopped working on Tuesday, which the White House said it was aware of. Karoline Leavitt, White House press secretary, said on X that “no payments have been affected”.

Tuesday’s move by the president came after he ordered a halt to funding for clean energy projects and virtually all foreign aid.

In the first memo ordering the freeze, the administration told agencies to submit information about their grants and loans to the White House by February 10, leaving many programmes in limbo until at least then.

The administration said the US spent $3tn in the 2024 fiscal year on federal financial assistance, but it is unclear how much of that would ultimately be cut.

A radical revamp of the federal government has long been sought by Russell Vought, the president’s pick to be White House budget director, and the authors of Project 2025, a blueprint for the incoming Republican administration assembled in recent years by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think-tank.

Trump distanced himself from Project 2025 during the election campaign against Joe Biden and Kamala Harris last year, since many of its prescriptions were too controversial, but some of its policies are appearing in his first executive actions.





An overwhelming majority of Greenlanders have rejected US President Donald Trump, saying they do not want to be bought by America, according to an opinion poll.

The first survey of Greenlanders since Trump renewed his interest in buying the Arctic island found that 85 per cent did not want to leave the Kingdom of Denmark and become part of the US.

Just 6 per cent said they wanted to join the US, while 9 per cent were undecided, in the poll for Greenlandic newspaper Sermitsiaq and Danish daily Berlingske.

The survey comprised 497 people and was conducted online over the past week by research firm Verian.

“Trump shouldn’t have Greenland. Greenland is Greenland,” said Lars Løkke Rasmussen, Denmark’s foreign minister, on Tuesday.

Trump’s interest in buying Greenland and his refusal to rule out military force or tariffs against Denmark to achieve his aim have thrust the world’s largest non-continental island and its 57,000 inhabitants into the geopolitical spotlight.

Múte Egede, Greenland’s prime minister, has repeatedly insisted the island is not for sale. “We don’t want to be Danish, we don’t want to be American — we want to be Greenlandic,” he said earlier this month.

Mette Frederiksen, Denmark’s prime minister, embarked on a whistle-stop tour of European leaders on Tuesday, visiting Germany’s Olaf Scholz, France’s Emmanuel Macron and the Nato secretary-general Mark Rutte.

None mentioned Trump or his threat to seize Greenland publicly, in line with Danish requests for silence to avoid offending the US president.

But Frederiksen said at the end of the trip: “Broadly, there is very, very great support for Denmark in this situation.”

Jean-Noël Barrot, France’s foreign minister, said Paris had discussed sending troops to Greenland but that “at this point, it is not Denmark’s wish”.

Five current and former senior European officials told the Financial Times last week that Trump had been aggressive and confrontational in a call with Frederiksen in which he insisted the US still wanted Greenland.

At the weekend, the US president said America would “get” Greenland. He said of Greenlanders: “I think the people want to be with us.”

Denmark and Greenland unveiled a sharp increase in military spending for the Arctic this week, including three new ships and two drones for the island.

Vivian Motzfeldt, Greenland’s foreign minister, told a press conference in Nuuk that it was important her country could look after itself.

“What we need to do is we need to ensure a tomorrow for us in this country. That is our most important responsibility,” she added.

But Trump ridiculed the spending at the weekend saying that “two dog sleds” — trailed by Denmark’s defence minister Troels Lund Poulsen as being part of the package, but not announced this week — was not enough protection for Greenland.

Greenland’s main military protection comes from a US military base in the far north. Politicians on the island as well as in Denmark have said they are open to America expanding its presence.



Scientists have warned wider areas of Los Angeles will become “more flammable” as temperatures rise, after finding the ferocious fires that killed at least 28 people and destroyed 16,000 buildings were made more than one-third worse by the conditions caused by climate change.

More than 30 researchers, including wildfire scientists from the US and Europe, calculated the hot, dry and windy weather that drove the LA fires would become another 35 per cent more likely if global warming reaches 2.6C above pre-industrial times. The world has already warmed by at least 1.1C.

The scientists, part of the World Weather Attribution group, combine weather data with climate models to understand the effects of climate change.

While it was not southern California’s “first rodeo when it comes to fires”, said John Abatzoglou, professor of climatology at the University of California Merced, the conditions provided the “perfect storm when it comes to conditions for fire disasters”.

Fires broke out on January 7 and were fanned by the powerful Santa Ana mountain winds. Exceptionally wet weather the previous winter had led to a rise in vegetation, but an extremely hot summer and a delay to the following rainy season meant the abundant plants were very dry.

The study found that low rainfall from October to December was about 2.4 times more likely compared with the pre-industrial climate, and fire-prone conditions had extended by about 23 days each year, increasing the chance a fire would start during peak Santa Ana winds.

Water infrastructure, not designed to fight a rapidly expanding wildfire, was unable to keep up with scale and extreme needs, it also noted.

UCLA hydroclimatologist Park Williams flagged the dangers faced by the many neighbourhoods in Southern California nestled in the heavily vegetated mountainsides, from Santa Barbara through Ventura, Orange and San Diego counties.

“I’d say that a large number of neighbourhoods are at similar risk to the small number of areas that we saw actually be exposed to the fires this year,” Williams said.

Recent days of moderate rain has helped contain the major fires, although one of the most recent breakout in San Luis Obispo county remained burning across 25 per cent of the area by Thursday this week.

The study is the third since the fires broke out to find a link between climate change and the disaster. Last month, rapid research from scientists at UCLA said climate change could be blamed for about 25 per cent of the fuel available for the fires.

“Politicians are talking about mismanagement of the landscape, but that is not the case with these particular fires,” said UCLA’s Williams.

The researchers said that while the individual results showed some degree of uncertainty, the overall results pointed in the same direction, indicating that climate change caused primarily by the burning of fossil fuels had increased the likelihood of the fires.

“Without a faster transition away from planet-heating fossil fuels, California will continue to get hotter, drier and more flammable,” said Clair Barnes of Imperial College London.

The findings were not peer reviewed because of the rapid nature of the study, but other scientists backed the findings.

“WWA’s study uses widely employed methods in climate change attribution, considers long-term and immediate causes of the fire, and draws on multiple lines of evidence from weather observations and climate models to buttress their findings,” said Rupert Stuart-Smith, senior researcher in climate science and attribution at Oxford university.

“Fires in California are far from unprecedented, but, be it in the extremely dry autumn that created tinderbox conditions, or the fire weather that drove the rapid spread of the flames, the authors find fingerprints of human-caused climate change throughout this event.”



Nvidia led Wall Street technology stocks higher on Tuesday following a global rout sparked by Chinese start-up DeepSeek’s advances in artificial intelligence.

The Nasdaq Composite index rose 2 per cent after Monday’s 3.1 per cent decline. Nvidia jumped almost 9 per cent following a historic 17 per cent fall that wiped $589bn off its market value.

This previous day’s losses had come as Wall Street and Silicon Valley panicked over a perceived threat from DeepSeek to the continued dominance of the US in AI. But relative calm returned to markets on Tuesday with the benchmark S&P 500 up 0.9 per cent.

Timothy Arcuri, an analyst at UBS, said: “The sheer magnitude of the moves in stocks like Nvidia, Broadcom and Marvell [on Monday] strike us as overdone and may generally look like a buying opportunity in hindsight once the dust settles.”

The Chinese company’s model, which achieved a quality of output similar to US chatbots but with apparently far less capital expenditure, has called into question the need to invest hundreds of billions of dollars in underlying AI infrastructure.

“Investors have been reminded that even technology stocks need to have a risk premium,” said Guy Miller, chief market strategist at insurer Zurich. “[The tech rout has been] a healthy reminder that nothing in markets, or in technological development, is a straight line.”

Markets in Europe and Asia steadied, with the Stoxx Europe 600 index closing up 0.4 per cent.

Japan’s tech-heavy Nikkei 225 closed down 1.4 per cent as its chipmaking companies continued their decline. The broader Topix, which has lower weightings for Japan’s tech exporters, was flat.

Tokyo-listed shares in SoftBank lost 5.2 per cent, following Monday’s 10 per cent drop in shares of Arm Holdings — the US-listed chip design company in which the Japanese group holds an 88 per cent stake.

In currency markets, the US dollar strengthened 0.6 per cent against a basket of currencies, including Japan’s yen and the pound, after US President Donald Trump said he wanted “much, much bigger” tariffs than the 2.5 per cent that US Treasury secretary Scott Bessent had been pushing for, said people familiar with the proposal.

DeepSeek’s promise of a much lower-cost AI model has raised the question of whether last week’s unveiling of the Stargate joint venture, involving SoftBank, Oracle and OpenAI in a $100bn data centre investment, “marked the peak of the AI capex boom”, said Chris Wood, strategist at Jefferies.

The market has moved to price in a smaller market share for AI incumbents and a “dramatically lower cost” for developing the technology, said Shaniel Ramjee, co-head of multi-asset at Pictet Asset Management. “While the incumbents looked to be building ever greater moats around their capability . . . this new development challenges that notion.”

In Hong Kong, shares in Chinese tech companies recorded gains, although chipmaker SMIC closed down 0.4 per cent. The Hang Seng index closed up 0.1 per cent, led higher by mainland Chinese tech companies including Tencent and Baidu, which closed up 1.4 and 3.6 per cent respectively.



Longtime CNN journalist Jim Acosta, who earned Donald Trump’s scorn for hard-hitting questioning during his first presidency, is leaving the news network after executives proposed moving his morning show to midnight.

“I’ve decided to move on,” Acosta said on air on Tuesday. “Don’t give in to the lies. Don’t give in to the fear. Hold on to the truth and to hope.”

Acosta worked for CNN for 18 years. He got into a heated exchange with Trump during a press conference in 2018, which spurred the White House to revoke his press pass. It was returned weeks later after the network sued the administration and a federal judge ordered it restored.

Trump on Tuesday posted on his Truth Social site: “Jim is a major loser who will fail no matter where he ends up. Good luck Jim!”

CNN last week revealed plans to lay off about 200 employees as chief executive Mark Thompson tries to turn around the struggling broadcaster. As part of the shake-up, the network overhauled its programming line-up, moving Wolf Blitzer’s Situation Room to the 10am slot, replacing Acosta’s morning show.

CNN proposed to Acosta a new slot of 12am to 2am Eastern time, offering to move him to Los Angeles, where it would be 9pm, said people familiar with the matter.

Critics of the decision suggested CNN was trying to appease Trump. “Looks like CNN is caving to the White House,” former US senator Al Franken said on X.

CNN said the network was thankful for Acosta’s “dedication and commitment”.

“Jim has had a long, distinguished nearly 20-year career at CNN, with a track record of standing up to authority, for the First Amendment and for our journalistic freedoms,” it said.

CNN’s audiences have shrunk substantially in recent years. Just 1.7mn people watched Trump’s inauguration on CNN earlier this month, down from 10mn who tuned in for Joe Biden’s inauguration in 2021.

Trump has long expressed contempt for mainstream news media, which he derides as “fake news”.

In her first briefing with reporters, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt on Tuesday said she would open up the briefing room to “new media voices” such as “podcasters, social media influencers and content creators”.



Foreign states including India, Russia and China have interfered in Canada’s democratic institutions in an effort to destabilise the country, an official investigation has concluded.

The final seven-volume report released on Tuesday by Justice Marie-Josée Hogue, who led the Foreign Interference Commission, was based on 16 months of reporting and the testimony of more than a 100 witnesses.

It found widespread incidence of attempted political interference and that “disinformation” was commonly deployed in traditional and social media against Canada and Canadian officials.

“It is true that some foreign states are trying to interfere in our democratic institutions, including electoral processes,” Hogue said in Ottawa. “What is new, is the means deployed by these states, the apparent scale of the issue and public discourse on the topic.”

The report focused on allegations that China and India, which have large diaspora populations in Canada, had carried out direct or indirect, influence campaigns but Russia, Pakistan and Iran were also included in the inquiry’s scope.

Despite the broad-based attempts to destabilise the country’s electoral system, Hogue concluded there had only been a few cases where foreign states had tried to influence Canadian parliamentarians. “The phenomenon remains marginal and largely ineffective,” she said.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s government has been accused of failing to act on intelligence briefings and warnings that foreign states were targeting Canada’s democracy, media, institution and officials.

The inquiry was launched after media reports of foreign interference based on leaked intelligence briefings and by officials complaining that their concerns were ignored.

Trudeau testified at the inquiry in October and said there was a list of Canadian politicians — from all parties — who were at risk of foreign influence.

Hogue’s findings also addressed accusations tabled in June last year by Canada’s National Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians, which consists of MPs and Senators with top security clearance, that some MPs were “semi-witting or witting” participants in efforts by foreign states to interfere in the country’s politics.

Hogue wrote there was no evidence “of traitors in parliament” but concluded Ottawa at times took “too long to act” on evidence of attempted interference and that co-ordination was poor.

The government was “overall a poor communicator” when it comes to foreign interference, she said.

The official interim report last May found China had directly meddled in Canada’s 2019 and 2021 elections and was “the most active foreign state actor engaged in interference” in the country.

Former Conservative party leader Erin O’Toole, who was a target of a Chinese disinformation campaign in 2021, said the inquiry served as a “wake-up call” on the issue.

“I think all of our democratic allies should take note of these risks,” he told the Financial Times.



Donald Trump’s re-election shows America is big on comebacks. And his 2020 electoral defeat suggests bitter losses can still lead to future success. US Steel CEO David Burritt is seeking a similar redemption arc.

Burritt engineered the $15bn sale of his company to Nippon Steel in 2023, only to see it blocked in the last weeks of Joe Biden’s presidency. Trump, for his part, never favoured selling the company to a foreign buyer. Nor did the United Steelworkers of America. But the buyout agreement has yet to be terminated and US Steel and Nippon are holding out hope that the newly inaugurated Trump can be persuaded to reverse Biden’s verdict.

While the US Steel boss fights the last battle, some investors have moved on to a new one. Earlier this week, hedge fund Ancora Holdings declared it wants fellow shareholders to replace the board and sack Burritt, whom it thinks can no longer effectively govern. It is not uncommon for a CEO to leave when a big transaction falls apart, but Burritt insists that his final chapter is not written.

Ancora may be harsh to fault Burritt for pursuing the deal with Nippon, as if an unprecedented brawl over a buyer from an allied nation was predictable. The Nippon share price offer, more than double where US Steel was previously trading, came amid a process kicked off by a hostile bid for US Steel from another rival, Cleveland Cliffs.

Moreover, it’s not like buyer and seller didn’t try to get the deal through. Nippon made generous, if uneconomic, concessions to allow local control of its prey. With Burritt at the helm, US Steel is pursuing two lawsuits, one over the Washington rejection and another over the union and Cleveland Cliffs’ attempts to scotch the deal. Besides, failure isn’t so bad. A Nippon abandonment would secure a $565mn termination fee for US Steel.

If the merger proves truly dead, the question of who should run the steelmaker is worth asking. Ancora says Burritt has failed as an operator and describes its candidate to replace him, industry executive Alan Kestenbaum, as a steel-sector “legend”. Such a person would come in handy: US Steel’s current share price is just $36, far below the $55 on offer from Nippon.

The biggest challenge for Burritt is that, unless he can revive the Nippon deal before its June drop-dead date, he must provide a persuasive vision of how US Steel can thrive on its own. Yet his brokering of the Nippon deal suggests he doesn’t think it can. It wouldn’t be surprising if shareholders are ready to give Ancora, which may have its own M&A angle, a hearing.

sujeet.indap@ft.com



Mexico and Canada have begun a flurry of activity at their US borders to show they are willing to clamp down on migrants ahead of Donald Trump’s deadline to impose punitive tariffs.

In the Mexican city of Ciudad Juárez on the US border, workers began filling in a 300 metre tunnel this week used to smuggle migrants into Texas. The 1.8 metre-high tunnel, with electric cabling and ventilation, ran under the Río Bravo, also known as the Rio Grande, from central Juárez beside a major highway. US agents said they had discovered it earlier this month.

Mexico has set up large, air-conditioned temporary shelters for deportees, while President Claudia Sheinbaum said some non-Mexicans were among thousands of migrants that Mexico took back in Trump’s first week. She had earlier suggested her country could accept non-Mexican migrants as an offering to Trump.

Canada deployed newly leased Black Hawk patrol helicopters, extra dogs and 60 drones at its border with the US as part of its response to Trump’s demands that the two countries curb entry of illegal migrants and fentanyl.

Canada’s public safety minister David McGuinty said their effort “involves political outreach, official outreach and operational outreach”, including talks this week with Trump’s border tsar Tom Homan.

Officials in Mexico City and Ottawa rushed to demonstrate action after Trump threatened to impose tariffs of 25 per cent on their exports as early as February 1 if they failed to cut migration and the drugs trade.

If implemented, the threatened tariffs would send both economies into recession, upend supply chains in industries from cars to electronics, and push up prices for US consumers, analysts have said.

Trump briefly announced punitive tariffs on Colombia last week after it refused to accept two military aircraft carrying deportees, but lifted them when Bogotá swiftly backed down.

He has also declared a national emergency at the US-Mexico border, sent 1,500 additional troops, and cancelled legal-entry pathways created by his predecessor Joe Biden, including an app for asylum applications.

The measures have left thousands of migrants, including Argenis, a 26-year-old Venezuelan who had hoped to reunite with his brother in Texas, stranded in Mexican border cities.

“Videos came up on TikTok of people hugging their families. I was so excited to hug my family too,” he told the FT.

“[Then] I was depressed. I even deleted my WhatsApp. I didn’t want to speak to anyone.”

Trump put the US southern border at the heart of all three of his presidential campaigns, railing last year against record levels of illegal immigration under Biden.

Sheinbaum said on Monday that migration officials from both countries had held several virtual meetings and reached agreements, without offering further detail.

Mexico took back about 4,000 migrants in Trump’s first week, an uptick from the roughly 3,700 a week it took back last year, according to government data.

Mexico had already been increasing immigration enforcement at the US’s behest for more than a decade. Last year it stepped up checks and detentions further across the country, focusing on busing foreign migrants southwards.

Mexico is also under pressure over drug cartels that supply substances including the deadly opioid fentanyl to the US. Curbing that trade is difficult, with combined murders and disappearances in the country close to record highs.

Security Minister Omar García Harfuch said on Tuesday that since October more than 10,000 people had been detained for high-impact crimes such as murder and violent robbery, and more than 90 tonnes of drugs seized.

The situation on Canada’s border with the US differs from Mexico’s. Since June last year, US authorities have found around 100,000 people a month crossing from Mexico irregularly, according to US Customs and Border Protection, but at the northern border with Canada the figure was about 15,000 a month.

Canada has said that only about 1 per cent of fentanyl entering the US is transported across its border. But that has not prevented Trump from threatening it, alongside Mexico. In recent months both Mexico and Canada have announced large drug busts.

Canadian foreign minister Mélanie Joly, who will travel to Washington DC to meet Secretary of State Marco Rubio on Wednesday, said this week she would also speak with Mexico, the UK and EU counterparts.

“At the heart of my conversations with my British colleagues and my European colleagues is going to be the question of how to respond to tariffs,” she said on Monday.

In December Canada announced an extra C$1.3bn (US $900mn) to bolster border security and the immigration system. It increased patrols and surveillance along the border, which stretches nearly 9,000km across land and water.

Xavi Delgado, of the Canada Institute at the Wilson Centre in Washington DC, said: “This has been a wake-up call for Ottawa. Trump has voiced frustration with Canada over it taking the US for granted.”

Mexico and Canada have lobbied lawmakers and others in the president’s circle, arguing that tariffs would be a “lose-lose” situation for all three countries.

Despite Trump’s crackdown, some migrants in Mexico remain hopeful. “I’m thinking of staying here quietly, waiting,” said Gabriel, a 23-year-old from Venezuela, at the border. “I feel that at any moment we’ll be able to cross legally, or something good will happen.”

This article has been amended to make clear that since June last year, US authorities have found around 100,000 people a month crossing irregularly from Mexico and 15,000 from Canada, not illegally as originally stated.



Chinese officials were prepared for Donald Trump to deliver bad news on his return to the US presidency: immediate 60 per cent tariffs on exports that could deal a serious blow to the world’s second-largest economy.

What they got instead seemed mild. Trump first ordered an investigation into US-China trade, before on Tuesday reiterating the threat of a 10 per cent tariff related to the deadly opioid fentanyl.

That was enough to hit China’s stocks and currency. The mainland’s CSI 300 index fell 1 per cent and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng retreated 1.6 per cent on Wednesday, while the offshore renminbi weakened 0.25 per cent.

Still, Trump’s opening moves on China were less severe than the 25 per cent tariffs he announced on US allies Mexico and Canada. He also hinted at a potential broader deal linking tariffs to ownership of TikTok, the Chinese-controlled short-video platform that US security hawks want to shut down.

Despite Trump’s tendency for erratic statements and rapid changes of course, this softer than expected prelude has rekindled hope in Beijing that negotiations might be possible to avert a second trade war. Now, the question is what kind of deal would be acceptable to both sides.

“There is a possibility that the two sides can strike a deal — you can sense there is cautious optimism,” said Zhao Minghao, professor at the Institute of International Studies at Fudan University in Shanghai. “But we will need to see if there is a good match between what Trump and Beijing can offer each other.”

Trump and China’s President Xi Jinping held a phone call the weekend before the inauguration, their first in four years, which the US president described as “very good” and covered “Trade, Fentanyl, TikTok, and many other subjects”.

Xi also dispatched the most senior Chinese official ever to attend a US inauguration, vice-president Han Zheng, who also met US business leaders including Trump confidant Elon Musk.

During his campaign, Trump had vowed to hit China with 60 per cent tariffs upon taking office, and later threatened an additional 10 per cent on day one to compel Beijing to crack down on flows of precursor drugs for fentanyl.

Instead, on Monday he issued a memo directing officials to investigate the US trade deficit and “recommend appropriate measures, such as a global supplemental tariff or other policies, to remedy such deficits”.

He also asked the US Trade Representative to study Beijing’s compliance with the “phase one” deal agreed during his first term as president, and to consider additional tariffs “particularly with respect to industrial supply chains and circumvention through third countries” — a move with potentially much further-reaching implications for China.

Economists believe part of China’s trade with the US has been diverted through third countries to avoid tariffs since the trade war of Trump’s first administration. The US officials are due to report their findings on April 1.

Although Trump signed an order allowing TikTok to operate for 75 days — a turnaround from his first term, where he had sought to ban it from the US — he also said Beijing would need to allow a US entity to take half of the company or face tariffs of up to 100 per cent.

The linking of tariffs to TikTok’s ownership followed quixotic remarks on Monday by Musk, who complained that while the former was allowed to operate in the US, his social media site X was blocked in China.

One person familiar with the matter in China said Beijing might agree to TikTok’s owner ByteDance selling the platform as part of a broader deal that would cover a range of issues including trade. However, any such discussions were at an early stage, the person said.

Chinese officials, who have long opposed a forced sale of TikTok and would need to approve it, have in recent days appeared to signal a more hands-off approach.

“When it comes to actions such as the operation and acquisition of businesses, we believe it should be independently decided by companies in accordance with market principles,” the foreign ministry said on Tuesday, adding that “China’s laws and regulations should be observed”.

Gabriel Wildau, managing director at consultancy Teneo, wrote in an analyst note that Chinese leaders might “believe that an amicable resolution of the TikTok issue could lay groundwork for co-operation” on other issues.

“These could include tariffs, export controls, and — in a dream scenario for Beijing — even US policy towards Taiwan and the South China Sea,” Wildau said.

However, economists warned that it was too early to be confident that trade conflict could be averted. While Trump sounded more open to dealmaking, his administration was filled with China hawks, they said.

“This is more of a holding pattern for now,” said Fred Neumann, chief Asia economist at HSBC. “It is somewhat encouraging that we didn’t see an immediate rise and tariffs and that maybe there is some room for discussions beforehand. But I think it would be the wrong conclusion to say that China is now entirely off the hook.”

Aside from trade, Beijing could offer Trump help on other issues, such as resolving the Ukraine war, said Wang Chong, a foreign policy expert at Zhejiang International Studies University.

Wang warned, however, that Beijing was ready if relations broke down. Even if the US started with small tariff increases, it would undermine investor confidence in China. “If tariffs are imposed, China should fight,” Wang said.

Additional reporting by Arjun Neil Alim in Hong Kong



Good morning. Upon arriving at the White House, Donald Trump signed orders to review “unfair trade practices”, but did not slap any new tariffs yet on his trade partners. Here are five takeaways from his opening salvo, and what it could mean for the EU.

Today, our trade correspondent outlines how the new EU justice commissioner wants to protect consumers from buying dangerous goods. And our Rome reporter has a dispatch on the recent train chaos in Italy that may or may not have been caused by sabotage.

Brussels should get the powers to stem the flood of dangerous goods sent to Europe in small parcels from China, EU justice commissioner Michael McGrath tells Andy Bounds.

Context: Some 10mn items are flown into the EU every day, most of them coming from China. The European Commission has previously launched investigations into Chinese retailers such as Temu over the alleged sale of illegal goods.

Speaking in an interview with the Financial Times, McGrath said the number of items that are faulty or do not meet safety standards was “an issue of major concern”.

“The overwhelming majority originates from China, and the surveys and the analysis that has been done shows a very high level of non-compliance with EU safety standards,” he said.

“It also affects European companies because it undermines the level playing field . . . and impacts on the ability of European companies to compete,” McGrath said.

The commission is preparing a paper on ecommerce for next month that will recommend tighter customs controls, among other measures. But McGrath believes member states are struggling to keep up with the rising demand, despite increased collaboration between them.

“It is an area where I believe there is a need for a centralised EU action,” said the Irish politician.

While new rules that allow national authorities to block certain websites are helping, McGrath wants to examine “centralised investigative and enforcement powers at an EU level”.

McGrath, who is also responsible for upholding democracy and EU values, also insisted that EU regulations of large online platforms were not “about censorship”.

“It is about ensuring that where there is illegal content, such as illegal hate speech, that that is removed,” he added.

McGrath defended the relatively slow pace of investigations into platforms including X and TikTok over how they handle content and potentially influence users.

“The EU can only act on the basis of evidence,” he said, and companies must have “a fair opportunity to respond, to address the concerns that have been raised”.

The commission also wanted to be confident that a fine or other punishment could survive a challenge at the European Court of Justice. “We’re very anxious to avoid the damage that could be done by adverse findings before the ECJ,” he said.

McGrath added that more legislation might be needed to protect free and fair elections, with a crucial poll in Germany next month.

The change of guard in Brussels is helping fuel a debate on whether the EU needs to reassess its merger rules to better support industrial policy.

Italy’s transport minister Matteo Salvini has warned about sabotage to the country’s railways as recent disruptions have paralysed the country, writes Giuliana Ricozzi.

Context: Earlier this month, a faulty power line at Milan’s central station resulted in dozens of train cancellations and hours of delays. Since then, similar malfunctions have occurred around the peninsula, igniting a debate on the railways’ conditions, and the responsibility for the disruptions.

Last week, Ferrovie dello Stato, the state company in charge of rail infrastructure, formally requested prosecutors in Rome to investigate what it described as “abnormal incidents’’ and “highly suspicious events’’, adding that the faults could be part of a deliberate sabotage campaign.

Salvini, who is in charge of transport as well as deputy prime minister, has come under fire for the disruption, with opponents calling for his resignation.

Speaking in parliament yesterday, Salvini echoed the warnings of sabotage, saying the “situation was objectively worrying’’.

“Italy is not and will never be intimidated,” Salvini said, adding that “for years the railway network has unfortunately been under attack”.

But opposition parties and unions have shown scepticism at the sabotage theory, rather pointing at frequent technical issues on the network and their mismanagement.

The countless disruptions and delays come as Italy’s old fashioned railway system is undergoing a big modernisation process with 1,200 open construction sites across the country.



Chinese banks have been pitching to work on the blockbuster Hong Kong secondary listing of the world’s leading EV battery maker CATL for as little as 0.01 per cent in fees, highlighting cut-throat competition in a once-lucrative listings market where business has significantly slowed.

CICC and CSC are among the banks lined up for a leading role on the deal, which stands to be one of the biggest listings in Hong Kong in recent years. JPMorgan and Bank of America are also lined up for top roles.

Two people with knowledge of the matter said CICC’s pitch for a role on the deal had suggested they would be willing to work on it for fees of 0.01 per cent of the capital raised, which could ultimately top $7bn. Two people with knowledge of the matter said CSC had also pitched for a fee at around that level.

“I think in this market, competitors are willing to do things for almost nothing,” said a senior banker at an institution that pitched for a role.

Companies typically use the numbers from several banks’ pitches as a guideline when deciding how to set fees, rather than directly paying them the amount they pitched. The total fee pool can be shared unevenly between the banks.

CATL was planning to pay 0.2 per cent in underwriting fees, two people with knowledge of the matter said. Incentive fees on top of this — based partly on the value of the orders that each bank brings in — could make the final number higher, two people briefed on the deal said. Fees on large deals such as CATL’s listing can often be lower than on smaller ones, but figures below 1 per cent are unusual.

Morgan Stanley has estimated the CATL listing could raise up to $7.7bn, marking one of the biggest offerings in the territory in recent years and giving the Shenzhen-listed company access to offshore funds as it seeks to expand overseas. CATL announced its plans in December, with the listing expected later this year.

Bankers said Chinese banks were willing to accept rock-bottom fees on such a major offering as there was little business and the IPO market was yet to recover on the mainland. A director at a European bank who pitched said it was not a surprise to see the cut-throat pitches “given most of their China team onshore has lots of capacity but no deal flows”.

US banks are planning to work on the deal despite the Pentagon this month adding CATL — a supplier to Tesla, Volkswagen and Ford — to a blacklist of companies that it says are linked to China’s military.

Interest among some US institutional investors for an allocation has also not wavered, according to bankers involved. The defence department’s list only prevents those named doing business with the US military and has no direct legal ramifications, but it brings reputational risk.

CATL said in a statement it had “never engaged in any military-related business or activities”, the move was a “mistake” and was “expected to have no substantially adverse impact on our business”.

The battery pioneer shelved a previous plan to sell up to $5bn in Swiss global depositary receipts in 2023 following regulatory concerns over large-scale offerings.

On average, banks would pitch for or receive at least a single-digit fee on a Hong Kong listing, according to investment bankers and prospectuses filed to the exchange in 2024.

An executive at another bank that pitched for a role described the CATL listing as a “franchise-defining deal” and said bankers would want to be involved despite the low fees.

Banks also have an incentive to be in on the deal in the hope of future business with CATL, such as block trades that could be more lucrative.

“Everyone just wants credits on the league table, they’re not trying to make money on this deal,” said one senior Chinese banker familiar with the pitch. “It’s very annoying to see some peers sabotaging the norms, but there’s nothing we can do about it.”

Bank of America, JPMorgan, Goldman Sachs and CICC declined to comment. CSC and CATL did not respond to requests for comment.



Netflix added a record 19mn subscribers in the fourth quarter, fuelled by live sports. US stocks rallied while currencies swung the day after Donald Trump’s inauguration, and TikTok-owner ByteDance plans to spend $12bn on AI chips in 2025. Plus, Chinese citizens’ doubts grow over the government’s economic growth claims.

Mentioned in this podcast:

Netflix shares jump as it adds record number of subscribers

Wall Street stocks climb as investors parse Donald Trump’s executive orders

TikTok-owner ByteDance plans to spend $12bn on AI chips in 2025

Chinese citizens’ doubts grow over official economic growth claims



The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian, Lulu Smyth, and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



TikTok owner ByteDance plans to spend more than $12bn on artificial intelligence infrastructure this year, betting on the cutting-edge technology for new growth while under pressure from Washington to sell its popular video-sharing app in the US.

The Beijing-based company has budgeted Rmb40bn ($5.5bn) to acquire AI chips in China in 2025, said two people familiar with the plans, which would double the amount it spent last year. The group also plans to invest about $6.8bn overseas to build up its foundation model training capabilities using advanced Nvidia chips.

About 60 per cent of ByteDance’s domestic semiconductor orders would go to Chinese suppliers such as Huawei and Cambricon, while the rest would be spent on Nvidia chips that have been watered down to align with US export controls, the people said.

Beijing has given Chinese tech companies informal guidance to buy at least 30 per cent of their chips from the country’s own suppliers, the people added.

The $6.8bn in overseas investment was budgeted to build out ByteDance’s AI computing capacity for model training. This investment could face challenges from recently expanded US export controls designed to hamper Chinese companies building sensitive technologies.

The push comes as ByteDance faces pressure in its core social media business. TikTok restored service to 170mn US users on Sunday after new President Donald Trump said companies that distributed and hosted the platform would not be held liable for violating a US law that banned the video app unless it was sold.

While Trump signed an executive order on Monday to keep TikTok open for 75 days, he said he wanted a US company to have 50 per cent ownership in the video app in the future. The president said he could “certainly” put tariffs on China if it rejected a deal.

Any such transaction could affect plans for a future ByteDance initial public offering, with the company valuing itself at $300bn during a recent share buyback programme.

The company drew up its huge purchasing budget for graphic processing units in 2025 before the recent interventions in the US.

ByteDance, which under the direction of the tech group’s founder Zhang Yiming has become the frontrunner in China’s AI race, is doubling down to build out its own AI infrastructure to train its foundation model, as well as to implement AI functions across its various platforms.

It has built up computing capacity in south-east Asia, particularly in Malaysia. Though Chinese companies have been banned from purchasing Nvidia chips outside of the US since 2023, they have been able to secure access to chips through rental agreements with third-party data centre providers, several industry insiders said.

This loophole was closed last week by Joe Biden’s administration, which issued new rules that the identity of both the owner and operator of the chips must undergo a review process.

While Trump could take a different stance on export controls, the regulations — if strictly implemented — would make ByteDance’s chip purchases overseas more difficult than ever.

It has made large orders to build up overseas AI capacity this year, such as through rental agreements, one of the people said. It should be sufficient for most of the company’s needs in 2025 but what happened after that remained uncertain, the person added.

ByteDance’s budget for purchases of AI chips overseas was previously reported by news outlet The Information. In response to the FT’s reporting, ByteDance said: “The anonymously sourced information about our plan is incorrect.”

ByteDance also faces challenges from deep-pocketed local competitors, such as Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent, which are investing heavily in generative AI. Alongside these rivals, it has been pushing out more capable models and lowering costs for developers.

Chinese companies still need to build up the capacity of AI data centres onshore to support the use of AI applications even after the models have been trained.

ByteDance plans to use most of its Chinese AI chips — including Huawei’s Ascend and Cambricon — for “inference” tasks, the computation undertaken by large language models to generate a response to a prompt.

ByteDance released its AI chatbot Doubao in August 2023 and the AI app has become China’s most popular AI application, according to website analytics site Aicpb.com.

Doubao, which means “beanbag” in Chinese, had 71mn regular monthly active users as of December, compared with OpenAI’s 300mn weekly active users globally.

Nvidia recorded $11.6bn in revenue from China, including Hong Kong, or about 13 per cent of its global total, during the first three quarters of 2024, according to company filings.

ByteDance is by far the largest client for Nvidia in China. The TikTok parent can only buy less advanced chips such as Nvidia’s H20 for Chinese data centres, a specialised and less-powerful version of its GPUs tailored to align with US export controls.

In 2024, it ordered about 230,000 of Nvidia’s chips, mostly H20s, according to estimates from tech consultancy Omdia. This compares with 485,000 of the more advanced “Hopper” chips bought by Microsoft last year and the 224,000 acquired by Meta.

Tech companies around the world have spent an estimated $229bn on servers in 2024, according to Omdia, led by Microsoft’s $31bn in capital expenditure and Amazon’s $26bn.

Additional reporting by Ryan McMorrow in Beijing and Demetri Sevastopulo in Washington



Donald Trump imposed no new trade tariffs on the first day of his second term, as feared by markets, but the US president did lay out the official blueprint for an “America First Trade Policy”.

A presidential memo called on federal agencies to remediate “unfair trade practices” and identify “currency manipulators”. Trade pacts with China, Canada, Mexico and all other partners were placed under review.

The message: the Trump administration was ready to use all means to re-engineer trade flows to its advantage. Here are five takeaways from the opening salvos of Trump’s trade agenda.

Trump mentioned tariffs just three times in his inaugural address, calming investors and trade partners who had been warned to expect “day one” levies. But he did outline plans to set up an External Revenue Service to collect tariffs, indicating serious plans to increase revenues from trade.

Josh Lipsky, a senior director at the Atlantic Council think-tank, said tariff decisions are likely to be delayed, but not abandoned. “The president was worried about the market reaction on Tuesday and he didn’t want it to mar his first day.”

The president’s “America First” memo provided a framework for the new agenda, announcing reviews into unfair trade practices, the reasons for US trade deficits and whether competitors are manipulating currencies and unfairly taxing US business.

Trump also sharpened his rhetoric and repeated threats to apply 25 per cent tariffs on Canadian and Mexican imports, despite the countries’ free trade pact. When asked about the prospect of imposing universal tariffs on anybody doing business with the US, the president said: “We may. But we’re not ready for that yet.”

On Tuesday Trump also reiterated a campaign threat to impose a 10 per cent tariff on China as a means of punishing Beijing for the flow of Fentanyl to Mexico and Canada. He said this could happen on February 1.

“The experience of the first term is to expect tariffs sooner rather than later,” Lipsky warned, adding the administration did not have a full economic team in place and wanted to establish solid legal bases for any moves.

Trump appears to be prioritising actions on the US’s nearest trading partners, saying he was preparing tariffs on Canada and Mexico to be applied as soon as February 1.

Trump had no qualms in hitting US allies in his first term, invoking national security concerns to put tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. But by going so publicly for Canada, analysts say he is signalling that no country is safe from the self-declared “tariff man”.

The president’s trade memo ordered a review of trade ties with Canada and Mexico by April 1 (a later date from Trump’s tariff warning, which he did not explain). Preparations would then begin for a comprehensive review of the USMCA trade deal in July 2026.

One priority highlighted in the trade memo is Trump’s determination to cut “unlawful migration and fentanyl flows”, particularly from Mexico and Canada.

Many supply chains for US manufacturers, particularly carmakers, rely on operations in all three countries and those businesses could put pressure on Trump to rescind his threats.

On Tuesday Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said his country was taking Trump’s proposals “seriously” and would respond if tariffs were imposed, while Mexico’s President Claudia Sheinbaum said it would focus on the “decrees rather than the discourse”.

Other parts of the president’s policy cover the means to enable a comprehensive shift in Washington’s dealings with its trade partners.

“I am not expecting tweaks on the margins,” said Kelly Ann Shaw, a partner at law firm Hogan Lovells and a former Trump trade adviser. “But rather a review of the entire panoply of trade and economic tools that results in significant action.”

The broad range of initiatives kick-started by the memo include a probe into currency manipulation. Trump has previously accused China of undervaluing the renminbi to boost the value of its exports.

The president also directed his trade representative, Jamieson Greer, to review US trade deals, including the limited one struck during the first Trump administration that was intended to boost exports to China.

Several sections of the memo direct various US economic officials to probe Washington’s economic relations with Beijing more broadly, including a review of existing tariffs on Chinese goods.

Greer has also been asked to identify possible new deals with significant market access for “American workers, farmers, ranchers, service providers and other businesses”, indicating the second Trump administration may be open to forging new trade agreements.

“This is a pretty huge deal. It makes me think at some point there is going to be a trade bill in Congress,” said Everett Eissenstat, a partner at Washington law firm Squire Patton Boggs. “Once trade bills start moving they tend to be very significant and the statutes don’t change that often.”

Trump has linked tariffs to other policy goals, beyond reducing trade deficits.

He has promised duties on EU products unless the bloc’s members buy more American oil and gas. Trump on Monday also suggested tariffs on China could hinge on a deal over TikTok’s ownership. He said he would apply levies on Chinese imports of up to 100 per cent if Beijing failed to agree on a deal to sell at least 50 per cent of the app to a US company.

Anahita Thoms, head of international trade for law firm Baker McKenzie in Germany, said Trump was using tariff threats to maximise his leverage.

“I do not think he is bluffing but he is using it as a negotiating tool,” she said. Now “each country will know what concession it will have to make to be on good terms”.

The threats risked collateral damage. “Tariffs would be inflationary,” said Thoms, adding Trump would not “want to do something that has a negative impact on inflation”.

US imports from countries such as Vietnam and Mexico picked up in Trump’s first term. This reflected the trend of Chinese manufacturers seeking to bypass US tariffs by exporting to America via third countries.

Trump’s trade team have realised this. His memo calls on Greer to consider additional tariff modifications to address “circumvention through third countries”.

The memo asks officials to look at whether a “global supplemental tariff” could be used to remedy the “large and persistent” annual US trade deficit. That indicates that something similar to the universal tariff promised by Trump on the campaign trail might still emerge.

His threats could also stimulate other countries to increase trade with each other. Just since December, the EU has clinched agreements with the Mercosur group of South American countries and Mexico while restarting talks with Malaysia after more than a decade.

Speaking to the Financial Times, Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim said the global trading system would survive the “initial shock” of Trump’s trade barriers.



Taiwan’s parliament has frozen critical parts of the 2025 defence budget, heightening the risk that the country alienates US President Donald Trump just at the moment that it needs firm US support against security threats from China.

Taipei has been eager to demonstrate to the incoming US administration that it is stepping up efforts to strengthen its defences. Trump claimed in July that Taiwan “doesn’t give us anything” and compared the US to “an insurance company” for the island nation’s security.

But just hours after Trump was inaugurated to a second term on Monday, Taiwan’s opposition-controlled legislature voted to freeze half the country’s budget for its submarine programme, 30 per cent of the military’s operations expenditure and one-third of the funding for a drone industry park. It also cut 60 per cent of the defence ministry’s publicity budget.

Taiwanese government officials and ruling party lawmakers accused the Kuomintang, the largest opposition party, of helping China by undermining President Lai Ching-te’s minority government.

Blocking parts of the defence budget “shows the world that Taiwan’s determination to defend itself has been significantly compromised”, premier Cho Jung-tai told reporters.

Po Horng-huei, vice-minister of defence, said that the freeze on the operations budget would impede the military’s daily efforts to counter “grey zone” provocations from China, while the drone funding restrictions would set Taiwan further back in an area where it already “lags far behind” the People’s Liberation Army, and that has become a crucial weapons category since the war in Ukraine.

The slashing of the publicity budget would hinder efforts to fight Chinese cognitive warfare, he added.

“Our defence will move backwards this year,” Po said.

The draft budget submitted by Lai’s government in August included NT$647bn (US$20bn) in defence spending. While that was a 7.7 per cent increase over the 2024 budget, it amounts to only 2.45 per cent of GDP, down from 2.5 per cent last year and short of the 3 per cent target US officials and defence experts have urged for Taiwan.

Elbridge Colby, Trump’s nominee for under-secretary of defence for policy, has repeatedly criticised Taiwan over its “meagre” defence spending, and has suggested US support would be moot unless Taipei strengthened its defences against the threat from China.

Beijing claims Taiwan as part of its territory and threatens to annex it by force if Taipei refuses unification indefinitely. Over the past few years, it has stepped up military operations around Taiwan.

Counter to Trump’s claims, Taipei is one of the largest paying customers for US defence companies.

But Washington maintains a policy of “strategic ambiguity” on whether it would come to Taiwan’s defence. Under the Taiwan Relations Act, the US considers any effort to determine Taiwan’s future by non-peaceful means as of grave concern to the US, and commits to providing Taiwan with defensive weapons and to maintaining its own capacity to resist coercion that would jeopardise Taiwan’s security.

Former president Joe Biden said on multiple occasions that the US would deploy forces to defend Taiwan against a Chinese attack, but Trump has said it would be “very, very difficult” to do so.

Taiwan’s military will be able to access the frozen funds only if parliament agrees to unblock them following a report from the defence ministry at a plenary session.

Although the KMT advocates for closer ties across the Taiwan Strait, it denies being pro-Beijing and has previously pledged to support increased defence spending.

But opposition lawmakers attacked government spending plans as “wasteful”, echoing some voters’ criticism about the ruling party.



The US share of global cross-border investment projects has soared to its highest level on record, underscoring the country’s stronger economic momentum than Europe or China as Donald Trump starts his second term in the Oval Office.

The figures for announced greenfield projects — where companies build or expand new facilities and operations in a foreign country — come as political and business leaders gather in Davos to debate how the Trump presidency might reshape the global economic order through steep tariffs and reshored production.

The proportion of new FDI projects announced in the US rose from 11.6 per cent in 2023, to 14.3 per cent in the 12 months to November 2024, according to the Financial Times’ analysis of data collected by fDI Markets, an FT-owned company that has tracked cross-border investments from 2003.

The increase has been driven by buoyant consumer demand and government incentives in the world’s largest economy, according to economists.

“The US is pulling in more and more global investment projects and this reflects the strong demand outlook and much stronger productivity growth than elsewhere,” said Innes McFee, global economist at Oxford Economics.

“We expect that US exceptionalism to continue,” he said, adding that while the Trump policies were creating uncertainty, a looser budget would drive demand and “add to reasons for investing in the US in the short term. Protectionist policies might do the same”.

Trump will address the World Economic Forum in Davos on Thursday via video link, with delegates in the Swiss resort keen to hear his economic plans. The president did not immediately impose higher import levies in the executive orders he issued during his inauguration on Monday.

The US attracted more than 2,100 new FDI greenfield projects in the 12 months to November, preliminary 2024 data showed. By contrast, China secured just under 400 projects, close to a record low and a fraction of the 1,000 plus investments received each year in the decade up to the mid-2010s.

New projects in Germany plunged to 470 in the 12 months to November 2024, the lowest figure in 18 years in Europe’s largest economy and a big decline from 1,100 greenfield investments a year earlier.

Nathan Sheets, chief economist at US bank Citi, said the American surge was partly because of the country’s importance as a hub for AI innovation, lower energy costs and investment incentives as part of the Biden administration’s Inflation Reduction Act and the Chips Act.

Meanwhile, China’s share of inward FDI has fallen due to “geopolitics”, Sheets said, referring to the west’s attempts to “de-risk” from China.

Europe’s share has fallen even more sharply. Energy prices surged on the continent following Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in early 2022. “Cheap energy is attractive to investors,” said Sheets.

The estimated value of new greenfield FDI projects in the US announced in the 12 months to November 2024 rose by more than $100bn to $227bn, according to fDi. The data is based on corporate announcements, press reports and fDI estimates for the lifetime of the project, rather than annual capital spending.

The rise in US greenfield investment is spread across several sectors. Record 12-month totals were recorded for semiconductor projects — which have benefited from the Chips Act’s grants and credits — and in industrial equipment, construction, electronic components, renewable energy and aerospace.

US growth is forecast to continue outpacing the rates in other advanced nations, according to IMF figures released last week. The US is now expected to grow by 2.7 per cent in 2025, compared with an expansion of just 1 per cent in the Eurozone.

The shifting geopolitical landscape, with rising trade tensions between the US and China, is contributing to recent FDI trends as multinationals try to hedge supply chain risks.

“Global trade is more fragmented and securing supply chains becomes the name of the game,” said Samy Chaar, chief economist at Lombard Odier. “This means a trend towards friendshoring for goods you do not intend to produce and reshoring for strategic industries such as microchips and healthcare.”

Sixty-two per cent of FDI projects in the US last year were from western Europe, up from an average of 58 per cent in the 10 years to 2019, the last year before the Covid-19 pandemic.

In contrast with the inward FDI surge, the number of overseas projects from the US shrank to 2,600 in the 12 months to November, the lowest in two decades, excluding the height of the pandemic. The Biden administration’s industrial policies have incentivised US companies to keep production in the country, experts said.

While uncertainty over Trump’s trade and taxation plans has hung over big corporations since November’s election, economists do not expect his agenda to deter projects in the short term.

Trump’s election “doesn’t change the investment incentives and the economic picture” for investors, said Richard Bolwijn, head of investment research at UN trade body Unctad’s investment and enterprise division. “From that perspective, the attractiveness of the US for world investment will continue to go up.”



President Donald Trump has said that tariffs on China could hinge on a deal over TikTok’s ownership, as he signed an executive order to keep the popular short-form video platform online in the US for 75 days.

Within hours of his inauguration on Monday, Trump postponed a deadline requiring TikTok’s Chinese parent company ByteDance to sell its stake in the app or face a ban in the country.

Trump said the US “should be entitled to get half of TikTok” if the app continued operating beyond that cut-off and that he could “certainly” put tariffs on China if it rejected a deal, which he said would be a “hostile act”.

He said the tariffs could be as high as 100 per cent. “Ultimately [Beijing] would approve it because we’d put tariffs on China,” Trump said on signing the order. “I’m not saying I would, but you certainly could do that.”

China was one of three countries Trump threatened to hit with tariffs on his first day in office. On Monday, he said he could impose levies of 25 per cent on Canada and Mexico from February 1.

But he did not enact sweeping 60 per cent levies on Chinese imports as he had promised during the campaign, in what would have marked a new stage in the trade war with Beijing during his first term.

The move to hold off on tariffs against China appeared to offer a bargaining chip for a TikTok deal. Trump spoke to Chinese leader Xi Jinping on Friday and said he had raised the TikTok issue, although Beijing did not confirm the discussion.

TikTok became temporarily unavailable for about 170mn US users at midnight on Sunday following the initial deadline under the “divest or ban” law, but it resumed service hours later.

The executive order said companies that distribute and host TikTok — which include Apple and Google as well as cloud provider Oracle — would not be held liable for violating the law during the 75-day extension. Under the law, service providers risked fines of $5,000 per user.

But Tom Cotton, Republican head of the Senate intelligence committee, warned the companies on Sunday that they risked “ruinous bankruptcy” by violating the law.

TikTok chief executive Shou Zi Chew had gone on a charm offensive after Trump had indicated during his campaign that he hoped to “save” the app.

Chew attended the inauguration alongside tech billionaires Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg and was seated beside Tulsi Gabbard, Trump’s nominee for director of national intelligence, drawing criticism from some observers.

Many US politicians and security officials believe China’s government could use TikTok to access Americans’ personal information, which could facilitate espionage, and wield the app’s algorithm to spread propaganda. TikTok denies that Beijing has any control over the app.

TikTok has also said that divestment was not technologically feasible within the law’s timeframe. Beijing has indicated that it opposed a sale.

Nevertheless, Trump suggested that if the app was to continue operating, the US should be paid “half of the value of TikTok”, adding: “If I don’t do the deal it’s worthless. If I do the deal, it’s worth maybe a trillion dollars.”

Last week, the Financial Times reported that Chinese officials were discussing using Musk, a close confidant of Trump, as a broker in a potential sale of TikTok’s US operations. Musk on Monday met China’s vice-president Han Zheng, who attended Trump’s inauguration.

He also called out TikTok’s presence in the US — while western platforms such as his social media site X are banned in China — as “unbalanced”, adding “something needs to change”.

Beijing did not immediately respond to Trump’s remarks threatening tariffs if it did not agree to a TikTok deal.

On Monday, China’s foreign ministry had said that any decision regarding TikTok’s ownership should be taken “according to market principles and be determined by the companies themselves”.

Additional reporting by Aime Williams in Washington



The EU urgently needs to classify a substance used to line furnaces and kilns for making cement, glass and steel as a critical raw material or supplies will become hostage to China, the world’s biggest producer of high-end industrial ceramics has warned.

Stefan Borgas, chief executive of London-listed RHI Magnesita, told the Financial Times that while magnesite was essential to basic chemical processes underlying Europe’s industrial base, its absence from a list of strategically important materials had disincentivised homegrown production.

Magnesite is used to make refractories, materials that allow furnaces to handle extremely high temperatures above 1,200C. Europe imports most of its magnesite from China, which controls two-thirds of global production.

“We have enough magnesite in Europe that we could secure supply to the European heavy industries,” Borgas said, adding that EU critical materials designation was helping to boost investment in the mining and processing of lithium, nickel and other metals where China also dominated supply.

“For sure it gives a boost to the European production of these materials,” Borgas said. “We have natural resources [but] Europe has neglected its mining capabilities over the last 50 years.”

The call by Vienna-based RHI Magnesita is a sign of how far China’s global surge in industrial exports in response to faltering domestic demand is extending beyond steel and other widely used metals to lesser known but equally critical materials.

The company, which has a listed subsidiary in India and a market value of about £1.5bn, is battling falling prices for refractories as Chinese producers turn to exports to absorb excess capacity. Factories in India are also investing in new refractory production as the country pursues its steelmaking ambitions.

In an effort to boost its supplies of the commodities required to make clean technologies such as batteries and wind turbines, the EU has listed 16 products including nickel, lithium and cobalt as “strategic” as part of a Critical Raw Materials Act that sets targets for their domestic extraction, processing and recycling.

Borgas argued that magnesite should be added to this list because it also underpinned the processing and recycling of more than half of these “strategic” minerals.

He said that including it on the list would also help companies cluster together to invest in decarbonising high-emitting processes. The production of one tonne of magnesia from magnesite emitted about 1.8 tonnes of carbon dioxide, Borgas said.

“Being on the strategic raw material list helps to support investment in totally new technologies. [This is] uncharted territory, which for any single company would be very risky. But as a cluster, this could become very interesting.”

The global supply of refractories is running at about 40 per cent above demand but the supply chains for raw materials, such as magnesite, were becoming precarious, according to RHI Magnesita.

“For every building material for modern society . . . you need refractories,” Borgas said. “You need this ceramic insulation layer inside the furnace in order to protect the plants and the people from this hot material.

“The Chinese have invested into this based on their resources and — very reliably, actually — supply the world . . . Europe and every other continent should take care that they at least use what they have,” he said.

The EU should update the critical raw materials list by May 24 2027, according to the act. Any material must be assessed before it can be added, an EU official said.



Huawei is seeking to grab a larger share of the Chinese market for artificial intelligence chips that is dominated by Nvidia, by encouraging local companies to adopt its rival processors for “inference” tasks.

Leading AI companies in China rely on graphic processing units (GPUs) made by Nvidia to “train” large language models, with the $3.4tn US chipmaker’s products seen as vital to developing the technology.

Instead of challenging Nvidia in training, Huawei is positioning its latest Ascend AI processors as the hardware of choice for Chinese groups running “inference”, the computation undertaken by LLMs to generate a response to a prompt. The Chinese tech giant is betting that inference will be a bigger future source of demand if the pace of model training slows and AI applications such as chatbots become more widespread.

“Training is important, but it only occurs a few times,” said Georgios Zacharopoulos, a senior AI researcher working on inference acceleration at Huawei’s Zurich lab. “Huawei is mostly focused on inference, which ultimately will serve more customers.”

It is focused on the technically less challenging but potentially lucrative path of retrofitting AI models trained on Nvidia products to run on Ascend chips, according to company employees and Ascend customers. Since Nvidia GPUs and Ascend operate on different software, Huawei is helping companies use another software tool to make the two systems compatible.

Huawei’s push comes with top-down government support. Chinese officials have urged local tech giants to buy more of Huawei’s AI chips and shift away from Nvidia.

One person familiar with Nvidia’s operations in China said Huawei was seen internally as the most serious competitor in the country, adding that its chip design capability was “advanced”.

Washington has sought to curb Beijing’s development of AI with export controls aimed at hampering the development of sensitive technologies in China. Unlike their US rivals such as OpenAI and Google, companies are unable to access the most cutting-edge GPUs in China. But even though Chinese groups are only able to acquire Nvidia’s less-powerful H20 chips, which are tailored to meet export controls, the GPUs remain in high demand as they are considered better than local alternatives.

Analysts and Huawei researchers said Ascend was not yet ready to replace Nvidia for model training because of technical issues, such as a breakdown in the ways the chips interact with each other inside a wider “cluster” of AI chips when training ever larger models.“While the Ascend chips perform well on a per-chip basis, there is a bottleneck with the inter-chip connectivity,” said Lin Qingyuan, Bernstein’s China semiconductor analyst. “When training a big model, you must break it into smaller tasks. If one chip fails, the software needs to figure out a way for the other chips to take over without delay.”

The other challenge for Huawei is convincing developers to switch from Nvidia’s Cuda software, renowned as the company’s “secret sauce” for being easy to use for developers and capable of vastly accelerating data processing.

But Huawei’s soon-to-be-released and updated version of its AI chip, the Ascend 910C, is also expected to address these concerns. “We’re expecting this new generation of hardware to come with improved software that makes it more accessible for developers,” said a Huawei employee, who declined to be named.

Huawei and Nvidia face stiff competition. Chinese internet group Baidu and chip designer Cambricon have made strides in AI chip development. Meanwhile, in the US, Amazon and Microsoft are also betting they can grab more market share in chips for inference as AI applications become more widespread.

Estimates from SemiAnalysis, a chip consultancy, suggest Nvidia made $12bn on sales in China last year by delivering 1mn of its H20 chips in the country, selling twice as many AI chips as Huawei with its Ascend 910B.

“Nvidia’s China-specific H20 GPUs make up the majority of AI chips sold in China. But the lead is narrowing quickly as Huawei increases manufacturing capacity,” said Dylan Patel, chief analyst at SemiAnalysis.

Industry insiders cautioned that Huawei’s AI chip push was also being constrained by insufficient supply, with two prospective customers telling the Financial Times that they were unable to secure the chips.

Huawei did not respond to a request for comment. Nvidia declined to comment.

Analysts have said that Huawei’s manufacturing is likely to be facing challenges due to US export controls that have left Chinese fabs dependent on outdated chip manufacturing equipment.

The focus on inference also points to an evolving dynamic in Chinese AI that differs from the US. Washington’s export controls mean Chinese AI players are not engaged in the same race as Silicon Valley rivals Meta, Elon Musk’s x.AI and OpenAI to build large mega-clusters of Nvidia’s most advanced GPUs.

“Chinese companies are playing a different game. They are paying much more attention to inference than the US because it is possible to make big efficiency gains even with less powerful chips, which also means they can achieve commercialisation faster,” said Bernstein analyst Lin.

Chinese companies were betting they could stay competitive on AI by driving down the cost of inference, which in turn made it cheaper to run AI applications, he said.

Last month, Hangzhou and Beijing-based start-up DeepSeek released its V3 model, which garnered attention because of its low training and inference costs compared with comparative models in the US.

The company proposed a new way for an AI model to selectively focus on specific parts of input data as a way of reducing the costs of running the model. It also used the “mixture of experts” technique popular with other Chinese AI start-ups, which also helps to speed up inference because only part of the model is used to generate a response.

DeepSeek said that Huawei had successfully adapted V3 to Ascend, providing detailed instructions for developers on how to use the chip. The FT has previously reported that Huawei had dispatched engineers to help customers migrate from Nvidia to Ascend.

Additional reporting by Zijing Wu in Hong Kong



Elon Musk has objected to a lack of reciprocity in the US-China tech relationship, a rare criticism from the billionaire on issues sensitive to Beijing after US president-elect Donald Trump prepared to offer a reprieve to TikTok on a ban in the US.

Musk, who has long sought to maintain close ties with Communist party officials in China, a core market and production centre for his electric-car company Tesla, has for years been careful in his statements about Beijing.

But he said on Sunday that “something needs to change” after Trump said he would “most likely” extend a deadline for Chinese tech group ByteDance to divest from TikTok, which faced a ban under a US law that briefly forced it offline.

Musk said that while he opposed banning the short-form video app on free-speech grounds, “the current situation where TikTok is allowed to operate in America, but X is not allowed to operate in China, is unbalanced”.

“Something needs to change,” he said in a post on X.

Asked about Musk’s comments, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said on Monday that Beijing welcomed any company that abided by its laws and Chinese groups abroad were obliged to follow local rules.

Responding to Trump’s proposal to push TikTok, which began restoring service in the US on Sunday, into a joint venture, Mao said Chinese groups should “decide independently” on operations and deals.

Musk’s criticism was mild compared with some of his fierce attacks on western politicians and recent intrusions into the domestic politics of countries such as Germany, the UK and Italy.

But it highlighted the Tesla chief’s potential conflicts of interest between protecting his business interests in China and serving as a confidant to the incoming president and a government efficiency tsar.

Tesla earned almost a quarter of its sales in the third quarter from China and exported even more vehicles from its Shanghai plant to third countries.

Some analysts believe Beijing is pinning its hopes on Musk as a potential intermediary with Trump, who has vowed to increase tariffs on imports from China. Chinese officials had previously discussed using Musk as a broker to resolve TikTok’s fate in the US.

Musk on Sunday also met Chinese vice-president Han Zheng, who will represent President Xi Jinping at Trump’s inauguration. The presence of a Chinese official as senior as Han is unprecedented at US presidential inaugurations, where Beijing is normally represented by its ambassador in Washington.

“Han met . . . Elon Musk, and welcomed US companies including Tesla to seize opportunities and share the fruits of China’s development,” China’s state-run news agency Xinhua reported.

Han also met business leaders from the US-China Business Council and the US Chamber of Commerce on Sunday, as well as Trump’s incoming vice-president JD Vance.

Han and Vance discussed the deadly synthetic opioid fentanyl, which successive US administrations have pushed Beijing to crack down on, as well as regional stability and balancing trade, the Trump-Vance transition team said in a statement.

US business leaders in the past have sought to play a moderating influence in often-volatile Sino-US relations, a role Beijing seems eager to encourage ahead of the second Trump administration.

Han described US business as a “backbone” of relations between the countries, and urged businesses to “play an active role as a bridge” in US-China relations, Xinhua said.



For the past four years, Alan Estevez has been finding new obstacles to place in China’s path as it tries to use US technology to develop cutting-edge chips and artificial intelligence.

“We’re running down the alley throwing garbage cans,” Estevez told the Financial Times on his penultimate day as under-secretary of commerce for industry and security in Joe Biden’s administration.

Estevez and Tarun Chhabra, a White House official, have been responsible for policies designed to slow China’s semiconductor and AI industries by severing access to critical US technology.

In their final week, the commerce department unveiled several significant rules, including a global licensing regime for AI data centre chips that garnered resistance from industry and criticism from the European Commission.

Estevez conceded that US policy could do no more than slow China since it had smart engineers, money to invest and government support. But he said Washington had been successful, pointing to statements from Chinese AI groups identifying US export controls as their main obstacle.

“We’ve definitely impeded the People’s Republic of China’s ability to produce those chips and ergo have impacted their ability to develop large language models,” said Estevez, referring to the models that power AI products.

The outgoing under-secretary has straddled two forces: American companies and some allies who believe the US went too far, and critics who wanted the administration to take even harsher, quicker action against China and its military.

He pushed back against criticism of the recent AI rule, which puts countries into three tiers in terms of ease of access to US chips. Estevez said it appeared to spark more criticism because the companies complaining, such as Nvidia, were household names, unlike the chipmaking equipment producers that opposed other export controls.

Over the past four years, Estevez and Chhabra have held long and often contentious talks with allies, particularly Japan and the Netherlands, to build a seamless export control regime for chipmaking tools.

Tokyo and The Hague eventually agreed to many actions pushed by Washington — in some cases after threats of extraterritorial action — but the talks highlighted a problem for the US and allies: Chinese retaliation. Beijing threatened to restrict exports of two critical minerals, gallium and germanium, to Japan if it went along with Washington.

“We do need to think harder about how we are going to wean ourselves off adversarial supply chains,” said Estevez, explaining the need to reduce Beijing’s ability to create choke points that make it harder for the US and allies to take actions against China.

“What I wish we had done sooner . . . is sharing our intelligence [with allies] and where we see threats,” he said. “When we do that, they actually say: ‘Yeah, you’re right’, and that makes it easier to dialogue.”

Estevez noted some companies struggled to understand the national security implications of selling technology to China, particularly because they had focused on that market for decades before Washington became more hawkish on Beijing.

“For American business, it was like ‘gung ho’ until suddenly it’s not. I don’t think everyone has got that in their strategic mindset of where those lines are,” said Estevez, adding that the US government needed to do a better job explaining the risks to companies who did not have security clearances.

While the administration has been criticised by industry, others have questioned why the government did not take quicker action against efforts by Chinese telecoms equipment maker Huawei to move into the chip sector.

Estevez said the US was “really successful” in using controls to target equipment going to fabrication plants linked to Huawei.

But he said the US could not take immediate action when it discovered in 2023 that Huawei was building chip fabrication plants, partly because unilateral moves would not have been effective and also because it needed more intelligence to explain the threat to allies to seek their co-operation.

As Estevez leaves office, he stressed that the Bureau of Industry and Security, which he runs, needed more resources to deal with the expanding threat. It also needs more modern technology, including AI, to boost efficiency in order to, for example, stay on top of Chinese companies that change their name to avoid scrutiny from the US.

“I wish I could have made the inter-agency process a little more agile and a little more strategic,” he said, noting that he and Chhabra would normally “cut a deal” but then have to grapple with the whole government.

Estevez said his biggest concern as he prepared to hand over the reins to Donald Trump’s team was China’s technology sector, particularly AI, which he described as the “future of warfare”.

“It’s going to be the good side of that future, too,” he said, “and we’re just going to impede the bad side of that future.”



The first Trump administration reversed America’s stance on global trade. Joe Biden then doubled down on Donald Trump’s tariffs, while adding industrial policy to the mix. Now his parting gift to Trump is a new trade verdict that argues for US government support for the maritime, logistics and shipbuilding sectors in the face of Chinese competition. It will be the first big test of whether Trump’s second term will be focused on the economic desires of his base, or the “tech-industrial complex” decried by Biden in his parting speech.

The timing is no accident. The investigation, issued by the US trade representative under Section 301 of the Trade Act, lays out how China has used non-market practices to dominate the global maritime industry. While Biden has supported pushing back against such practices, not everyone in the Democratic party has been eager to make the shift. By releasing the case four days before Trump’s inauguration, the departing administration has made sure it didn’t get derailed by Democrats who would prefer to tip-toe away from the issue of Chinese mercantilism. It also threw down a gauntlet for Trump. Will tariffs be his only tool? Or will he support industrial policy and US workers in more effective and durable ways?

Whether or not you support Section 301 action, it’s tough to read the case and argue that China’s behaviour in shipbuilding isn’t discriminatory. There are the usual problems, like massive state loans and access to non-market excess capacity in raw materials. Then there are the distortions in the Chinese labour market that make it nearly impossible for market economies to compete in the maritime sector, where China now has a market share of more than 50 per cent.

One of the most interesting sections of the report dives deep into the hukou system. In this, Chinese citizens are classified as rural or urban residents, and can’t receive state benefits such as education, housing, or healthcare outside the jurisdiction in which they were born. Since many rural residents migrate to coastal areas to work, the result is that half of the population resides in urban areas, but only a third have an urban classification.

That has a hugely distorting effect on Chinese and global labour markets. As one scholar quoted in the report notes, the hukou system creates a “huge class of super-exploitable, yet highly mobile or flexible industrial workers for China’s new economy, now closely integrated into global trade networks”. It is essentially a massive state transfer from labour to the owners of capital, which is one of the reasons why Chinese economists concerned about bolstering domestic consumption would like to get rid of it (hukou reform is happening, though not as fast as many would like).

It’s also one of many ways in which China’s system is incompatible with the Bretton Woods trading system as it exists today. “There’s no question that China’s very different economic model makes it difficult to have a system of globalisation based on WTO rules,” notes economist and Nobel laureate Michael Spence. Indeed, that’s the reason that Biden’s trade representative, Katherine Tai, pushed (albeit unsuccessfully) for a new model of trade based on setting a floor, rather than a ceiling, on environmental and labour standards.

Trump certainly won’t care much about the former, but politically, he will need to care about the latter. The fractures between the Maga base and billionaire class populating the top ranks of his administration are already showing. If he chooses not to take on the shipbuilding support recommendations left by his predecessor, unions and Maga hardliners alike will pitch a fit, which could sow major discontent in his first 100 days.

But I’m betting that the Trump administration will take up the issue, and perhaps even offer up more vigorous support than Democrats might have done. Trump loves bright shiny objects, and nothing is brighter and shinier than a new aircraft carrier.

More importantly, there are legitimate national security and commercial supply chain reasons to build more non-Chinese maritime capacity. Nearly half of US goods and 80 per cent of global trade is transported by ship. China can significantly influence the pricing and availability of ships given its share of the market. It’s hard to imagine that this power wouldn’t be weaponised in the event of any US-China conflict. Trump has already suggested the US build ships with allies like South Korea.

Of course, increasing maritime capacity is a long-term, heavy lift. And yet, the success of the Chips Act, which has rebooted US semiconductor production in less than two and a half years, shows that it is possible to create more resiliency and redundancy in critical industries when there is political will. The question is whether Trump will have any. Slapping tariffs on adversaries and allies alike is much easier than actually crafting a multifaceted industrial policy.

That said, the political pull towards it will be pressing. Much of the Biden administration’s stimulus went into red states. The Chips Act is supporting construction of new semiconductor plants in Ohio, Texas and Arizona, all of which voted for Trump. The bipartisan Ships Act introduced last month provides a road map for maritime industrial policy. Whether Trump follows it will say much about the direction of his second term.

rana.foroohar@ft.com



Welcome back. Donald Trump will be inaugurated as US president on Monday. What better time to stir the pot with a contrarian take on his team’s plans to squeeze China in trade, manufacturing and technology?

Understandably, many reckon that additional tariffs and restrictions on China will be bad for its economy. But Trump’s protectionist efforts could cause less harm than expected. In fact, Chinese industry could prosper in spite (or even because) of them. Here are the counterarguments.

Let’s begin with the immediate, direct economic impact of tariffs. China has diversified away from the US market since Trump’s first term. Total American demand for Chinese goods now accounts for about 2.8 per cent of China’s GDP, according to Capital Economics.

Its calculations suggest that an increase in the effective tariff from around 15 per cent to 60 per cent (in extremis) — as Trump has threatened — could shrink the Chinese economy by a mere 1 per cent. (Other economists end up in the same ballpark.)

That’s perhaps smaller than many thought, and it is also before considering other offsetting factors.

China can divert exports to other destinations where there is rising demand. After tariffs hit the country in Trump’s first term, Beijing’s exports to fast-growing emerging markets soared. Demand for Chinese goods in the developed world excluding the US also picked up. Other nations — particularly those in the Belt and Road Initiative whom China has spent decades strengthening economic ties with — will want to maintain low-cost trade with Beijing.

Next, Chinese goods could still find their way to the US via trans-shipment — export through a third country — which would allow producers to avoid the levies. Trump has cottoned on, and is looking to clamp down on countries such as Mexico and Vietnam. That won’t be easy or fast. Chinese companies are already hedging this risk by setting up factories across the world.

The renminbi is also likely to weaken when tariffs are announced. That will keep Chinese exports competitive. (Depreciation in the renminbi offset the impact of levies in Trump’s first term.)

All things considered, the direct economic hit could be well below 1 per cent.

Cost of living pressures and the urgency of climate change mean the economic rationale to import cheaply from China (at least beyond the US) remains strong.

China’s price competitiveness comes from its specialism in sourcing, refining and producing goods that align with global growth sectors. A decades-long, state-led industrial strategy has given China vertical dominance of the supply chains for electric vehicles, batteries and renewables, from rare earth commodities to finished products.

The country commands close to a third of global manufacturing output (exceeding the output share of the next nine largest producers combined). It has a revealed comparative advantage across a broad range of goods: not just the old-school “Made in China” toys and clothing, but high-end, sophisticated products too.

Indeed, efforts to restrain China’s industrial prowess often underestimate just how dominant it is and Beijing’s ability to use state apparatus to support its producers. Goldman Sachs’ China economist Lisheng Wang has suggested “continued policy support for high-tech manufacturing” and “fiscal easing” would help mitigate the impact of tariffs.

Beijing could use rising US protectionism around the world as an opportunity to improve trade ties with America’s frustrated allies. It could also retaliate by blocking access to vital raw materials. China has 36 per cent of the world’s rare earth reserves, but controls 70 per cent of the global supply (hence Trump’s obsession with Greenland).

Finally, though the west has advantages in artificial intelligence, semiconductors and quantum computing, protectionism in these areas may not hinder China’s development of advanced technologies as much as some might expect.

BNP Paribas Asset Management’s Chi Lo argued in a note last year that “restrictions can only bolster China’s resolve to become tech self-sufficient”. Lo’s view brings the proverb “necessity is the mother of invention” — popularised by 20th-century Danish economist Ester Boserup — to mind.

With national control over its private sector, Beijing is using subsidies, directives and incentives to meet President Xi Jinping’s objective to be world-leading in scientific and technological innovation. State-driven industrial strategy has its flaws, but China is better than any other at doing it well.

That means US export controls can incentivise Chinese companies — supported by Beijing — to redouble efforts on import substitution and tech independence through innovative workarounds, domestic collaboration and even black markets. Manufacturers face “fierce competition” with one another for state support.

“On net, American restrictions have accelerated China’s innovation drive,” said Dan Wang, a fellow at the Yale Law School’s Paul Tsai China Center. “Before, Huawei and BYD would buy the best components on the market, but now their incentives are aligned to the Chinese government’s. Huawei’s money now goes to local semiconductor firms.”

According to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, China led in just three of 64 critical technologies between 2003 and 2007, but had become the lead country in 57 of those technologies between 2019 and 2023.

Despite being cut from western semiconductor supply chains, Huawei and SMIC developed a smartphone with cutting-edge chips in 2023. Last year, Huawei unveiled plans to mass produce an AI chip.

Beijing has developed a domestic engine to power scientific innovation. It has the world’s largest number of STEM graduates, and provides long-term capital for research and development (which, as a share of GDP, is closing in on the US). This has undermined the restrictions put in place in Trump’s first term and under Joe Biden’s administration.

Still, things may not go China’s way. For instance, Trump’s protectionist agenda could drive wider global uncertainty, depressing demand and amplifying the hit from tariffs on Beijing’s economy. The rest of the world may get tougher on Chinese imports too. Plus, the country’s state-led innovation model is no panacea. It relies on the government making the right calls when allocating (and pulling) funds. That can be wasteful.

China also has significant structural economic issues. Its growth trajectory has weakened, and it is struggling to revive animal spirits and boost consumption levels following the property market crash. That leaves it too reliant on export- and investment-led growth.

But the point remains. Trump’s tariffs may not be as harmful to China’s manufacturing and technological supremacy as anticipated. Beijing has bigger challenges to worry about.

Thoughts? Rebuttals? Message me at freelunch@ft.com or on X @tejparikh90.

Though economists are still grappling with matters here on Earth, this piece argues that the profession should point its attention to the stars. SpaceX and Blue Origin’s recent exploits, rising space debris and satellite competition all underscore the need to think about how to manage resources in outer space.



The writer is chief executive of the New America think-tank and an FT contributing editor

For almost two decades, China adhered to the doctrine of “peaceful rise”, a concept developed by state counsellor and intellectual Zheng Bijan. It emphasised China’s desire to grow in power and prosperity by integrating into the international system, without posing a threat to other nations.

The strategy succeeded: from the 1990s to the mid-2010s, China’s GDP and global influence rose spectacularly. Xi Jinping, however, changed course. Beginning in 2017, he launched a set of tactics that became known as “wolf warrior diplomacy”. Chinese diplomats became more assertive in defending China’s interests. And in a few short years the Chinese government succeeded in undoing much of the goodwill that years of peaceful rise had engendered.

In 2023, Xi backed off. But this aggressive advance of China’s interests had made it worse off in the world, creating lasting distrust and convincing many of China’s partners to hedge their bets by strengthening relations with the US.

Now, US president-elect Donald Trump and his merry band of tech titans are embracing their own brand of Wild West diplomacy, amplified with a dose of Silicon Valley swagger. Its hallmarks are supreme self-confidence, a disregard for rules of any kind and a willingness to make deals with anyone anywhere as long as they advance immediate self-interest.

Trump himself lives in a world of self-bestowed superlatives, which find a ready echo in his new friends from California. Many of the men who have risen to power and unimaginable riches on the back of technological innovation assume that American superiority over other countries is as evident as the superiority of the tech sector over the rest of the US economy. It is the future, and they control it.

Such attitudes seem certain to create a regular stream of incidents and mini-crises with other countries. Yet based on the Chinese experience, the issue will not be this or that outrage, but the steady accumulation of statements and actions that gradually permeate the domestic politics of other nations, shifting coalitions in consequential ways.

As Xi discovered, Beijing’s truculence and bald assertion of entitlement strengthened the hand of China hawks in both the US and the EU, and sowed doubt among former China supporters. Long-term damage to the relationship between Washington and Beijing was the result not only of Trump’s actions during his last term in office, but also a deep shift in the views of former Obama officials who entered the Biden administration and built on many of Trump’s anti-China policies.

Pushing US technological supremacy, in particular, will embolden those in other countries who are already seeking to challenge the grip of big American tech companies. The EU has been fighting the power and reach of those companies for over a decade. The new Trump administration, following Meta’s refusal to deploy its artificial intelligence in the EU, is likely to force showdowns that will provide a needed spur to the creation of integrated European technology and defence markets.

In countries such as Mexico, India, Brazil, Turkey, South Africa, Kenya, Ethiopia and Indonesia, even where current leaders are friendly to Trump, the constant push from Washington to open markets and improve terms of trade in favour of US companies will alienate local entrepreneurs and exporters.

The US, like China in the wolf warrior years, will increasingly be known for breaking and circumventing domestic and international rules. Demands that everyone else “pay up” for American military protection could look ever more like a global extortion racket.

Rising middle powers, now able to play a much more independent role on the global stage than in the 20th century, are not willing to be pawns in a US-China competition. They will insist instead on asserting their own national interests in the same way that Trump wishes to put America first.

The George W Bush administration eschewed international rules and processes in favour of “coalitions of the willing”. Since then, Republican unilateralists have been followed by Democratic multilateralists who spent years repairing damage to the US’s global relationships and creating new informal alliances and coalitions.

This cycle, however, has worn away trust and confidence in the US’s reliability as a partner and ally. Add a heavy dose of arrogance and insult, and the damage caused by the next era of American wolf warrior diplomacy could be permanent.



The EU should encourage Chinese carmakers to open more plants in the bloc as part of a deal to drop punitive tariffs on imported Chinese electric vehicles, the boss of Mercedes-Benz has said.

Ola Källenius, who is also president of EU car industry body Acea, said China had asked European carmakers to invest domestically to access its market decades ago, and that approach could form part of a solution to the trade dispute.

“Nobody disagrees about the fact that the level playing field is a legitimate discussion. The question is, what tool do you use?” Källenius told the Financial Times in an interview. “Don’t accelerate protectionism because . . . we have much to lose.”

In October, Brussels imposed tariffs of up to 45 per cent on Chinese EV imports after a big surge in sales, alleging they received unfair subsidies, and opened several anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations. Beijing responded with anti-dumping tariffs on brandy and investigations into pork and dairy products.

German carmakers have been the most vocal opponents of protectionist measures as they fear retaliatory moves from Beijing and weakened interest from the country’s consumers at a time when they have already suffered a sharp decline in sales due to the rise of Chinese brands.

They have also struggled to compete against more affordable and advanced Chinese EVs from companies such as BYD.

When German carmakers sought to establish themselves in the emerging Asian economy in the 1980s they agreed to form joint ventures with Chinese partners. Källenius said it was a decision for EU policymakers whether to come up with a reciprocal arrangement.

“When we came to China . . . there was a call upon us by the policymakers: industrialise here if you want to capture the market. From my understanding, European policymakers have said the same, vis-à-vis the Chinese,” he said.

“I think those are legitimate conversations, but that means that you would actually open up markets and create as much as possible a level playing field and then let the best market actor win.”

Brussels is also planning to impose criteria requiring Chinese businesses to have factories in Europe and share technological knowhow. BYD plans to build vehicles in Hungary, while CATL has recently agreed to build a €4.1bn lithium battery factory in Spain with Stellantis.

Kallenius said tariffs would hurt the industry and Brussels should compromise with Beijing on a deal to remove them, adding that China had become an integral part of the global automotive supply chain, including raw materials, advanced chips and components.

“We just want to caution policymakers to say, don’t forget what made us so successful in this complicated world,” he said.

Last week Acea sent a letter to EU leaders urging them not to retaliate against US president-elect Donald Trump’s threatened tariffs.

Mercedes-Benz is one of Germany’s top three carmakers alongside VW and BMW, with significant operations in both China and the US. Geely and BAIC, which is controlled by the Chinese state, own a fifth of shares in Mercedes-Benz. The carmaker also relies on the Chinese market for about 30 per cent of its global sales.



Donald Trump has held his first call with China’s President Xi Jinping since leaving the White House in 2021, with the two leaders discussing the fate of TikTok just before the Supreme Court upheld a law to ban the app in the US.

The conversation between the leaders was their first in four years and came just two days before the law is due to take effect, forcing app stores to stop offering it to users.

“I just spoke to Chairman Xi Jinping of China. The call was a very good one for both China and the U.S.A.,” Trump wrote on his Truth Social media platform on Friday. “We discussed balancing Trade, Fentanyl, TikTok, and many other subjects. President Xi and I will do everything possible to make the World more peaceful and safe!”

China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said the two leaders agreed to “set up a channel of strategic communication to keep in regular touch on major issues of shared interest”.

While it painted a positive picture of the call, the ministry said Xi warned Trump that the US should approach the “Taiwan question” with “prudence”.

Beijing claims sovereignty over Taiwan and has refused to rule out using force to occupy the island.

Trump’s incoming national security team has been in contact with Beijing, but the call between the Chinese leader and incoming US president marks the first direct conversation between the men in four years.

The call comes three days before Trump is inaugurated at a ceremony that will be attended by China’s vice-president Han Zheng, marking the first time a top Chinese official has attended a US inauguration.

The Financial Times reported last week that Xi would send an envoy to Washington after Trump invited the Chinese leader to attend the event.

Some Trump advisers had hoped Beijing would send Cai Qi, a member of the Politburo Standing Committee who is very close to Xi and wields much more power than Han, who sometimes stands in for Xi in ceremonial roles.

Washington and Beijing are waiting to see what kind of China policy Trump will unveil at the start of his administration. He has threatened to impose tariffs on imports from China and many other countries but it is unclear whether he will do so to gain leverage for negotiations with Beijing or whether he will start negotiations over a possible trade deal with China and apply tariffs if the talks are not successful.

The conversation comes two days before US app stores are obliged to stop carrying TikTok, the video-sharing app that has been downloaded by more than 170mn Americans. The law — upheld in a Supreme Court ruling on Friday morning — bans the app unless its Chinese owner ByteDance sells the platform.

Trump has expressed support for TikTok, raising questions about whether his administration will prosecute companies that violate the law.

US-China relations plummeted to their lowest point since the two countries established diplomatic relations in 1979 during the Biden administration over issues ranging from US export controls to differences over Taiwan.

While Biden and Xi succeeded in partially stabilising relations over the past year, the countries remain at loggerheads over a range of issues, including Chinese support for Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

Trump has named several vocal China hawks to serve in his administration, including Mike Waltz as US national security adviser and Marco Rubio as secretary of state.

Scott Bessent, the nominee for Treasury secretary, this week said Trump would push China to buy more US agricultural produce, such as corn and soyabeans which were part of a narrow trade deal he did with China last time.

Bessent said Trump would also be aggressive in imposing export controls that would affect China. Beijing has frequently slammed the Biden administration for introducing tough export controls on chips and technology related to artificial intelligence in an effort to slow down the modernisation of the People’s Liberation Army.

But China experts are watching closely to see if some of the technology billionaires in Trump’s orbit, such as Elon Musk, will attempt to convince the incoming president to take a less tough stance on the issue.

Additional reporting by Joe Leahy in Beijing



TikTok on Friday warned of an imminent blackout for its 170mn US users after the Supreme Court upheld a divest-or-ban law targeting the video app.

The law compels TikTok’s Chinese parent ByteDance to sell the platform by January 19 — the day before Donald Trump returns as US president — or face a nationwide ban.

“There is no doubt that, for more than 170mn Americans, TikTok offers a distinctive and expansive outlet for expression, means of engagement, and source of community,” the Supreme Court wrote in a unanimous opinion published on Friday.

“But Congress has determined that divestiture is necessary to address its well-supported national security concerns regarding TikTok’s data collection practices and relationship with a foreign adversary,” it added.

Following the ruling, Joe Biden’s administration said the outgoing president would not enforce the ban during his remaining days in office.

“Given the sheer fact of timing, this administration recognises that actions to implement the law simply must fall to the next administration, which takes office on Monday,” the White House said.

But TikTok late on Friday said statements from the White House as well as from the Department of Justice had “failed to provide the necessary clarity and assurance to the service providers that are integral to maintaining TikTok’s availability” in the US.

It added: “Unless the Biden administration immediately provides a definitive statement to satisfy the most critical service providers assuring non-enforcement, unfortunately TikTok will be forced to go dark on January 19.”

Under the terms of the law, without a sale, it will be unlawful for companies to provide services to distribute or host the video app, or they will face fines of $5,000 per user.

It remains unclear whether tech groups such as Apple, Google and Oracle, which offer such services to TikTok in the US, would take the risk of continuing to partner with the company over the weekend. It is also unclear whether the app could also take itself offline deliberately, to protect its partners.

Apple, Google and Oracle did not respond to requests for comment.

Trump said in a post on Truth Social after the ruling that his “decision on TikTok will be made in the not too distant future, but I must have time to review the situation”, adding that the court’s decision was “expected, and everyone must respect it”.

In a video posted on TikTok following the court’s decision, the group’s chief executive Shou Zi Chew gave no reassurances on whether the app would continue to function in the US on Sunday, but lavished Trump with praise.

“I want to thank president Trump for his commitment to work with us to find a solution that keeps TikTok available in the United States. This is a strong stand for the First Amendment and against arbitrary censorship,” he said, adding the president-elect “truly understands” the platform.

US attorney-general Merrick Garland said the court’s decision “enables the justice department to prevent the Chinese government from weaponising TikTok to undermine America’s national security”.

Deputy US attorney-general Lisa Monaco said the “next phase of this effort — implementing and ensuring compliance with the law after it goes into effect on January 19 — will be a process that plays out over time”.

TikTok has said any spin-off would be technologically unfeasible, while Beijing has indicated it would oppose any sale.

The court’s ruling was handed down shortly after Trump on Friday said he had discussed TikTok on a call with China’s President Xi Jinping. It was the first call between the leaders in four years.

The Supreme Court’s ruling upholds one of the boldest legislative moves of Biden’s term just days before the Democratic president leaves the White House.

On Thursday, Trump’s incoming national security adviser Mike Waltz said the legislation “allows for an extension as long as a viable deal is on the table. Essentially that buys president Trump time to keep TikTok going”.

Chinese officials have held preliminary discussions about whether billionaire Elon Musk — now a close ally of Trump — could broker a deal for the app’s sale, the Financial Times reported this week.

Some potential buyers and partners have been circling and lobbying Trump. These include Frank McCourt, an American media and sports businessman, who has established a consortium of investors that would bid for TikTok through his non-profit entity, Project Liberty.

TikTok chief Chew has mounted a charm offensive to cement Trump’s backing, including plans to attend a “victory rally” for the president-elect in Washington on Sunday and his inauguration on Monday, said two people familiar with the matter.

Concerns Beijing could use the app for espionage or to spread propaganda spurred the law, which was passed with strong bipartisan support last year.

Even though China “has not yet leveraged its relationship with ByteDance Ltd to access US TikTok users’ data”, the top court said, there was “no basis for concluding that the government’s determination that China might do so is not at least a ‘reasonable inferenc[e] based on substantial evidence’.”

TikTok asked the Supreme Court to hear its case after a US appeals court rejected its challenge to the law, as well as its subsequent request to halt the measure pending further court proceedings.

The company sought to throw out the law by arguing it was unconstitutional and it violated First Amendment protections for free speech.

Additional reporting by Aime Williams in Washington and Stephen Morris and Michael Acton in San Francisco



Good morning. Another strong retail sales report landed yesterday. Will aggregate consumption ever notice higher interest rates? Unhedged will take off Martin Luther King day and be back in your inbox on Tuesday, at which point there will be a new president and a new collegiate football Champion, the Ohio State Buckeyes. Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

Judging by the volume of chatter and research reports, Donald Trump’s policy that markets care the most about is tariffs. This makes sense: it could have a direct impact on equities (through prices) and bonds (through currencies). And tariff policy is susceptible, in theory, to the numerical — or pseudo-numerical — analysis Wall Street runs on.

But because the president-elect has said so much about tariffs, not all of it consistent, investors are left to speculate what the policy will be. In hopes of alleviating some of this uncertainty, we summarise below the public statements of Trump’s key economic appointees on the topic. We leave it to readers to decide which advisers, if any, will have the president’s ear, and which proposals will become policy.

Scott Bessent: In interviews, opinion pieces, and in a Senate hearing yesterday, Trump’s pick for Treasury secretary lamented that “free” trade has undermined US competitiveness and created an unbalanced global economy. This is because of “deliberate policy choices of foreign governments”.

Howard Lutnick: Lutnick, Trump’s pick for commerce, is pro-tariff in a similar vein to Bessent.

Stephen Miran: Miran, tapped to lead the Council of Economic Advisers, argues the dollar’s role as the world’s reserve currency is the cause of our global economic imbalances. Normally, the currency of a country that runs a big trade deficit would weaken, making its exports more competitive. But with global demand for the dollar as a reserve, this can’t happen. So the US manufacturing base is being hollowed out and US debts are ballooning. To counter this, he believes:

Jamieson Greer: Trump picked Greer, Robert Lighthizer’s former deputy, as US trade representative. Greer’s paper trail is much shorter than the others on this list. That said:

Peter Navarro: Trump named Navarro, a former trade adviser during Trump’s first term, as senior counsellor for trade and manufacturing. Navarro wrote the trade section of Project 2025, the conservative policy playbook written by the Heritage Foundation for the next administration.

Kevin Hassett. Kevin Hasset, soon to be director of the National Economic Council, is, like Navarro, a staunch supporter of the RTA.

All love tariffs. All are interested in using them as leverage. Most are heavily critical of China. All of this fits with Trump’s comments. At the same time, though, they are mostly against blanket tariffs applied at the same level to all countries and all products at the same rate — which is what Trump, at times, sounds like he wants. The market seems to think the advisers, who generally endorse fiddly policies, will have an influence on Trump, who is more of a sledgehammer guy. We’ll see.

Subsidising disaster?

Correction: This story has been amended to reflect that Peter Navarro was a trade adviser during Donald Trump’s first term, not US Trade Representative as previously stated.



AstraZeneca has overhauled its local management in China in a bid to move on from recent scandals and revive sales after the arrest of its president in the country.

The FTSE 100 group has appointed new executives to lead its Chinese oncology business, which has come under intense scrutiny over two incidents including alleged illegal sales practices for cancer drugs.

The scandal ensnared the China president Leon Wang, who the company announced in November had been detained, along with several other employees. AstraZeneca shed more than £15bn off its market capitalisation after reports about an investigation by local authorities.

Alex Lin is replacing Michael Lai as country general manager, according to two people with direct knowledge of the matter. Lai was one of Wang’s senior managers. Lai has moved to the US to be in charge of a key cancer drug for AstraZeneca and report to the head of oncology, according to people close to the company. Lai did not respond to a request to comment.

The drugmaker has promoted Mary Guan, who was previously at its Chinese general medicines unit, to lead oncology in China as part of a move to deal with the department, according to one person familiar with the matter.

AstraZeneca declined to comment. It has previously said that it would fully co-operate with the Chinese authorities, and also that Wang was co-operating with the investigation.

The drugmaker — the largest foreign pharmaceutical group in China by revenues in 2023 — is trying reboot its business in China where insiders report they are expecting a dip in sales due to hospitals being unwilling to deal with the company. The new management will be pivotal to putting AstraZeneca back on course in what was once its most important growth market. China contributed 13 per cent of global sales in 2023.

The company wants to “show that there has been a clean cut with the old management,” said one person familiar with its position.

Another person said there are “a lot of changes expected in the China Leadership team but they have not yet been announced”.

AstraZeneca executive Iskra Reic was appointed in early December to take over from Wang, who also ran the international region that includes other emerging markets.

“AstraZeneca has distanced itself from Leon and the other affected employees,” said one person close to the company.

They added that Wang had been under “a lot of pressure to rejuvenate growth” after China revenues declined in 2022.

AstraZeneca leadership has received no formal explanation from Chinese authorities and has not been able to contact Wang, according to people familiar with the matter. The company has concluded that the probe is about the alleged illegal importation of cancer drug Imjudo through Hong Kong to China — where the drug is not approved — because authorities also detained AstraZeneca’s former head of oncology, Yin Min, who was in charge of the department during the alleged offences.

Separately, scores of salespeople were convicted over the past two years for medical insurance fraud after the courts found they tampered with genetic test results to ensure lung cancer patients qualified for their drug Tagrisso under a national reimbursement scheme.

The drugmaker is pinning much of its hopes in China on its breast cancer drug Enhertu, which authorities recently said would be included in the state health insurance scheme.



China recorded its third consecutive year of population decline in 2024, despite the country’s first increase in births in almost a decade in a year traditionally regarded as auspicious.

Figures released on Friday by the National Bureau of Statistics showed the country recorded 9.54mn births in 2024, compared with 10.93mn deaths. The births figure was up from 9.02mn in 2023 as Chinese families marked the year of the dragon, believed to be an auspicious zodiac sign. Birth rates hit a record low in 2023.

The increase was the first rise in births since 2016 and left the country with a total population of 1.408bn. India overtook China in 2023 as the world’s most populous country.

China’s declining population, which fell in 2022 for the first time in six decades, stems from a 1980s policy — ended in 2016 — that limited most couples to having only one child, below the average of 2.1 needed for populations to remain stable.

Analysts say birth rates have also been depressed by economic pressures as the country grapples with slowing growth.

The declining population has wide-reaching implications for the economy, with the working-age population shrinking, piling pressure on labour productivity. The UN forecasts that China’s population could decline to just over 1.3bn by 2050, while the number of people aged 65 or over is predicted to nearly double.

“[The data] just reinforces the new demographic paradigm that China finds itself in,” said Stuart Gietel-Basten, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. “Population decline is not a blip, this is the new normal.”

Policymakers are pursuing alternatives such as automation and robotics to maintain high levels of productivity, as well as seeking to encourage couples to have more children through a mix of subsidies, tax breaks and cajoling.

With more than a fifth of the country’s population aged 60 or older, according to official figures, a vibrant “silver economy” has emerged of products and services aimed at the growing elderly population.

Beijing last year unveiled guidelines for the promotion of a market estimated to be worth trillions of renminbi, with a focus on the development of food and healthcare services.

The state council, China’s cabinet, also announced in October that it was formulating a plan for “birth-friendly society” as one part of wider efforts to stimulate the slowing economy.

“I think that adapting to this new demographic paradigm is a real priority [for policymakers],” said Gietel-Basten. “A lot of policies have already been brought in and they do recognise that this is a challenge but it’s a matter of how far and how fast you can go.”

Steve Tsang, director of the Soas China Institute in London, said the high costs of raising children also contributed to China’s demographic decline.

Unless factors such as these change, “the government’s policy to encourage more births is unlikely to have much effect”, he added. “In other words, the prospect is that China’s population will continue to shrink for years, indeed decades, to come.”



China’s economy grew 5 per cent last year on the back of surging manufacturing, official data showed, as companies front-loaded exports in anticipation of higher US tariffs and as Beijing stepped up stimulus efforts.

The economy “recovered remarkably” in the fourth quarter of 2024, said the National Bureau of Statistics, growing 5.4 per cent year on year and rebounding from slower growth in the third quarter.

“With a package of incremental [stimulus] policies . . . confidence was effectively bolstered and the economy recovered remarkably,” the NBS said in its 2024 GDP data release on Friday.

The annual figure, which slightly exceeded economists’ forecasts of 4.9 per cent, trailed last year’s growth of 5.2 per cent and was the lowest since 1990, excluding years distorted by the coronavirus pandemic.

The data comes as Beijing is trying to revive strong growth in a two-speed economy, in which strong exports and manufacturing are offsetting weak household sentiment.

In September, the central bank announced monetary easing and support for the stock market. Beijing has also launched a programme to refinance local government debt and speed up stimulus spending targeting infrastructure and other areas.

But economists worry that China is at risk of entrenched deflation. Producer prices have been in negative territory for more than two years, and consumer prices managed growth of just 0.1 per cent in December.

NBS director Kang Yi told a press conference that 2024 could be “described as highly turbulent, marked by intensified geopolitical conflicts and escalating trade protectionism”.

Analysts expect Beijing to set its official growth target for 2025 at about 5 per cent for the third year in a row when its rubber-stamp parliament meets in March, though trade is expected to face challenges given incoming US president Donald Trump’s threats of higher tariffs.

“The adverse effects of the external environment are deepening. Domestically, insufficient demand persists,” said Kang, adding that “employment and income growth” were under pressure.

Retail sales grew 3.5 per cent last year as consumer confidence remained weak amid a prolonged housing downturn, while industrial output rose 5.8 per cent thanks to strong growth in manufacturing.

Residential property prices slid across China’s largest cities, but new home prices rose in Shanghai.

In another sign of the country’s long-term structural challenges, China’s population shrank by almost 1.4mn in 2024, the third consecutive year of decline, as a slight rise in births from the previous year to 9.54mn was outstripped by 10.93mn deaths.

While China’s economic growth beat expectations, the headline figure “masks some underlying vulnerabilities”, said Frederic Neumann, chief Asia economist at HSBC.

“The surge in growth was really driven by industrial production, which hints at the support from frontal loading of exports in anticipation of US import restrictions,” said Neumann. “That will inevitably lead to a payback as US import restrictions begin to bite.”

China’s trade surplus with the rest of the world reached a record of almost $1tn in 2024, customs figures showed last week, thanks to strong export growth as Chinese manufacturers stoked output to make up for sluggish domestic demand. Import growth has remained more modest.

“The current Achilles heel in the Chinese economy is really the hesitant consumer,” Neumann added. “All this points to the need for more stimulus, particularly the need to support consumer spending power.”

The release also underlined doubts about China’s official data, which some analysts increasingly worry does not reflect underlying weakness in the economy.

“The Chinese government’s ostensible attainment of its growth target is a Pyrrhic victory that further erodes credibility in official data and, at best, reflects an economy still beset by underlying fragilities and loss of confidence in government policymaking,” said Eswar Prasad, professor at Cornell University and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.

Analysts at Morgan Stanley said the better than expected growth in the fourth quarter “could be shortlived”, and could soften from the second quarter due to export front-loading and insufficient stimulus measures.

“We think better data has likely reduced Beijing’s sense of urgency, and policy may continue to undershoot on the housing and social welfare front,” they wrote in a note.

China’s CSI 300 index of mainland-listed blue-chip companies rose 0.5 per cent in morning trading following the data release, after opening lower earlier in the day.

The benchmark is still down about 14 per cent from its October 8 peak, when stimulus policy announcements stoked a stock rally.



In a private dining room at the Deda, head chef Lu Xiaozhou is chatting enthusiastically about sous-vide cooking and molecular gastronomy. An earnest, bespectacled man of 32, he’s been working in this Shanghai restaurant since he was 18 years old. But while he’s au fait with contemporary culinary trends, Lu is a specialist in a unique local genre: Shanghainese “western food”. The restaurant’s full name is Deda Western Food Society, a reference to the German entrepreneur who founded it in 1897, combined with a 19th-century Shanghainese term for western cooking, “great cuisine”. We meet over cups of milky tea in the private dining room on the top floor, which is decked out in vintage European style with an elaborate mantelpiece and a wind-up gramophone.

You can eat practically anything in Shanghai these days, from authentic Spanish tapas and Italian pizza, to modernist cuisine by the likes of Jean-Georges Vongerichten and Paul Pairet. Yet locals have an enduring affection for their own “western food”, the legacy of dishes brought to the city by foreigners in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Deda signature dishes include a local version of borscht (luosong tang, “Russian soup”) made with tomatoes rather than beetroot; pork schnitzel with a dip of “hot soy sauce”, a Shanghainese homage to Worcestershire sauce which bears no relation to actual soy sauce; “Portuguese chicken” in curried cheese béchamel; and a Russian-style potato salad made with mayonnaise and dotted with morsels of sausage, carrot and peas. A hefty platter of cured pork and sausages with gherkins harks back to the tastes of the restaurant’s German founder.

The food recalls an era when foreigners swanned around in extraterritorial concessions that had been extracted at gunpoint from the Qing Dynasty government in the treaties that followed the opium wars. The city was a free port so visas were not required. There were British, Americans, French, Japanese and Germans, among others. Impoverished White Russians fled here after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Later, the rise of Hitler saw an influx of European Jews. The foreigners recreated the west around them, with dance halls and cocktail bars, delicatessens and restaurants, European-style mansions and the grand riverfront buildings of the Bund.

Many did their utmost to avoid Chinese food. Chinese domestic staff were taught how to cook western dishes. The Anglo-Chinese Cook Book, published in Shanghai in 1916 in two volumes (one in English for the employer, one in Chinese for the cook), includes a few Anglo-Indian recipes but not a single Chinese one. Delicatessens sold imported luxury products from Fortnum & Mason and tinned foods that foreigners could take with them on journeys to the interior, so they didn’t have to eat Chinese food there either.

Deda is one of a couple of restaurants that survive from that era (another is the Red House, a favourite of the author Eileen Chang, which is known for its French onion soup and snails or clams in garlic butter). It began as a wholesale shop selling fresh and cured meats and western-style beef dishes, with a German restaurant upstairs that became renowned for its steaks (the Shanghainese themselves traditionally didn’t eat beef because the cow was seen as the farmer’s loyal assistant in the fields).

When its original owner returned to Germany in 1910, a Chinese entrepreneur took over and the restaurant continued to flourish. By the late 1940s, it was the largest western restaurant in Shanghai, with a pan-western menu that included not only German, but French, Italian and other western dishes, as well as, at one point, Japanese sukiyaki. It was frequented by celebrities such as the sons of the Kuomintang leader Chiang Kai-shek and the businessman and hotelier Victor Sassoon.

The first western restaurants in Shanghai were designed to cater to the tastes of homesick foreigners, but the Chinese liked them too. Soon they were opening their own establishments, known as fancaiguan (“foreign” or “barbarian” restaurants). By the late 19th century, according to historian Mark Swislocki, author of Culinary Nostalgia: Regional Food Culture and the Urban Experience in Shanghai, they were numerous, and often run by Cantonese businessmen who had encountered western food in Canton (Guangzhou), the first international trading port in China. The term “great cuisine” (da cai), writes Swislocki, seems to have been coined to distinguish the big chunks of meat eaten by foreigners from daintily cut Chinese dishes, although it later came to mean something like “major cuisine”.

Eventually, the foreigners left Shanghai, driven out by the Japanese invasion or the 1949 communist takeover. But some of their culinary habits had taken permanent root in the city. Certain dishes, such as the pork schnitzel with “hot soy sauce”, Russian soup and potato salad, had become part of the regular Shanghainese repertoire, while Deda and the Red House had become fixtures of the local dining scene. During the cultural revolution, when foreign culture was banned, Deda was obliged to ditch the western food in favour of Chinese fried buns and noodles. At one point it even became a workshop packaging pills for a local medicine factory. In 1973, having somehow survived the worst years of extremism, it resumed trading as the quintessential Shanghainese western restaurant and Russian soup was back on the menu. When the reforms began in the 1980s, locals used it as a place to entertain foreign guests. It moved to its current location on Nanjing West Road in 2008.

As a child, chef Lu Xiaozhou dined at Deda with his parents and loved the western dishes. Later, they took him on holiday to Europe, where he enjoyed fish and chips in England and a whole lot of cheeses in France. (“Unlike most Chinese,” he says, “I adore the strong smell and flavour of blue cheese.”) He decided to take a job at Deda because his Cantonese girlfriend (now his wife) was a fan of its food. The then head chef, Lao Jianrong, had worked at the restaurant for 45 years and was a life-long specialist in Shanghainese western cuisine. When he retired in 2022, Lu took over: “This is my platform, and it was a great opportunity to run a restaurant,” he says.

The kitchen is studiously free of Chinese influences. There is no ginger, regular soy sauce or Shaoxing wine, Lu says, and the chefs ignore Chinese procedures for treating meat and poultry with rice wine and aromatics to refine their flavours. They use western chefs’ knives instead of Chinese cleavers. Outside in the dining room, the tables are laid with knives, forks and spoons rather than chopsticks. In his spare time, Lu has done some modernist cooking experiments, but at work he is more conservative: “As a chef, I like to try new methods and skills, but my guests here won’t accept these kinds of innovations.”

The first time I visited Deda, I expected it to be a cultural fossil serving a ghastly pastiche of western cooking. Instead, I was charmed. The dining room was buzzy with Shanghainese families having a great time. And while, for a real westerner like me, the menu was a curiosity that would have made no sense in London, or indeed anywhere but Shanghai, the Russian soup, grilled crabmeat in béchamel and potato salad were freshly made and delicious. On subsequent visits I tasted other dishes and chatted to customers. They included elders who had been dining there for decades and young professionals eager for a bit of culinary nostalgia. Sometimes I would sit in the café downstairs, drinking coffee with retirees who spent hours there every day and eating cakes from the in-house bakery. I never saw another foreigner.

In one sense, Shanghainese western is the equivalent of American and British Chinese food, a resolutely inauthentic cuisine curated to suit the tastes of those outside its original cultural sphere. But while Chinese food in the west is still largely made and marketed by Chinese immigrants, the chefs preparing vintage Shanghainese western are invariably Chinese. Most, like Lu Xiaozhou, have devoted their entire careers to this particular style and have no professional training in the Chinese culinary arts.

The Shanghainese, long famed for their “Shanghai style” (haipai) culture, an eclectic mix of influences from all over China and abroad, have made these old, classic dishes part of their own culinary tradition. Local bakeries sell palmiers (known in Chinese as “butterfly crisps”, hudie su) alongside Chinese pork-stuffed mooncakes. Sometimes, the palmiers are filled with black sesame seeds or Ningbo seaweed. Shanghainese steamed soup dumpling shops offer pork chops with “hot soy sauce” as a side dish, although here they cut the meat into chopstickable pieces, so it can be eaten with Chinese food. Potato salad and Russian soup are served alongside local braised pork and stir-fried ricecakes with shepherd’s purse.

Shanghainese western is not the only version of western cuisines that has been adopted and adapted by Chinese eaters and cooks. The Russians left their culinary footprints in Harbin, near the border with Siberia, in the form of bread and sausages. People in Qingdao have brewed beer since the city was a German treaty port. Best known is Hong Kong’s “soy sauce western cuisine”, a local fusion born from the collision of Chinese and western tastes, with classic dishes including chicken wings in so-called “Swiss” sauce (the name supposedly based on a misapprehension of the English word “sweet”). Casual “tea restaurants” or cha chaan teng in Hong Kong offer a fabulous assembly of localised western dishes, from French toast drizzled with condensed milk to macaroni in tinned chicken soup. Many Cantonese dim sum restaurants serve English-style custard tarts and offer Worcestershire-style sauce as a dip for deep-fried dumplings.

The opening up of China to foreign influences in the 1990s has also provided new ground for mash-ups of western culinary ideas with Chinese tastes. Outside the contemporary western restaurants, often run by foreigners, you can find pizzas topped with durian, strawberries or chocolate and crisps flavoured with cucumber or steamed garlic shrimp. Unforgettably, a waiter in a small town in Sichuan once brought me a perfect espresso with a side dish of chilli-spiked pickled radish instead of a biscuit.

But Chinese, like most cuisines, has always been multicultural. Noodles emerged after the adoption from central Asia of the rotary mill for grinding flour some two millennia ago. The sesame-sprinkled flatbreads and syrup-drenched pastries of Beijing are the legacy of ancient Silk Road contacts, while modern Sichuanese cuisine was born of the meeting of an ancient native spice (Sichuan pepper) with a relatively modern American import, the chilli. Each generation adds its own layer of culinary influences.

Shanghainese western food is another reminder that the notional borders between cuisines are arbitrary, fragile and porous, and cultural appropriation is the human condition. Humans are like magpies, attracted by bright shiny trinkets and exciting tastes. We steal ideas, whether from our slaves or our oppressors. The politics of the exchange may vary depending on who is doing the appropriating, but the compulsion is always there.

In ancient China, the people of the central plains despised the hairy barbarians beyond their own cultural pale but couldn’t resist some of their food. In Shanghai and the other treaty ports, the snooty behaviour of colonials may have rankled, but it didn’t stop local people developing a taste for their chunks of meat and buttery pastries. Similarly, in contemporary America, China may be seen as a rival and a possible enemy, but Chinese food is stitched into the nation’s culinary ecosystem and its affections (the enraged slogan “Love our people like you love our food” went viral during protests against anti-Asian racism at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic).

Appropriation happens in all directions, unpredictable and chaotic. The Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce that inspired Shanghainese “hot soy sauce” was, in turn, derived from an Indian recipe that may have incorporated a Chinese condiment: actual soy sauce. The tomato ketchup that appears with some dishes at Deda may be an American import, but its true origins lie in the fermented fish sauces of south-eastern China and their name (ke-tschup) in old Hokkien dialect.

In 2013, two Americans, one of them of Chinese heritage, opened a restaurant in Shanghai called Fortune Cookie serving something exotic to local palates: American Chinese food, including orange chicken and crab rangoon. Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, the restaurant 1908 British Chinese (named for the date when the first Chinese restaurant opened in central London) specialises in dishes inspired by British Chinese menus.

Despite all the evidence, we like to see cuisines as fixed anchors of our identities. Over time, even things that were once novel are viewed as fixed and immutable. People go to Deda for a taste of the past and a sense of continuity between generations. While the menu has evolved, with the addition of chocolate fondant pudding and other more contemporary offerings, Lu Xiaozhou says his job is to preserve the restaurant’s roots in its classic dishes, “which cannot be changed”. “I have a duty to pass these dishes on to my apprentices,” he says. “This is a tradition that has been handed down, and we must certainly preserve it.”

Fuchsia Dunlop is the author of “Invitation to a Banquet”, Fortnum & Mason Food Book of 2024

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend Magazine on X and FT Weekend on Instagram



Singapore’s Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong will step down next month after nearly 20 years in power, handing over to his deputy in what will be only the third leadership transition in the Asian financial hub’s modern history.

Lawrence Wong, deputy prime minister and finance minister, will become Singapore’s leader on May 15 after being named heir apparent in 2022 as part of the ruling People’s Action party’s long-standing succession plan.

The departure of Lee, the son of Singapore’s founding leader Lee Kuan Yew, raises expectations for a consequential general election that could be held as soon as this year.

The PAP, which has governed Singapore since independence, earned one of the lowest vote shares in the 2020 election in the city-state’s history. The party has been seeking to recover public support and bolster Singapore’s status as a trade and financial hub amid an increasingly febrile geopolitical backdrop.

In a post on social media platform X, Lee, who has served as prime minister since 2004, asked Singaporeans “to give Lawrence and his team your full support, and work with them to create a brighter future for Singapore”.

Wong said in a video statement he never expected to be asked to be the prime minister when he entered politics in 2011. “I accept this responsibility with humility and a deep sense of duty,” he said.

The succession marks an important moment in Singapore’s modern history, as just the third time the leadership baton has been passed since independence in 1965.

While planning to ensure a smooth succession had been under way for years, the process has also faced a number of setbacks.

Lee, 72, had intended to step down before turning 70, plans that were derailed by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The PAP’s succession strategy was thrown into disarray in 2021 after deputy prime minister Heng Swee Keat resigned as leader of the so-called fourth-generation team, a group of younger ministers lined up to take the reins of the governing party.

Wong, 51, was announced as 4G leader in April 2022, and will become only the second Singaporean premier who is not a member of the Lee family.

He will face a difficult task in maintaining Singapore’s delicate geopolitical balancing act. A trading entrepot, Singapore has evolved into one of Asia’s main financial hubs while maintaining its neutrality between east and west. But its open economy makes it vulnerable to macroeconomic issues and US-China rivalry.

Wong warned last year that aspects of the Washington-Beijing rift appeared “insurmountable” and that tensions over the Taiwan Strait were becoming the region’s “most dangerous flashpoint”.

He also faces a challenging domestic environment, with rising discontent over inequality and rising costs of living, in particular housing.

Linda Lim, a Singaporean and professor emerita of business at the University of Michigan who knew Wong when he studied economics there, said he would take over at a time when Singapore faces many new internal and external challenges, including to its economic model.

“This is the opportunity for [Wong] and the rest of his leadership team to show that they can meet these challenges with fresh ideas and a more participatory democracy and inclusive economy than has hitherto characterised the nation’s political system.”

Manu Bhaskaran, an economist and chief executive of consultancy Centennial Asia Advisors, said another question following the “well choreographed” succession was whether there would be an early general election. Singapore is due to hold elections by November 2025, but is widely expected to do so as soon as September this year.

“There is a lot of talk that the elections will be held well before the deadline. I would think Wong would want his own mandate to lead,” Bhaskaran said.

In the longer term, Wong will have to contend with a range of geopolitical challenges as well as maintain Singapore’s competitiveness given the rise of rivals such as Dubai and a high-cost structure, Bhaskaran added.

“We have done well over the past few decades but how do you maintain that? That is his big challenge.”



Singapore, despite its modest size and population, is home to more businesses in this year’s ranking of high-growth companies in the Asia-Pacific region than any rival city.

This is not unusual for the city-state of just 6mn people. A trading entrepôt between east and west, the island nation has long been a leading destination for entrepreneurs and investors thanks to its strategic location within south-east Asia, supportive government policies, strong legal frameworks, and a mix of both local and foreign workers.

More recently, this appeal as a base for business has been boosted by Singapore’s neutral status between the US and China, which appeals to companies wishing to protect themselves from geopolitical and supply chain disruptions.

With 93 businesses in the FT’s ranking of high-growth companies in Asia-Pacific, Singapore beat the cities of Seoul and Tokyo — though South Korea and Japan outstripped the nation state on a countrywide basis.

Singapore’s growth companies are varied, too — from such sectors as manufacturing, artificial intelligence, software, commodities and healthcare — underscoring the breadth of businesses that the city can support.

“Singapore is neutral, it is the Switzerland of Asia,” says Dylan Ng, co-founder of Lionsbot, a manufacturer of cleaning robots that is 23rd in the ranking, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 178 per cent for the period between 2019 and 2022. “This is important with the geopolitical situation globally. There is a big pool of talent, you can deliver to the world and the city has a strong law-abiding reputation,” he adds.

The majority of Lionsbot’s customers are outside Singapore and the company is now focusing on growing in overseas markets, including the US and Europe, after raising $35mn in a series A funding round last year.

But even companies that do not do business in the city-state describe the benefits of having it as a base.

iCare, number 65 on the list this year with a CAGR of 115 per cent, provides access to basic but life-changing appliances — including washing machines, refrigerators and rice cookers — to low-income female factory workers in developing countries, including Laos and Cambodia.

Co-founder Pablo Alonso Caprile, who is based in Cambodia, says having the group’s base in Singapore gives a “layer of safety”.

“The benefits are multilateral. It simplifies paperwork and reporting, while high reporting and accounting standards allow investors comfort,” he says. iCare has its headquarters in the city state but does not have operations or core employees based there.

Singapore is also a fundraising hub for the region and Caprile says he visits frequently because many of iCare’s investors have a presence in the city-state.

The company has a catalogue of appliances and works with factories to allow workers to buy the items they need and pay back in interest-free instalments.

iCare makes its margins from dealers, rather than charging customers and handles the repayments directly with the factories.

“We have been running this successfully since 2015, well before ‘buy now, pay later’ was a household name,” Caprile points out.

Skrya, another Singapore-based company at number 10 in the ranking, also gets most of its revenue from outside the city-state. Skrya helps clients, such as automobile parts companies, to recycle materials including palladium, rhodium and platinum via an app, Catalopedia, which uses AI and 3D to determine the best pricing.

“We are trying to do an old type of business — recycling — in a modern way, with apps and tech,” explains Sivakumar Avadiar, chief executive officer for the five-year-old group.

Skrya, which is profitable, has a number of facilities and a team of roughly 10 employees in Singapore. But it is planning to grow internationally this year, opening a new plant in India, which could add another $30mn-$40mn in revenue, Avadiar says.

Singapore’s stable reputation, and the ease of setting up a company there, made it the best choice as a base, he adds. However, he has found the cost of running a business in the city has gone up in recent years.

A survey of business sentiment by the Singapore Business Federation in January found that the increase in business costs is the top challenge companies are navigating, especially the cost of manpower.

Even for tech start-ups, such as X0PA AI — a software company that uses artificial intelligence and automation to help clients hire employees better and faster — the environment has been tougher.

“The market had a massive correction in the past few years,” says founder Nina Suri. “We had to correct ourselves and take a step back to focus on more sustainable growth.”

X0PA AI is fundraising now, via a second series A round. Suri says the company expects to break even this quarter and hopes to turn a profit by the end of 2024.

Singapore is X0PA AI’s largest market but the company is now focusing on growing in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, as well as the US.

Suri divides her time between Singapore and London but says Singapore’s ecosystem, which includes resources, talent and government support, such as grants, made it a “no brainer” to be X0PA AI’s base.

“But, for a business like ours you can’t survive and grow enough in just Singapore,” she says. “The government understands that and we got a grant to expand into overseas markets including the United Arab Emirates and the UK.”

However, despite the number of Singapore companies on this year’s list looking to expand beyond the city-state, there are still plenty that see opportunities in its small domestic market.

Doctor Anywhere, which started life as a primary care tele-health start-up, is now growing rapidly offline. For example, it recently started operating a health screening and imaging diagnostics facility. The business is ranked 55th on this year’s list with a CAGR of 124 per cent.

“Our underlying business comes from the region but many people come here for top healthcare,” says Wai Mun Lim, co-founder.

“We are building out our business in the city before replicating many of our services in other countries we operate in the region, including Malaysia and the Philippines. When you tell anyone a business is from Singapore, it means you are legitimate.”



The writer is an FT contributing editor

Singapore is a poster child for fiscal prudence. It almost always runs a budget surplus, and its constitution virtually prohibits borrowing to pay for current spending. All three major credit rating agencies assign it triple-A ratings, and the IMF judges its sovereign debt risks to be low.

But the country also has a whopping ratio of debt to gross domestic product — around 170 per cent. By the end of the year it will be the third most indebted nation on the planet. Are there lessons to take from the country’s approach to debt? If so, they come from understanding how it has arisen.

First, the Monetary Authority of Singapore has intervened frequently to prevent the Singaporean dollar from appreciating relative to the basket of currencies against which it is managed, selling Singaporean dollars for foreign currency. As with Switzerland, the result has been burgeoning foreign exchange reserves, far more than the government’s estimate of what they need to maintain their peg. The government’s solution to this reserve glut has been to issue close to 40 per cent of GDP in non-marketable debt to the central bank.

Second, the social security system is configured in a manner bound to drive up government liabilities. Residents and their employers are compelled to contribute a significant portion of their salaries to the Central Provident Fund, from which they can draw money to pay for healthcare, housing and retirement. All CPF receipts are passed back to the government in return for non-tradable government debt certificates, which amount to over 90 per cent of GDP.

Third, the government understands the importance of maintaining a liquid bond market. In the west we’ve come to regard bond markets simply as the only venues large enough to satisfy government borrowing needs rather than public goods in themselves. But absent deep debt capital markets, companies have little option but to channel all their financing needs through the banking system. In the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, Singapore acted to ensure that companies could raise funds in capital markets rather than tie their collective fortunes to a small group of financial institutions. Bonds and bills sold into the market add close to 40 per cent to the debt-to-GDP ratio.

Given a constitutional prohibition on using borrowing to fund day-to-day spending, receipts from debt sales are passed over to be managed by GIC, the government’s wholly-owned fund manager, and invested in global stocks, bonds, infrastructure and private equity. The result is that Singapore’s balance sheet looks more like a hedge fund than a sovereign. And despite significant short-term volatility, this has worked well for them over the medium-term. YeeFarn Phua, a director of sovereign ratings at S&P Global, estimates that the government has amassed a liquid portfolio worth more than $1tn — twice the level of GDP.

A final source of indebtedness comes from debt-financing strategic local infrastructure. Despite nosebleed-level gross government debt metrics, parliament authorised in 2021 the issuance of S$90bn of bonds — around 20 per cent of GDP at the time — to finance projects like tidal walls and subway systems.

Debt-fuelled asset purchases and investment by the public sector don’t always end well. In the UK, Woking council’s leveraged acquisition of a concentrated portfolio of commercial properties didn’t save it from issuing a section 114 bankruptcy notice last year. Arguably, it hastened it. And in 2009, state-backed conglomerate Dubai World needed bailing-out and restructuring after running into problems. But these look more like incompetence than bad luck.

The Singaporean state has been rewarded for absorbing market risk in the form of a dividend — worth over three percentage point of GDP — which is often large enough to flip increasingly persistent primary budget deficits into overall budget surpluses.

Fiscal rules can be a useful check on explosive debt dynamics. Six of the seven sets of fiscal rules deployed by UK governments since 2010, for instance, have referenced debt stock. But such a check would have barred the kind of investment that has enriched and developed Singapore. The experience of the city state shows that higher debt issuance is a poor measure of fiscal space. Concerns that markets may revolt if tapped for investment capital have not been borne out.

In any economy starved of investment, government has a role to play without fear of bond market vigilantism.



In January, walking around Singaporean fairs Art SG and SEA Focus, the attentive visitor could distinctly detect that special inflection of Cantonese typical to Hong Kong collectors. It is a sound that has become more common at art fairs in Singapore and elsewhere in Asia in the past few years as enticing alternatives to Hong Kong have emerged.

South-east Asian artists and galleries have historically looked at Hong Kong as the go-to place to expand their worldwide reach, thanks to fairs such as Art Basel Hong Kong and the presence of international auction houses. Add to this its free flow of capital, tax-free port status, logistical efficiency and deep pool of talent, and it’s easy to see why regional players have kept returning to the city.

“When contemporary Asian art began to flourish, Hong Kong naturally became the hub for collectors and dealers from south-east Asia,” says Singaporean collector Teng Jee Hum. He remembers collectors in south-east Asia using Hong Kong to settle purchases of Chinese ink masters from the mainland from the 1950s to the 1990s. “From 2000 onwards, it was the reverse flow,” says Teng, of mainland Chinese collectors buying works from south-east Asia — but still through Hong Kong.

South-east Asia’s engagement with the city is visible at this year’s Art Basel Hong Kong. In the Encounters section for large-scale projects, Filipino artist Patricia Perez Eustaquio will show embroidery and textile work and Singaporean Ming Wong a video installation. South-east Asian galleries at the fair include Gajah Gallery, Richard Koh Fine Art and ROH Projects.

But the past five years have been a more mixed story for Hong Kong. The important M+ museum was completed and international auction houses have moved or are planning to move their regional headquarters to bigger spaces in the city. At the same time, Hong Kong’s position has been challenged by a surge of authoritarianism from the mainland, a reduction of democratic freedoms and harsh pandemic restrictions, resulting in an outflow of people. “All these developments had a diluting effect on the vibrancy of Hong Kong and we are witnessing some Hong Kong players increasing their Singapore presence,” Teng says.

These emigrants have been replaced by mainland Chinese people flocking to Hong Kong under new schemes aimed at attracting talent and wealth. “This is creating a new dynamic in the city,” says Hong Kong collector Alan Lo, who predicts more mainland collectors and patrons will participate in the city’s institutional landscape over time. “I see Hong Kong becoming the Monaco of China where people come to spend money, buy luxury homes and yachts, drink expensive wine, build art collections.”

Meanwhile, other regional cities have grown in economic prosperity and bolstered their art market. Teng notes that east and south-east Asia are benefiting from evolving global supply chains, not least thanks to the US-China rivalry. “Art goes where the money is,” he says, pointing out that the Hong Kong stock and property markets are currently languishing, whereas Japan’s and South Korea’s are at or near record highs. “The latter are also actively promoting art and culture overseas as soft power.”

“During the pandemic and right after, there were many speculations as to whether Hong Kong could maintain its role as the art hub of Asia,” says Lo. “We have seen attempts by art-fair owners to expand into Singapore, Seoul, Taipei, Tokyo, which makes Asia a much stronger and deeper overall landscape.” In 2023, the fairs Tokyo Gendai and Art SG had their debuts, attracting the international community, while the second edition of Frieze Seoul and the 22nd edition of Kiaf Seoul were held simultaneously.

“Singapore is building itself nicely as a hub for south-east Asian art,” says Lo. He appreciates the state for its diversity and distinct character, which combines Malay, Indian, Chinese and western cultures. “In a way I feel Singapore responds best to our interest in Asian diaspora.”

Rachel Lehmann of Lehmann Maupin gallery, which has a space in Seoul, says the Korean gallery scene is highly developed, due to widespread public interest in contemporary art: “Collectors in South Korea and Taiwan come from a long, intergenerational lineage of collecting.”

Even so, Hong Kong’s rivals are still significantly smaller than it: Singapore and South Korea do not feature in the Art Basel and UBS Art Market Report’s eight largest markets.

If, for galleries, it’s about choosing the fairs or spaces which offer the best financial results, for collectors it is also about the perks of the fair ecosystem. For example, when travelling to fairs, Alan Lo never misses the chance to visit private foundations and homes to hear the story of their collections. “Taipei is probably the best for it because of the deeply rooted collector community,” he says. “It also has such an amazing food culture. I’m not going to lie: that plays a big role!”

What galleries and collectors agree on is that while Asia as a whole is vast and diverse enough to support multiple art capitals, the market in Hong Kong remains vibrant and unparalleled in the region. “The parlour game of guessing which city will replace Hong Kong’s hub status has been going on for years,” says Gagosian Hong Kong director Nick Simunovic, “but there is no replacing this city’s role in Asia’s art ecology. The next Hong Kong is Hong Kong.”



Malaysia is reviving a plan to build the country’s first high-speed railway connecting its capital of Kuala Lumpur to neighbouring Singapore after the two governments failed to reach an agreement on an earlier version of the project.

The first seven proposals submitted recently by the private sector include bids from consortiums led by state-owned China Railway Construction; South Korea’s Hyundai Rotem, a Hyundai Motor unit focused on railways and defence; and local conglomerates such as MMC, Gamuda, YTL, WCT Holdings and Berjaya, according to people familiar with the matter.

MyHSR, the government-owned entity leading the project, declined to name the companies interested in the project. Japanese companies did not submit proposals during the expression-of-interest process that ended on January 15.

MyHSR will shortlist three to four consortiums for the next phase, the request for proposals round, as early as this month and present its review of the bids to the cabinet, sources said. The Malaysian government is expected to present the proposal to Singapore over the next few months to determine if the city-state wants to take part in the project.

“We want to finalise [the proposal] as quickly as possible, hopefully over the next three to four months,” a Malaysian official told Nikkei Asia. MyHSR is also discussing an option to extend the line from Kuala Lumpur only to the southern state of Johor if Singapore decides not to participate.

The expression-of-interest phase of the bidding follows Malaysia’s call in July last year for the private sector to submit proposals to develop and operate the project through a public-private partnership model.

In August, Singapore said it was willing to discuss any new proposal from Malaysia “starting from a clean state”, then-acting transport minister Chee Hong Tat told parliament. The city-state said at the time that it had not received any new proposals from its neighbour.

The revived plan comes as momentum grows for Malaysia to enhance its transport system and help make Johor a regional investment destination. The government signed a memorandum of understanding with Singapore in January to jointly develop a special economic zone in the southern state as a new engine of growth.

Sultan Ibrahim of Johor, who became Malaysia’s new king in January, said he wanted to revive the project. “I will make it [come back] on,” he told Singapore’s Straits Times in an interview published in December.

But Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim has said the government will not fund the project and is instead seeking privately backed proposals. Due to the country’s financial constraints, the government favours proposals with “comprehensive financing”, an official told Nikkei Asia.

During the initial review of the private-sector proposals, the Chinese consortium consisting of China Railway Construction, China Communications Construction and the Export-Import Bank of China, was seen as a strong candidate for the shortlist, given its financing scheme, sources said.

The high-speed railway project with Singapore was first floated in 2013 during former prime minister Najib Razak’s administration. The 350km link, which was agreed in 2016 and due to open in 2026, would have cut travel time between the two cities to about 90 minutes, versus more than four hours by car.

The high-speed rail line had been expected to boost cross-border business as well as development of areas along the line. The two neighbours have close economic ties, with the air route linking Singapore and Kuala Lumpur among the busiest in the world.

At the time, the project was estimated to cost about $17bn, and companies from China, Japan, South Korea and Europe had expressed interest in contracts to build, operate and finance the trains and rail assets.

But the project was hit by multiple delays due to escalating costs and changes in plans. The project was eventually scrapped in 2021, after Malaysia and Singapore failed to reach an agreement. Malaysia paid more than S$100mn (US$74mn) in compensation to Singapore for the termination.

The latest iteration of the project comes against a backdrop of new high speed rail lines in south-east Asia. In October, Indonesia officially opened the region’s first high-speed railway, connecting 140km between Jakarta and Bandung in less than an hour. The $7bn line was built by a consortium of Indonesian and Chinese state-owned companies, with government support for land acquisition.

But analysts said significant hurdles would need to be overcome if Malaysia were to complete the project. At an estimated cost of up to RM120bn ($25bn), funding is another obstacle for the government, which seeks to pay for the rail line with capital exclusively from private companies.

Adib Zalkapli, director at advisory BowerGroupAsia, said the project was “very ambitious” and would be “costly” for Malaysia to complete without clear government support, although the country’s tight fiscal position poses serious constraints.

To shore up the country’s fiscal position, Malaysia in October passed legislation to limit the country’s debt to 60 per cent of gross domestic product within three to five years. The country’s public debt as of December had reached RM1.5tn, or more than 80 per cent of GDP, well above this target.

Additional reporting by Dylan Loh

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on March 6. ©2024 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Shimano, the world’s largest bicycle parts maker, will use its new plant in Singapore as a hub for exploring south-east Asia’s high-potential market for sports bikes, the company’s chair and chief executive Yozo Shimano said.

“Our Singapore plant is controlling our major overseas factories,” he told Nikkei Asia in an exclusive interview, adding that as demand for bicycles increased in Asia and Latin America, its Singapore plant, which mainly makes midrange components, would become even more important.

The plant went online in 2023, replacing an old one established in 1973. Investing ¥25bn ($165mn), Shimano renewed the facilities to increase efficiency.

The company was founded in 1921 by ironworker Shozaburo Shimano in the industrial city of Sakai, just south of Osaka.

It develops and manufactures a wide range of parts, such as gears, transmissions, brakes and wheels, mainly for sports bikes including road and mountain bikes, with an estimated global share of 85 per cent.

Shimano has factories in Japan, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, China and the Czech Republic. In co-ordination with the factories in neighbouring counties, the Singapore plant focuses on midrange products, which account for 70 per cent of the company’s production volume.

The chair, who served as the company’s fifth president until 2021, said the Singapore plant had been playing a key decision-making role in the company’s global operations. It identifies overseas facilities that need investment and passes on suggestions to the head office in Japan, he said. The company will continue to invest about ¥40bn annually in facilities and equipment for medium- to long-term growth, 60 per cent of which will be spent overseas, including in Singapore.

Europe and North America are the largest markets for sports bikes, but Shimano is betting on growth in south-east Asia, where most people once viewed sports bikes as luxuries.

“In countries like Vietnam, bicycles are first and foremost a means of transportation, but as the economy develops, demand for sports bikes will also increase,” he said. He expects roughly 20 per cent of the company’s products will serve end users in south-east Asia in the medium to long term.

The company is accelerating its efforts to promote sports bikes in south-east Asia by holding bicycle competitions in co-operation with bicycle makers and local agencies. It has been operating a museum, Shimano Cycling World, in Singapore since 2014 to foster cycling culture.

But Shimano’s road ahead seems more bumpy than smooth, and taking it requires being well-equipped.

During the Covid-19 pandemic, Shimano’s performance was buoyed by a surge in demand for outdoor gear. Net sales and income reached record highs of ¥628.9bn and ¥128.1bn in 2022, a great leap from the ¥363.2bn and ¥51.8bn in 2019.

“We had anticipated that there would eventually be a slump,” said the chair. In 2023, net sales and income fell to ¥474.3bn and ¥61.1bn as demand declined after the pandemic. The company is now seeking ways to revive its performance.

“At the time when demand was surging, we had to prioritise increasing production and postpone other projects for medium- and long-term growth that we had begun,” he said. Now the company has resumed one of those projects: increasing in-house manufacturing to shorten delivery times.

According to Shimano, the company currently outsources about 50 per cent of its parts for the company’s flagship parts series, Dura-Ace, to subcontractors. “We make products by combining other companies’ excellent technologies and expertise. We cannot make all of them by ourselves,” he said. “[But] the supply chain for bicycles is long, and manufacturing takes time . . . We will be able to shorten the lead time by bringing what we can do in-house to some extent.”

The company plans to increase its in-house production ratio to approximately 70 per cent for Dura-Ace in the next few years and improve production efficiency by utilising digital and other technologies, with an annual investment of ¥15bn. “We should be able to improve profit margins,” he added.

The competition in the market has increased as e-bikes — sports bikes powered by lightweight batteries — become popular and new manufacturers enter the market. “We will be able to take advantage of our many years of experience as a bicycle parts manufacturer and our knowledge of bicycles,” Shimano said.

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on March 6. ©2024 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Banks in the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations may be seeing the last of beefy earnings from loans in the current higher financing era as lower interest rates loom.

The US Federal Reserve has signalled rate cuts in the coming months on lower inflation worries, gradually making money cheaper to borrow. For the Asean’s biggest banks, most of which are based in Singapore, growth in income from loans could slow over the coming months.

“It is inevitable that this environment will change,” said Kavan Choksi, wealth consultant at corporate advisory KC Consulting. “It is imperative for banks to redirect their focus towards devising strategies to sustain growth amid evolving interest rate environments.”

The three major Singaporean financial institutions — DBS, United Overseas Bank and Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation — refer to Fed rates when setting those for their own loans. Expectations are that growth in interest profits may have peaked.

OCBC on Wednesday said net interest margins — the difference between what a bank earns from loans and what it has to pay depositors, relative to interest-earning assets — should range from 2.2 per cent to 2.25 per cent in 2024, lower than the 2.29 per cent logged in the fourth quarter of last year.

The bank booked a net profit of S$1.6bn (US$1.2bn) for the October-December quarter, up 12 per cent from the same period in 2022, even as the lender expects “low single-digit loan growth” in 2024.

“We expect 2024 to be a more challenging year than 2023,” said OCBC chief Helen Wong during Wednesday’s earnings briefing. “Would there be upside? It depends also on how interest rate environment will actually exhibit in the rest of the year.”

OCBC peer UOB noted in its latest earnings release that interest margins had peaked. Last week, the lender said net interest margins stood at 2.02 per cent in October-December — the lowest of all the quarters in 2023. The margin last year hit 2.14 per cent in January-March, with results steadily declining over consecutive quarters.

“It’s very clear on a declining interest rate environment . . . the ability to manage costs of deposits will be more important than the ability to manage yield,” said Lee Wai Fai, UOB’s chief financial officer, during an earnings briefing last week. “The challenge we have is to sustain the NIM . . . we have to manage aggressively our deposit base.”

To stay competitive, Singapore’s banks have raised interest payouts to depositors in the current era of higher financing costs. But the same costs would have deterred some customers from increasing or obtaining new leverage, putting lenders in a position where profitability from loans compresses.

Carmen Lee, an analyst at OCBC’s investment research unit, wrote in a report this month that slower growth in loans and unexpected deceleration in macroenvironment conditions in UOB’s key Asean markets were risks for the bank.

“Net interest margins improved from 1.86 per cent in financial year ‘22 to 2.09 per cent in financial year ‘23,” she wrote of the previous uptick, while noting the less positive prospects ahead. “[UOB] management is guiding for NIM of around 2 per cent in financial year ‘24.”

Elsewhere in Asean, Thai and Indonesian lenders also grapple with pressure on earnings. Credit research agency CreditSights noted in a January report on Thailand’s lenders, including Krung Thai Bank, TMB Thanachart Bank and Bangkok Bank, that “quarterly NIMs near or has peaked”.

“Loan growth saw yet another weak quarter [from October to December] due to a common focus on quality given elevated household debt and challenged small and medium enterprises, amid a still sluggish and uneven economic recovery,” the report said. “The banks remain cautious for financial year ‘24.”

In Indonesia, CreditSights noted in February that lenders Bank Mandiri and Bank Negara Indonesia “delivered a strong performance” last year, though both faced more NIM pressure.

“Funding costs rose again in quarter four so both banks saw quarter-on-quarter NIM compression,” the report said. “Both banks have guided for overall flat to slightly lower financial year ‘24 NIMs.”

DBS, south-east Asia’s largest bank by total assets, this month reported that NIM in October-December stood at 2.13 per cent, just a whisker above the 2.12 per cent recorded in January-March and the second-lowest figure last year. Peak performance in 2023 was logged in July-September when NIM was booked at 2.19 per cent.

“We took a conscious decision to put on some fixed-rate assets in the tail end of the third quarter and fourth quarter,” said DBS chief Piyush Gupta during an earnings call this month. “We put on about S$30bn in that period of time just to lock in rates to protect us from a declining interest rate environment.”

A report from the equity research unit of Jefferies this month noted a deteriorating global macroeconomic outlook as a risk to DBS, which could limit any upside to capital returns for the bank, after the lender published its earnings results.

“[The] company does not see stress in the book right now,” the report noted. “We see rather limited upside . . . with costs running slightly higher and . . . NIM marginally softer.”

But there may still be some time left for banks such as DBS to make the most out of high financing costs, with the Fed signalling a cautious approach to any rate cuts in the future.

In a report this month, the global research unit of HSBC highlighted that for the US central bank, the “timing of any move to cut policy rates may still depend significantly on inflation readings to come in the months ahead”.

“We have growing confidence,” noted HSBC, quoting Fed chair Jay Powell’s remarks at a January meeting. “But not to the point where we feel like it’s a highly consequential decision to start the process of dialling back on restriction.”

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on February 27. ©2024 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Singapore’s prime minister has defended a deal to secure pop star Taylor Swift’s only performances in south-east Asia this year, dismissing rising indignation from the city-state’s neighbours.

Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong confirmed on Tuesday that Singapore had negotiated for the city-state to be the singer’s only stop in the region of 700mn but denied that such an arrangement was “unfriendly” to the city-state’s neighbours.

“It has turned out to be a very successful arrangement. I don’t see that as being unfriendly,” Lee said on Tuesday in Australia, where he was attending a summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

“If we had not made such an arrangement, would she have come to someplace else in south-east Asia or more places in south-east Asia? Maybe, maybe not,” he added, without revealing the terms of the deal.

Swift’s blockbuster Eras tour has provided an economic boost to destinations around the world, with her fans driving a surge in spending.

More than 300,000 tickets have been sold to her six sold-out concerts in Singapore, which conclude this week. Many of the attendees are from overseas. Hotel and airfare prices have soared by double digits in the city-state as far back as a year ago.

But the announcement of the tour’s Asia-Pacific dates last year stoked widespread disappointment across south-east Asia, after Swift revealed that she would only be stopping in Singapore, Japan and Australia.

Thailand’s prime minister alleged last month that Singapore had offered the singer subsidies of up to $3mn a show on the condition that she not perform elsewhere in the region. Srettha Thavisin said he had been told of the deal by promoter Anschutz Entertainment Group.

Singapore’s culture ministry and tourism board said in a joint statement last month that they had worked directly with AEG to book Swift.

Singapore’s culture minister Edwin Tong told the city-state’s parliament on Monday that speculation about the size of the grant to Swift was “not accurate and not anywhere as high as speculated”.

“Due to business confidentiality, we cannot reveal the specific size and conditions of the grant,” he added.

Swift’s representatives did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Prime Minister Lee said such deals helped expand the economy and bring in “goodwill and visitors” from the region.

In the Philippines, lawmaker Joey Salceda said in a statement last week that an exclusivity deal was “not what good neighbours do” and “runs contrary to the principle of consensus-based relations and solidarity on which the Asean was founded”. Salceda added that he had asked the Philippines’ Department of Foreign Affairs to formally protest against the arrangement.

Hong Kong also expressed displeasure at being overlooked in favour of its rival financial hub, with the Chinese territory’s government saying that most entertainment events “operate on commercial principles without government involvement”.

Swift’s performances were “a boost to Singapore’s status”, said Nirgunan Tiruchelvam, an analyst for Aletheia Capital. “Investors in Singapore’s hotel and tourism sectors will welcome it.”

He added that Singapore was a “no-brainer” for performers thanks to “superior logistics and connectivity” but said “Asean benefits as a whole” from the tour.

Tong, Singapore’s culture minister, warned on Monday that the government could take action against individuals found to have breached the confidentiality clause in Swift’s contract.

The government will assess the terms of the contract and will take “appropriate measures under advisement”, he said.



Neil Shen, China’s most prominent tech investor, acquired permanent residency in Singapore and later opened an office for his $56bn venture capital firm in the city-state as tensions rose between Washington and Beijing.

The billionaire founder of Sequoia China, renowned for early investments in Alibaba, ByteDance and Shein, was granted the status before the Covid-19 pandemic, according to three people familiar with the matter.

One of the people close to Shen cited “personal reasons” for the decision, while another said the first application was made over a decade ago.

Shen’s firm, which rebranded last year as HongShan, subsequently expanded into Singapore, opening an office in the financial hub as it split from US-based Sequoia last June.

HongShan has also encouraged some of its China-based portfolio companies with global ambitions to set up entities in Singapore since the pandemic.

“The decision to open a Singapore office was made for business reasons and was not related to personal matters of any of our executives,” said HongShan in a statement. HongShan has previously said the Singapore office was set up to fulfil local legal requirements.

Another person familiar with Shen’s situation said he had been spending little time in Singapore and still appeared to be based in Hong Kong with frequent travel to mainland China.

Shen, 56, became an early mover in a trend that became replicated many times over by wealthy Chinese, especially those tied to the country’s tech sector. Many shifted to low-tax, stable Singapore amid strict pandemic lockdowns in the mainland as well as President Xi Jinping’s crackdown on tech companies and calls for wealth redistribution.

The city-state, which has a large ethnic Chinese population, strikes a neutral line between the US and China. Tensions between the two superpowers have grown since Donald Trump’s election as US president in 2016 and have continued under Joe Biden.

“Neil’s decision . . . made it a lot easier for others to follow after that,” one of the people said, adding the move was “spoken about” in Chinese business circles even though it has not become publicly known until now.

Permanent residency in the city-state allows those with the pass to apply for permanent residency for their spouses and children, pay lower taxes on property purchases and paves the way for Singapore citizenship.

Shen led Sequoia’s China business before political pressure stemming from worsening Sino-US relations forced it to split from its American arm. The divorce resulted in three separate businesses: HongShan in China, Peak XV in India and south-east Asia and Sequoia Capital in the US.

HongShan has since sought to become more global, pursuing business opportunities and investments worldwide to benefit its Chinese portfolio companies.

One mainland start-up in the healthcare industry backed by HongShan told the Financial Times it had received advice to start a Singapore entity as that would ease its expansion into international markets including the US. Two other co-investors in start-ups also backed by HongShan said founders had been told to establish a Singapore presence.

Some have already been set up. Beijing-based Moonshot AI, which last week raised $1bn, last year established a Singapore entity. HongShan is a longtime investor in the start-up.

China’s Hai Robotics, an autonomous warehouse robotics start-up and another HongShan-backed company, set up a Singapore office in late 2021.

Other Chinese companies with large operations in western markets, including TikTok owner ByteDance and fast-fashion group Shein, have picked Singapore as their global headquarters. Both companies are backed by HongShan.

HongShan declined to comment, but a person close to the company said many of its portfolio companies had offices around the world, including in Singapore.

HongShan, Moonshot AI and ByteDance were named in a US congressional report this month which scrutinised American capital invested in Chinese tech companies that support Beijing’s military and its repression of minorities in Xinjiang.

Meanwhile, other Chinese business figures, particularly in the investment and technology sectors, have sought residency in Singapore and expanded or opened offices in the city-state in recent years.

Sean Tong, the co-founder of China’s Boyu Capital, a leading private equity firm set up by a grandson of former Chinese president Jiang Zemin, relocated to Singapore from Hong Kong during the early stages of the pandemic. Boyu opened a Singapore office in 2019.

Zhang Lei, the billionaire China-born founder of Hillhouse Capital, became a Singaporean citizen. Hillhouse expanded and consolidated into larger premises in 2022.

Dianping founder Zhang Tao and Tencent co-founder Tony Zhang relocated to Singapore in the past few years.



When I visit a bar, I (of course) love an excellent cocktail — and meeting bartenders and mixologists who are super geeky about their latest brew. But if, as a guest, you don’t feel like you’ve stumbled into a bit of magic, and aren’t made to feel looked after, then you’re just enjoying a great drink — not a great bar. Having been fortunate enough to travel and witness first-hand the plethora of different bars, clubs and restaurants around the world — and having worked in, owned and run a wide range of venues for some 20 years — I’ve become quite particular about how I define a fantastic bar.

Below are some of my favourite places around the globe that aren’t solely focused on serving a quality product, but offer the total package, feel inclusive and reflect a passion — and even though they’re off the beaten track, they’re well worth making a special effort to visit.

This is a contender for my favourite bar in the world: understated, charming and an important piece of Madrid history. It became a popular hang-out for Republican soldiers and their supporters during the Spanish Civil War, and to this day there’s a homeliness, with no photography allowed (though modern clientele are probably less wary of potential spies knocking around). There are barrels of sherry on offer (try the Palo Cortado — a dry style that jumps between savoury, nutty and aromatic), simple yet superb snacks (I usually order the anchovies on bread and some bottarga) and even a resident cat padding around. Over an evening, the atmosphere evolves from rather sedate to raucous when guests spill on to the streets. Madrid is said to have more bars per capita than any other European city, so naturally there are great cocktail spots and vermuterías adjacent, should you wish to hop between a few places. I also like nearby Viva Madrid, but I wouldn’t be in a rush to leave La Venencia. It's the perfect place to settle in for a few hours. Website; Directions

There is no shortage of good bars in Melbourne, a city renowned for its craft cocktail culture, but a real favourite is Caretaker’s Cottage, located behind a church on Little Lonsdale Street in a tiny bluestone cottage (a former caretaker’s quarters). It strikes the perfect balance of cocktail bar, home from home and pub, and is owned and operated by some dear friends and ex-Lyan family, who offer the warmth of Aussie hospitality in the most wonderful way. Chat to the team, listen to great music and drink through the short but well-crafted menu. They’re known for having Guinness on tap and milk punch (a milk and brandy or bourbon-based cocktail that originated in the 18th century), and a cleverly curated wine list. Website; Directions

Just a few blocks away from Caretaker’s Cottage, Section 8 is a cool outdoor bar that first started as a pop-up but did so well it became a permanent fixture. Locals call it the “Container Bar” because it’s in a converted shipping container that’s located in a car park in Chinatown. It’s a fun place to grab a drink while soaking up the Australian sun and taking in a bit of Melbourne’s music scene (it regularly hosts bands). Drinks are fittingly summery and nod to iconic songs: my favourite cocktail is the “Good Kid, M.A.A.D Litty” (a riff on the Kendrick Lamar album) made with tequila, hibiscus and lemongrass syrup, guava nectar and citrus. Website; Directions

This is the bar I wish was part of the Lyan family. An Edinburgh institution that still manages to feel like a local spot, with great Guinness, a lively atmosphere and warmth, and well-priced drams of single malt whisky. It’s a beautiful little stone building tucked away on a cobbled side street in the New Town, and the small space doesn’t take much to get packed out. Stepping through the door almost feels like you’re in a time warp, instantly looping you in to a real sense of community. This is the place to go for real ales, with rotating taps from Scottish craft breweries, and the friendly staff are more than happy to talk you through their selection. Website; Directions

Owned and run by Jean Trinh, a friend, super-talented bartender and one of the nicest figures in the industry, Alquímico, which is based in a renovated colonial mansion, is a wonderful showcase of Colombia, one of the most biodiverse countries in the world. It’s no surprise that this bar has been named the best in all of South America for the past few years. Jean’s commitment to highlighting indigenous knowledge, ingredients and culture is channelled through three floors of dancing, food and cocktails, each with a different personality, offering something for any occasion. The menu is a celebration of Colombia’s brilliant produce with inventive applications. I recommend the taquitos with banana peel, the yucca dumplings and the ahuyama (squash) ceviche, while sipping on a Selva martini (replete with aromatic herb oil) or a Kianga, marrying local fruits, herbs and honey with one of my favourite Scottish single malts. Website; Directions

In a city renowned for its phenomenal culinary scene, it is no surprise that Copenhagen also offers many great cocktail bars to explore, though its natural wine and beer scene is what really excites me. From hole-in-the-wall venues to converted warehouse spaces and stylish modern bars, there’s something for every occasion. And although wine bars and a brewpub might seem like things you can find elsewhere, these three places — from the decor to the service to the atmosphere — feel distinctly Danish.

Ved Stranden 10 is one of the city’s most stylish natural wine bars. Set in a historic tea shop, the charming canal-side venue is not known for its menu but lack thereof, so it’s best to ask the knowledgable staff for a recommendation. Featured wines come from small, independent producers, so you’re likely to enjoy something you’ve never heard of, or learn something new. Website; Directions

Pompette, a natural wine bar and shop in the chic Nørrebro neighbourhood, has despite its popularity remained strong on its mission to sell top-quality products at reasonable prices. I recommend a glass of one of Tschida’s wines, a producer in Austria’s Burgenland, and a fried chicken sandwich from Poulette, the bar’s takeaway sandwich shop right next door. Website; Directions

Craft beer lovers will be acquainted with Copenhagen’s Mikkekeller, and its Warpigs brewpub is a must-stop for me for a locally brewed something (you can cover all tastes here) before exploring the old Meatpacking District and its restaurants and art spaces. Website; Directions

As historic spaces go, this one, south Asia’s grand-dame hotel, is particularly fabulous, and despite my ancestral connection, I love it simply as it channels a bygone era. The hotel, which opened in 1864, is one of the oldest east of the Suez. I came here with family just to enjoy the glamorous setting, but ended up settling into cocktails using Rockland produce — a pioneering local family distillery that’s been operating for a century on the island. It’s an incomparable spot to sit back on a waterside terrace, order a daiquiri and enjoy the beautiful surroundings. Website; Directions

I love tea for its complexity, variety and versatility as much as I do whisky, so I love finding venues that are committed to it as much as great bars are to their booze. This lively restaurant dates back nearly a century, and has a magical touch balancing styling, product and service that makes you feel like you’ve wandered into a different era. Order everything (from the very cool, old-style menu cards) — the traditional dim sum are delicious — and lean into the great atmosphere. Website; Directions

An Australian export to a city replete with great bars, this taverna offers the magic of traditional stylings, local wines, beers and cocktails alongside the requisite tapas — but the energy and service are what makes this particular spot stick out. The local Txakoli wine — fresh, light and zesty with a slight minerality — alongside the richness of cured tuna and ham or a steak tartare is a match made in heaven. But with an impressive list of local wines (many by the glass), along with some other old world gems, the trick here is to go with enough friends to tackle the whole menu. Website; Directions

New York has some of the best drinking spots in the world and, given that cocktails are an American invention, the city has you covered for everything from pitch-perfect classics to seasonal specialities and cutting-edge serves. But this Brooklyn joint brings the joy of a dive bar, with live music, sparkling wine on tap and very cold beer. This is an unpretentious spot in Bushwick, and there other great places about (Empirical’s new distillery is nearby), but first have a boilermaker (beer with a shot of bourbon on the side) — and see where the night takes you. Website; Directions

Singapore is a wonderful melting pot of cultures and uniquely positioned at the centre of so many international influences, but before this cocktail bar opened, many bars (and restaurants) — even at the finer end of the spectrum — focused on Western ideals and ingredients. Co-owner Vijay Mudaliar (again, a friend, ex-Lyan family and one of the loveliest folks in the industry) wanted to celebrate his homeland in a more authentic manner, embracing local ingredients, music, materials and accents. What results is a wonderful love letter to Singaporean culture, with flavours and compositions you won’t find anywhere else. Website; Directions

Ryan “Mr Lyan” Chetiyawardana, one of the world’s leading bartenders, runs four venues around the globe: London’s Seed Library and Lyaness (which is launching a new menu in March), Silver Lyan in Washington DC and Super Lyan in Amsterdam

Share your favourite bars around the world in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



Two years after Asia’s two big financial hubs, Singapore and Hong Kong, allowed so-called blank-cheque companies as a novel way to help fast-growing technology start-ups and others go public, the results have fallen short of expectations.

These fundraising vehicles, known as special-purpose acquisition companies (Spacs), raise money with a promise to invest in an operating company. They have largely failed to deliver an era of quicker listings of tech upstarts on Asian exchanges.

Most Spacs listed in the two financial centres have failed to bring privately held companies on to their stock exchanges. Nor have any new Spacs made their debuts in Singapore or Hong Kong last year, after a flurry of initial public offerings of these fundraising shell companies in 2022.

“Investor interest in Asian Spacs has been poor,” said Mak Yuen Teen, a professor of accounting at the National University of Singapore Business School. “The experiment with Spacs is over in Singapore, and probably Hong Kong, even if the exchanges do not want to admit it and claim that there may be other Spac listings in future.”

Singapore may have beaten Hong Kong to listing the first Spacs in January 2022, but Mak called that victory “hollow”. Three Spacs — Vertex Technology Acquisition, Novo Tellus Alpha Acquisition and Pegasus Asia — launched IPOs on the Singapore Exchange that month.

Two years later, only Vertex, backed by Singapore state investor Temasek, completed a merger. The other two failed to do so, setting both on a path to dissolution, with the money raised via their IPOs returning to investors.

Vertex merged with 17Live in December, allowing the Taiwan-founded livestreaming platform to bypass a traditional IPO, which was the appeal, at least in theory, that Spacs presented to tech start-ups looking to go public.

A traditional IPO involves a more arduous vetting process and typically requires more time. Spacs do the initial work of the IPO, with the start-up using it as a vehicle to become a publicly traded company via a merger, also known as a “de-Spac”.

US markets paved the way for the rise of Spacs in 2021 when the Covid-19 pandemic was in full swing and interest rates were low, which fed risk appetite among investors for fast-growing, but also cash-burning, tech start-ups.

Singapore unicorns such as Grab and Sea Group, or start-ups with a value of over $1bn, listed in the US, with Sea doing so via a traditional IPO while Grab went public with a de-Spac.

The ambition was for Asian exchanges to take a slice of the lucrative Spac pie, and Singapore and Hong Kong formalised their rules for blank-cheque companies by 2022, opening the way for sponsors and their targets to make it work.

But this has not always produced the desired results. 17Live’s share price, for instance, has dived more than 70 per cent from the benchmark set by the shell company it merged with.

“It is clear that the Singapore experiment with Spacs has failed,” Mak said. “While SGX may claim that there is now a Spac framework, and does not rule out future Spac listings, I think it is game over.”

SGX, the city-state’s bourse, has not had a new Spac listing after the first three. Its rival, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, has also seen a drought in such listings.

According to financial markets data provider LSEG, the last Spac to list on the Hong Kong market was TechStar Acquisition in December 2022, bringing the total number of blank-cheque companies to five. With no new Spacs listed since then, only two — Aquila Acquisition and Vision Deal HK Acquisition — found target companies to merge with.

“Since the launch of the Spac regime in Hong Kong in 2022, it has yet to spark significant waves,” said Hebe Chen, market analyst at IG International. “Escalating fears of a global recession and China’s lacklustre economic recovery have contributed to a growing cautious mood in the Hong Kong market, leading to a sharp decline in market valuations and restricted liquidity.”

Soaring inflation, coupled with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, helped to make investors skittish. The US Federal Reserve set the tone by jacking up interest rates and central banks elsewhere have followed suit, ending the era of cheap money that helped fuel the rise of Spacs.

The performance of de-Spaced entities has also been lacklustre. Like Singapore-listed 17Live, Grab’s share price has sagged by more than 70% since its US listing. Grab listed on Nasdaq via its Spac merger in December 2021. It was only in November 2023 that it logged its first quarterly profit on an adjusted basis since its founding more than a decade ago.

“Interest towards Spacs has been extremely speculative, and only investors with higher risk appetites were really willing to inject funds into the listed vehicles,” said Oriano Lizza, a sales trader at trading platform provider CMC Markets. “Specifically, with higher [interest] rate environments, investors were not required to take such risk, and opted for risk-free returns in the case of fixed deposits and government bonds.”

Pol de Win, SGX’s head of global sales and origination, said the bourse’s decisions on Spacs were not made based on one market cycle, but for the longer term, adding that a scenario where blank-cheque companies make a comeback in “the next five years” is possible.

He said that for a good de-Spac to occur, the IPO environment has to be “conducive,” and this has not largely been the case for the last two years. “If we go back two years, we would have hoped that we were in a different position now,” de Win said. “But a lot of that, or pretty much all of that, is just down to timing and market conditions.”

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on February 12. ©2024 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



A Singapore private club known for catering to wealthy Chinese clients has shut down as ultra-rich residents of the Asian financial hub increasingly opt for discretion over conspicuous displays of wealth.

Circle 33, located inside a former colonial residence on Scotts Road in the swish suburb of Orchard, has closed its doors after failing to renew its lease last year, according to three people familiar with the wine club’s situation.

The closure of the club, which was launched in 2021, comes as sales of luxury goods such as watches, cars, high-end apartments and golf memberships have tumbled in the city-state, according to industry experts, and as Singapore authorities are increasing scrutiny of family offices in the wake of a record money-laundering scandal.

Last August, Singaporean authorities arrested and charged 10 people — all with links to China — in connection to a $2.2bn money laundering and fraud investigation, the largest in Singapore’s history. Police also seized assets including luxury properties, cars, designer handbags, gold bars, cash and cryptocurrency in raids across the city.

In the wake of the probe, authorities have turned a closer eye on Singapore’s most affluent residents, visiting auto dealerships and real estate groups and warning in October that luxury assets including cars, watches and handbags may be subjected to anti-money laundering controls.

Private bankers have also tightened due diligence processes for new clients, leading to longer waiting times to open accounts and set up family offices.

Circle 33, which was famed for its extensive wine menu with prices that ran into six figures, came to symbolise the flow of wealth to Singapore during the pandemic, especially from super-rich Chinese fleeing draconian restrictions in mainland China.

Co-founded by Zhang Tao, the co-founder of restaurant review site Dianping, and backed by Chinese business figures such as Min Fan, co-founder of travel group Ctrip, Circle 33 gained notoriety by attracting high-flying executives from China, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia, according to multiple people who frequented the club.

“It was printing money but members stopped going after it was spoken about in the media and earned a reputation,” said one person who visited the club on multiple occasions.

Another person close to the club said Circle 33 did not make enough money, forcing the owners to decide against renewing the lease.

On a recent visit by the Financial Times, there was no sign of Circle 33 at the villa on Scotts Road save for terracotta statues in the garden.

Jade Koh, who is listed as the general manager of Circle 33 on LinkedIn, declined to comment. The club does not have a website and its Google listing said it was permanently closed.

While the money laundering investigation, which Singapore police said had been in progress for years, was announced after Circle 33’s quiet closure this summer, the scandal has swayed the city-state’s wealthy to avoid flaunting their privilege, especially as the cost of living rises.

“The economy is not as robust,” said Aaron Goh, a high-end events planner for eXposure Entertainment, who has observed a drop-off in demand for personalised parties over the past six months.

Lee Lee Langdale, owner of Singolf Services, a club membership brokerage, said prices had been rising “until the money laundering case in August” thanks to demand from foreigners, especially from China. “Since then it has been really quiet,” she said.

Golf clubs have also begun more strictly examining suspicious payments, she added, while membership prices have come down, with joining fees at Sentosa Golf Club falling from about S$950,000 to S$850,000 (US$709,000-US$635,000).

Say Kwee Neng, a car industry consultant, said sales of luxury and super-luxury brands had also come under more scrutiny, on top of a targeted tax rise introduced last year.

“Anecdotally, I heard stories of how the authorities were visiting authorised dealers for Porsche, Ferrari and Bentley,” he said. “Specifically they wanted to know why more detailed background checks weren’t conducted by the dealers to ascertain the source of funding for these people of interest.”

Higher duties have also contributed to a fall in luxury home sales in the second half of last year, according to real estate industry experts.

“The high-end market fuelled by foreigners was already softening due to higher stamp duty costs,” said one real estate agent specialising in foreign buyers. “The laundering scandal was the nail in the coffin.”



From 1993 until the Covid-19 pandemic, the Eastern & Oriental Express ran from Singapore to Bangkok via Kuala Lumpur and Penang. Like its sister the Venice-Simplon Orient Express, it’s owned by Belmond. The VSOE has recently expanded its routes and connections in Europe; now the E&O is following suit, relaunching with a three-night Essence of Malaysia journey, with the original carriages – Japanese-built, specced-up even higher in Singapore – newly refurbished and ready to, ahem, roll.

Guests board and disembark at Singapore’s Woodlands station for a round-trip journey with stops in Penang and Langkawi. On Penang, there are private guided tours of the historic shophouses of George Town, today full of art galleries, artisan boutiques and design studios, and excellent restaurants; you can also grab a map and a trishaw (like a rickshaw but with the driver at the back) and explore the Old Town yourself. On Langkawi, where the beaches are heaven and the rainforest more than 10mn years old, the activities skew to snorkelling, paddle-boarding and massages. Belmond trains are known for their cuisine, so no surprise they’ve enlisted André Chiang – his Restaurant André in Singapore was the city’s top-rated venue for years – to oversee the galleys here. belmond.com, from $2,400

Intriguing news from the Finnish countryside, an hour outside Helsinki: Billnäs Gård, an early-20th-century villa-turned-hospitality project in the tiny, pretty riverside village of Billnäs. Its owners recently completed a several-year restoration that honours the genteel spirit of the original interiors with mod-con add-ons, both necessary and indulgent, including a saltwater swimming pool and a medicinal and herb garden adjacent to the traditional potager.

They plan to run Billnäs Gård part of the time as a small, intimate hotel, and part as a private villa for holidays and celebrations, with retreats of all sorts throughout the year. Six ensuite bedrooms are furnished with antiques, iconic contemporary Scandinavian designs and collectable 20th-century pieces, skilfully combined into vignettes. Two suites have small kitchens; one has a bathroom with a stunning tiled fireplace; in summer, a small cabin at the river’s edge joins the inventory. Already on the 2024 schedule are yoga and somatic healing retreats, as well as ones themed around healthy eating. billnasgard.fi, from about €430

Is it ever too early to think summer? Arev Saint-Tropez opens next month on a quiet street tucked just outside the village itself, with 43 rooms designed by madrileño Luis Bustamante, who never met a primary colour he didn’t like. Be prepared for lots of cobalt, canary and cardinal, with elegant light-toned boiserie and well-judged interludes of white.

They’ve created a small square on the property that hosts rotating pop-up boutiques and a coffee-patisserie truck; if you prefer your croissant down in the village, there are bikes on hand for borrowing and a chauffeured Citroën Méhari EV. What they hope will be their masterstroke of genius: a revival of the Strand Restaurant and Champagne Lounge, which, some years back, turned over its Rue du Petit Bal premises – one of the oldest continuously operating restaurant spaces in the Côte d’Azur – to Villa Azur, and is reinvented here. arevcollection.com, from €590

The Cuyama Buckhorn, in California’s eastern Santa Barbara county, first opened in 1952 in New Cuyama — an oil-boom town conceived in an era of roadside fenced pools, common barbecue areas and ranch-influenced architecture with prefab leanings. Its LA-based owners (the city is a two-hour drive away) have retained quite a few of those midcentury traces, but mostly it feels like a very 2024 balance of high and low, with printed cement-tile floors, slick little minibars and floating platform beds with timber headboards in the 21 rooms.

There’s the Buck Stop Coffee Shop and Buckhorn Restaurant, where the drinks menu has garnered attention across central California (the expected regional wines, craft beers and mezcal cocktails are joined by sake and bourbon flights). The roadside pool has been joined by a bocce ball court and a dry sauna. Best of all might be the proximity to the Cuyama Valley, which is west-coast wildflower nirvana, home to its own mini version of California’s famous springtime “superbloom”. cuyamabuckhorn.com, from $250

@mariashollenbarger



Singapore’s transport minister has been charged with corruption and has resigned, in a rare graft accusation in the city-state that prides itself on its reputation for clean governance and transparency.

S Iswaran faces 27 charges including graft, obstruction of justice and obtaining “valuable things” from a prominent real estate tycoon, the country’s corruption watchdog said in a statement on Thursday.

Iswaran has denied wrongdoing. He faces a penalty of up to S$100,000 and seven years in prison if found guilty of corruption.

The charges allege he received kickbacks totalling more than S$384,000 (US$285,770) in value between 2015 and 2022, according to the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau.

“I reject the allegations in the charges and will now focus on clearing my name,” Iswaran said in a resignation letter made public by the office of Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong on Thursday. Iswaran added that he would return his salary and allowances received since the beginning of the investigation in July last year.

Lee said the government would continue to deal with the case “rigorously”.

“I am determined to uphold the integrity of the party and the government, and our reputation for honesty and incorruptibility,” Lee said, referring to the ruling People’s Action party, of which Iswaran was also a member until his resignation this week. “Singaporeans expect no less.”

The charges came about six months after the anti-graft agency arrested Iswaran and Ong Beng Seng, one of the city-state’s most high-profile property tycoons. Both were released on bail.

The corruption watchdog said Iswaran received some of the alleged bribes for “advancing Ong’s business interests” in a contract between his company Singapore GP Pte and the Singapore Tourism Board, a government agency.

According to a charge sheet seen by the Financial Times, the kickbacks allegedly included tickets to English Premier League football matches, Formula One races and plays including Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, Hamilton and Kinky Boots, as well as a business class flight from Doha to Singapore in 2022.

Iswaran, who previously served as Singapore’s minister of communications and of trade and industry, was instrumental in bringing the Formula One Grand Prix to Singapore in partnership with Ong in 2007.

Ong has not been charged. He is the founder of Hotel Properties, which has brands such as the Four Seasons and Intercontinental in its property portfolio. The company has previously said that Ong was providing details of his dealings with Iswaran to the watchdog.

Singapore GP Pte declined to comment. The Singapore Tourism Board did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Ong declined to comment.

The corruption case comes amid mounting scandals for the ruling party, which faces a crucial leadership transition this year.

Prime Minister Lee is set to hand over power to his deputy Lawrence Wong as soon as November, in what will only be the fourth change of leadership in Singapore’s history. In 2025, the country will go to the polls in a race that PAP, which has ruled Singapore uninterrupted since independence in 1965, is again expected to win.

Lee said last year that the graft accusations against Iswaran and Ong, along with the resignations of two senior PAP lawmakers over an “inappropriate relationship”, had hit the party’s reputation.

Singapore’s ministers are among the highest paid in the world, earning about S$1mn a year, in part to discourage corruption. The last graft case in Singapore involving a minister was in 1986.



The international art market moves to the Indo-Pacific this week for the second edition of ART SG in Singapore (January 19-21, Marina Bay Sands Expo and Convention Centre). Coinciding with Singapore Art Week and notable museum show openings, the fair has generated a “step up of activity in town” this year, according to its co-founder Magnus Renfrew.

Support from the region’s individual collectors bolsters many events, including at the so-called Private Museum, which is in fact a hybrid non-profit charity founded by the real estate developer Daniel Teo and his daughter Rachel Teo in 2010. Shows here include works from 15 members of “Art Addicts Anonymous” — an informal WhatsApp group that has become a thriving collectors circle — and of art owned by Pierre Lorinet, a financier-turned-philanthropist who is a member of ART SG’s 26-person advisory group. Elsewhere, the British curator Zoé Whitley organises an exhibition of 100 artists from Africa and Asia at Gillman Barracks for The Institutum, founded by the international collector Andreas Teoh.

Renfrew notes the acceleration of money flowing into Singapore, including through its thriving biotech and tech sectors. This year’s edition of the fair is however nearly a third smaller than its inaugural edition — with about 110 galleries versus 160 in 2023 — which, Renfrew says, reflects that galleries are “having to make short-term, pragmatic decisions” in a softer market. But, he says, “given the wider context of the ascent of Singapore’s relevance geopolitically and geo-economically, ART SG has the potential to play a role in building a key cultural and art market hub over the coming years.”

Two Australians who forged their careers in London have moved back and will open a new gallery in Sydney on February 24. Tania Doropoulos, previously artistic director of Frieze London and Frieze Studios, and Matt Glenn, a former director at Sadie Coles gallery, have identified a “generational shift” among gallerists and collectors in Australia and believe that now is a good time to begin catering to the widening demand. The art market’s move towards Asia is among the dynamics helping to put Australia on the map, they say.

The gallery will be called “Palas”, to invoke a sense of palatial hospitality, and so spelt after “an accident between an artist and an artificial intelligence”, Doropoulos says. The two-story space is in the city’s fast-developing Zetland area, and opens with a show of new silkscreen paintings by Marco Fusinato (US$35,000-$45,000). Fusinato represented Australia in the 2022 Venice Biennale, participating every day in a performance that ran for the event’s 200-day run.

The Palas founders plan to join the international art fair circuit, they say. “Artists here want to engage more internationally but it can be a very difficult leap, without physically relocating to the northern hemisphere, which can take years out of their practice,” Glenn says. Doropoulos adds that there is also demand from artists outside of Australia to build their profile there. “The biennial and museum sectors are showing a much better exchange but the gallery sector is not as participatory overseas,” she says. Other shows in the pipeline include those of the Irish artist Eva Rothschild, who also recently represented her country at Venice, and Canada’s Tamara Henderson.

Experimenting with a new business model is Matt Carey-Williams, who left Victoria Miro gallery in London last year and is now setting up solo. His venture will have a physical space — at 12 Porchester Place near Marble Arch — where he will hang about 10 small and short shows a year, each a “close up” of one artist. The first of these “Scenes” runs February 6-March 2 with work by Glen Pudvine (b1989, £3,500-£11,000), whom Carey-Williams first encountered at Pudvine’s Royal Academy Schools’ graduate show. It’s at this level that Carey-Williams feels he can really make a difference, offering exhibitions without demanding official representation. “There is a real thirst for artists who haven’t even graduated yet, which is risky for everyone, especially the artist,” he says.

He will supplement the Scene showings with “Episodes”, larger-scale group exhibitions based on a theme, which will run in different venues around the world. The first of these, Bump, will be at Frieze’s 9 Cork Street building, March 7-23, and will comprise 21 artists including Marc Dennis, Clare Woods and Flora Yukhnovich (prices up to $140,000). Carey-Williams says he is likely to go to Seoul for a future Episode in the autumn.

Hot on the heels of his Blackness, White, and Light exhibition that closed this month at the Mumok museum in Vienna, American artist Adam Pendleton gets his first solo gallery show in New York for more than 10 years at Pace from May 3. The show, including 20 recent paintings and works on paper, is an extension of the Vienna exhibition — which itself was a continuation of his best-known series, Black Dada and introduced colour for the first time. The Pace works will be priced between $65,000 and $450,000.

The artist’s “nearly continuous institutional exhibitions over the past 10 years”, including also at New York’s Museum of Modern Art and the KW Institute of Contemporary Art in Berlin, are a reason why it has taken so long for him to have a commercial show in his home town, says Samanthe Rubell, president of Pace, which has represented the artist since 2012. The artist, who explores the relationship between blackness and abstraction, is “one of the most relevant working today” and “reflects how we experience the world in the 21st century through its palpable feeling of everything happening at once”, she says.

Institutional demand has not exactly cooled — also in the planning is a large-scale, site-specific commission for the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington DC, slated for Spring 2025.

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FTWeekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



The Mexican revolution was finally over. The civil wars and agrarian uprisings that overthrew a dictator and established a constitutional republic ushered in a new era of Mexican nationalism. In Frida Kahlo’s “Self-Portrait with Monkey” (1945), the artist, dressed in a robe from the indigenous Tehuana people of Mexico, trusty spider monkey at her shoulder, throws us a haughty glance from under her unibrow. Celebrating pre-colonial cultures and female empowerment, this self-portrait captures a mood of defiance and confidence.

Contrast this with “Self-Portrait” (1958) by Patrick Ng, rendered a year after the Federation of Malaya, formerly British Malaya, became independent. The artist, a Chinese man, has depicted himself as a Malay woman. The queering (from man to woman, Chinese to Malay) makes this a slippery painting. On one level, it seems to be expressing ambivalence about “Malayanisation”, a national development programme to build a homogenous identity in a multiracial state. But it could also be read as a vision of a future society of radical fluidity, where typical markers of identity can be transcended.

Two self-portraits made during periods of national transformation; two very different moods. They are placed side by side in Tropical: Stories from Southeast Asia and Latin America at National Gallery Singapore, billed as the first major comparative survey of art from the two regions. One of its propositions is that self-portraiture was a strategy that artists from both sides of the globe used to comment on societal change and to imagine new worlds.

But is this a strategy exclusive to these regions? Self-portraits have everywhere and always offered commentary and vision. Beyond this, the show connects the art from diverse territories under a grand narrative of anti-imperialist resistance and sundry other rebellions. Besides self-portraiture, other threads in the show include the incorporation of local traditions, such as in the stacked totems of Rubem Valentim that reference Afro-Brazilian customs, as well as the innovative use of crafts, as seen in Barbara Sansoni’s geometric handwoven textile works suspended from the ceiling.

To unite all this, the curators propose a concept called “Tropical”, described as a “defiant attitude” that “allowed for the most imaginative possibilities to emerge even from the most trying of circumstances”. While not very illuminating (even verging on reductive, as it suggests that equatorial types are governed by their passions), it does generate an atmosphere of solidarity: the tropical as a hothouse space of restless ferment and unruly fecundity.

Is this convincing? Only if you take “tropicality” as a poetic mood or a speculative proposition, which allows for some fudging of timescales and the fusing of diverse liberatory struggles. The sweeping concept takes some serious creative licence and does not properly account for global conditions. The curators propose that although independence in both regions happened at different periods — most of Latin America between 1808 and 1826, south-east Asia between 1945 and 1957 — their art histories followed similar trajectories and can be mapped on to each other. But as this is mostly a 20th-century painting show, the Latin American artists are mischaracterised by this line of reasoning; by that time, some of them were fighting local dictators rather than colonial overlords.

But this is an ambitious and meaningful project. As interest in the art from the Global South grows, there is particular focus on south-to-south exchanges. Here, two regions occupying peripheral roles within a “global” history of Eurocentric modernism have placed themselves centrestage. White people are not invited, with the exception of Paul Gauguin, who opens the exhibition as a common enemy. His “Poor Fisherman” (1896), showing a naked native from French Polynesia drinking from a coconut shell, exemplifies lingering stereotypes of the tropics as idle, primitive and backward.

Over the course of the show, this trope gets soundly rebutted by more than 200 artworks showing labour, resistance and futuristic visions of Global South solidarity (even before the term was coined). The argument is borne out in three sections, roughly chronological in order. The Myth of the Lazy Native explores how artists resisted European representations of colonial subjects in a series of figurative paintings that celebrate local life, industry and cultures. Here, we have a Brazilian fruit-seller on a boat with a wonderful expression of bored disdain (Tarsila do Amaral, “The Fruit Seller”, 1925), a Mexican woman making tortillas (Diego Rivera, “Woman Grinding Maize”, 1924) and a street-theatre performance in Jakarta (Hendra Gunawan, “Monkey Dance”).

The second section, This Earth of Mankind, roughly maps on to the post-independence period, in which artists grappled with national identities and melded traditions with experimentation. As part of the exhibition’s populist manoeuvres, a mirror has been put between two Indonesian modern masters for visitors to take selfies. On the left, we have Chinese-born Lee Man Fong’s careful self-portrait dressed in a tropics-appropriate white T-shirt and surrounded by Greek statues, signalling his parity with European traditions; on the right, the Indonesian artist Affandi’s visage composed of chaotic squiggles, achieved by squeezing tubes of paint directly on to the canvas and smudging them around with his fingers. Following them is a pageant of self-portraits that eventually culminates in an exploration of how artists elevated craft traditions to art.

Finally, The Subversive brings us to the present day. This is where the exhibition becomes the most multidisciplinary, with installations, videos and sculpture. Curatorially, it’s a bit of a free-for-all: so long as the artist is challenging something, she’s in. But it ends up being the strongest section. Liberated from a linear narrative, the works speak a language of defiance, fierceness, sensuality and mystery. Bali’s I Gusti Ayu Kadek Murniasih’s sinuous figures with explicit genitalia upend sexual conservatism with joyous lasciviousness.

It is also here that the western category of “art” gets destabilised by Singaporean Malay artist Mohammad Din Mohammad’s talismanic paintings. As a Sufi mystic and healer, his works are packed with pieces of wood, animal bone and shells in crowded compositions which are believed to be therapeutic to the viewer. One wonders whether “tropical” could involve a fusion of different paradigms, such as art, spirituality and medicine, which make up singular practices in the Global South that cannot be easily assimilated into western aesthetic categories? In any case, this exhibition is a starting point for imagining how we can broaden the ways we narrate creative processes from around the world.

To March 24, nationalgallery.sg



This article is part of a guide to Singapore from FT Globetrotter

While Singapore has long been a bastion of fine dining, its award-winning repertoire over the years has tended to lean French or Japanese. In recent years, however, a slew of young, talented chefs has challenged this stance — and the misconception that local (which, due to the city-state’s history as a trading post in the 19th and 20th centuries, can be anything from Chinese, Malay, Indian and Peranakan) had to be “cheaper.”

These cuisines, as well as those from neighbouring states, were previously mostly found only at hawker stalls and casual joints. Today, they can also be enjoyed on multi-course tasting menus, proudly celebrating their respective chefs’ heritages.

This shift began with the birth of “mod-Sin”, or modern Singapore cuisine, attributed to chef Willin Low, who coined the term in 2005 to describe his cuisine at the now-closed Wild Rocket. There, he recreated the hawker favourite char kway teow using thinly sliced cuttlefish in place of noodles, and topped stir-fried Hokkien mee with luscious king prawns.

Mod-Sin has continued to gain momentum. In 2014, banker-turned-chef Han Liguang opened Labyrinth, serving progressive Singaporean flavours and sourcing the vast majority of ingredients locally (a particular feat in a state where limited agricultural production means that more than 90 per cent of food is imported from overseas). When Busan-born chef Sun Kim opened his first iteration of Meta in 2016, he specialised in French-inspired fare. But he has since shifted towards highlighting his Korean heritage and its produce, with the famed abalone from Jeju Island now a mainstay on his menus. And at his namesake restaurant Thevar, which opened in 2018, chef Mano Thevar translates his Indian heritage into modern dishes.

The critics started paying attention: in recent years, all of these restaurants were awarded Michelin stars and ranked on the Asia’s 50 Best Restaurants list.

But that was just the beginning. As soon as the Covid-19 stay-at-home orders were no longer in place, a new wave of young south-east and East Asian chefs opened their own fine-dining restaurants — or completely refreshed an existing one — with their respective heritages as a focal point. Below are five of the most exciting places that celebrate the vastness of the region’s cuisines.

Seroja serves multi-course tasting menus that pay tribute to the vast flavours and culinary traditions of the Malay Archipelago, heralding 29-year-old chef-owner Kevin Wong’s homeland. Since opening last year, it has been awarded a Michelin star, as well as a Michelin Green star for its sustainability efforts (Singapore’s first), while Wong himself picked up Michelin’s Young Chef nod too, which recognises rising stars in the culinary world.

Diners begin a meal at Seroja with delicate one-bite wonders, such as obsiblue prawns in a caramelised sambal hitam (a black chilli paste), anchovies topped with finely shredded leek, or barbecue eel with sare roti (wherein the flatbread is seasoned with sare, a seaweed found abundantly in the Malay Peninsula, that has been dried and turned into a powder). This is usually followed by a memorable bread course: Malaysian roti paung (aka butter buns) that are steamed before being deep-fried. Soft, pillowy and crisp on the edges, the pull-apart roti is served with a hand-dived scallop on an aromatic laksa sauce that’s perfect to dip the bread in.

Other highlights include nasi dagang (made with a heirloom red rice grown for 3,000 years by the Lun Bawang tribe in Sarawak) that is anointed with coconut and ginger scallion oil, and served with coral trout on percik, a Malaysian barbecue sauce. Served alongside: chutney and herb sambal, with sides of chayote (a green squash) and a cucumber-coconut salad, altogether offering sweet, savoury and umami flavours all at once. “It’s like in south-east Asian homes where, when we eat, we have a lot of side dishes,” Wong adds.

Even if you don’t have a sweet tooth, make space for dessert: the Borneo raw-sugar bahulu, a traditional Malay pastry, baked in handmade brassware from the Malaysian state of Terengganu, is delightful and cannot be missed.

Malaysian culture is thoughtfully integrated into Seroja’s space — an art installation by the entrance is inspired by ketupat, which Wong explains is a local way of making rice cakes. Just behind, the Seroja signage on the hostess’s podium is inspired by wayang kulit, a regional folk art of shadow puppetry. The ceiling above the chefs’ counter (which is where one should aim to sit to take in the action in the kitchen) is an illustration of the Malay Archipelago.

In addition to providing a platform for Malay farmers, fishers and artists, Seroja uses a compost garden and has built a rooftop garden-farm where they source their tropical vegetables and herbs. They also collect and recycle rainwater.

Malcolm Lee’s Candlenut is the world’s first Peranakan restaurant to receive a Michelin star, and has held on to this distinction since 2016, the year the guide made its debut in Singapore. He has long championed his Peranakan heritage (also referred to as Straits Chinese: generally a person of mixed Chinese and Malay/Indonesian lineage) in various iterations, from the ah-ma-kase menu (a play on the words omakase and ah-ma, which means “grandmother” in Hokkien) at Candlenut to his favourite ingredient, the poisonous fruit of the buah keluak tree (which is made edible by fermentation).

His latest venue, Pangium, opened last year at the Singapore Botanic Gardens’ eight-hectare Gallop Extension. Here he serves tasting menus on minimalist ceramics that celebrate contemporary Straits cuisine, which he describes as “the food our forebears first created with the knowledge, ingredients and tools they had on hand upon sailing down south-east Asia in search of a better life”.

The menu during my last visit was themed to the Lunar New Year — an ode to the Chinese migrants who made Singapore home. Pang susi, the Eurasian sweet potato bun, was filled with Iberico pork cheek, though as a pescatarian I enjoyed a version with turmeric blue swimmer crab curry, its sugary crust giving way to a beautiful sweet and savoury finish. Buah keluak was mixed into a wok-fried rice with lobster and free-range eggs, lending to an earthy, umami-laden dish. Fish moolie, a dish believed to have originated in Kerala, was served here with toothfish (a type of sea bass) and scallops.

The multi-course menu changes every three months, and Lee says they are tied to “the whole vision of exploring and rediscovering Straits cuisine” — for the most recent one, he “looked at old recipes and stories, like a salad recipe from a 1960s cookbook called laksa siam”.

Dining here at lunchtime offers serene 180-degree views overlooking the Unesco World Heritage site, with the feeling of being in a treehouse in the middle of a forest — although in the evening, the minimalist space can be romantic (tables are generously spaced out, too).

Chinese-Malaysian Zor Tan, who grew up in Malaysia, used to be known as the lauded chef André Chiang’s right hand, having worked alongside him at Restaurant André in Singapore, Raw in Taipei and Sichuan Moon in Macau.

In June 2022, after working with Chiang for 11 years, Tan finally opened his own venture, Born, in the former Jinrikisha station, a heritage building. It has one of the most stunning dining rooms in the country, with an eye-catching paper sculpture by Dutch artist Peter Gentenaar hanging from the ceiling.

Here, Tan serves what he calls “contemporary” cuisine inspired by his childhood memories, professional journey and personal ideas. His menu is made up of nine courses that span the “Circle of Life”, based on the Chinese philosophy that what comes to an end will restart again.

Each dish — rooted in Chinese ingredients (from his Hokkien ancestry to Cantonese, Sichuan, and Taiwanese influences from his work and lived experiences) — is prepared dexterously with classic technique in an exciting interplay of flavours.

On the menu that I had, the taro puff, for instance, is based on the gula Melaka (palm sugar originating from the state of Malacca in Malaysia) puffs his mother used to make while he was growing up. At Born, it is a savoury snack, deep-fried taro with a molten salted egg custard centre, topped with grated bottarga. He relates this to “vicissitude”, or how his family has progressed from humble beginnings through the years. His signature dish, monkfish, steamed and finished over binchotan (Japanese oak-wood charcoal) is served with fermented imperial chilli, jade fungus from the Yunnan mountains and Sichuan peppers, is a tribute to his time living and working in Macau.

Dessert came in the form of toasted rice cream, topped with milk ice cream, puffed rice, chestnut purée, and black garlic and sable — Tan’s take on the classic Mont Blanc dessert, inspired by how rice is often the last dish at Chinese celebratory dinners.

The amuse-bouches at Nae:um were presented in an adorable way: kim mari (fried seaweed roll), yuzu tomato and Korean fried cauliflower centred around figurines of a boy and girl kissing on a picnic. I must have taken 20 photos from every angle as I decided which one to post on Instagram.

Little did I know that was just the beginning of an artful tasting menu (even the actual menu itself features a watercolour illustration) where each dish was as striking as the other. South Korea-born chef-patron Louis Han calls his contemporary tasting menus “Episodes” — compendiums of his memories of growing up in Seoul (and, in the future, of his time spent abroad), each of which runs for six months. Han worked in kitchens in Lebanon (where he volunteered to serve with the UN Peacekeeping force) and Abu Dhabi before coming to Singapore, and working at chef Sun Kim’s Meta and Kimme restaurants.

When I dined at the blond-wood 28-seat space, the theme was the Han river, which chef Han says “brings everyone together in Korea” — hence those picnicking figurines. Other standouts included sliced striped jack (white travelly) and kimchi draped over thin buckwheat noodles; a beautiful milssam roll, with prawns delicately encased in a Korean crepe; deopbap rice with black truffle, morels and mushrooms; and kkul hotteok (Korean sweet pancakes), served with glutinous rice, honeycomb and caramelised fig.

Located in a shophouse, Lolla has been around since 2012. It used to be a Spanish tapas restaurant, but in 2020 had a refresh when Philippine-born Johanne Siy became head chef. Siy had stints at La Bernardin and Café Boulud in New York, Faviken in Sweden and Noma in Copenhagen, and worked with André Chiang at Restaurant André, each influencing her style of cooking. While her culinary training is modern European, she draws much of her inspiration from her Filipino heritage. “Rather than doing a take on a complete dish, I take elements which capture the essence of the dish and incorporate them into my cuisine,” Siy explains.

For instance, Siy’s signature avocado dish is inspired by kinilaw, the Filipino “ceviche”. “I wanted to create a bright dish that’s reminiscent of kinilaw from back home — lots of acidity, brightness and complexity to get the appetite going,” Siy says. While there are other interpretations of kinilaw at Lolla, with different souring agents, aromatics and spices, with this one “there’s acid in the form of citrus, heat from chillies, freshness from cucumber and richness from coconut milk”.

Another signature, the crab relleno, is Siy’s take on the stuffed crab dishes usually served at fiestas and gatherings in the Philippines, taken to the next level. She uses three kinds of crab — blue, snow and river — tied together with one of her favourite ingredients from the Philippines, aligue, an umami-rich paste made from crab tomalley (or crab “roe”) gathered from small river crabs. This velvety, bright orange indulgence is layered above a bed of pearl couscous, and topped with smoked paprika foam, Kaffir lime and mustard flowers to balance the richness.

“I get a lot of comments from diners that even if the dishes don’t necessarily look Filipino, the flavour profiles are Filipino,” she says. On the à la carte menu, Lolla offers the classic Filipino dish of adobo, with charred smoky quail served with a distilled vinegar-soy sauce and an egg-yolk confit, which sometimes makes an appearance on the tasting menu. It is not to be missed.

Which Singapore restaurant in your opinion is best for mod-Sin? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



The global queue to set up a family office in Singapore has stretched to as long as 18 months, with a backlog of wealthy investors encountering stricter new regulations in the Asian financial hub.

Family offices boomed during the pandemic and have come to symbolise Singapore’s ambitions as an investment destination, but are under additional scrutiny after the city-state’s biggest money laundering probe.

The number of Singapore-registered family offices, which manage tens of billions of dollars of private wealth, has leapt from just 50 in 2018 to 1,100 at the end of 2022, according to the Monetary Authority of Singapore.

But lawyers and advisers involved in setting up family offices said the pace of new registrations has slowed, with demand now falling as processing times stretch from less than six months to in some cases as long as 18 months.

The extended wait time, the people said, was the result of a backlog of existing applications and greater scrutiny under new, stricter criteria from Singaporean authorities. The long wait time is deterring some potential clients.

“Family offices remain popular, but we are seeing a slowdown,” said Kia Meng Loh, co-head of private wealth and family office practices at Dentons Rodyk. He said the number of inquiries from wealthy families and individuals had declined from two to three a week to “two to three per month”.

The delays varied, however, with some clients who applied last year still waiting for approval, while others who applied in January this year receiving the green light as soon as August, he added.

That disparity points to growing regulatory concern that the vehicles could be used by criminal enterprises, lawyers in the city-state said. Private banking clients have also faced longer wait times to open accounts due to tighter due diligence, the Financial Times previously reported.

Singapore was rocked by the revelation in August of a S$2.8bn (US$2bn) money-laundering scandal, as police seized assets including luxury properties, cars, designer handbags, gold bars, cash and cryptocurrency in raids across the city-state. Ten individuals, all of whom originated in mainland China, have been arrested and charged.

Investigators are examining whether part of those funds found their way into family offices and whether they benefited from tax incentives for the vehicles.

“If you are from certain jurisdictions, I was told recently to expect a waiting period of 18 months. But it can be less than that,” said one Singapore-based lawyer who asked not to be named. “I think everyone now is being more cautious after the money laundering investigation.”

Singapore’s government has encouraged the opening of family offices as it seeks a competitive edge over Hong Kong, seeking wealthy investors from around the world. The city-state’s financial regulator calculated that family offices held about S$90bn in assets at the end of 2021.

“The family office regime is very important for Singapore as a finance and asset management hub, and the government has put a lot of work into expanding and finessing it,” said Sudip Baniya, business development director for private wealth at IQ-EQ.

Baniya confirmed the slowdown in family office registrations this year, mostly from the greater China region, but said it was “not a drastic decline”. While some cases had been waiting for 18 months, more often it was closer to 12 months, depending on the complexity of the application, he said.

The MAS began to impose additional restrictions on family offices in July, including setting a minimum fund size of S$20mn. At least S$200,000 must be invested annually in local businesses such as start-ups or the stock market.

It also required family offices to hire two investment professionals, at least one of whom comes from outside the client family, and has proposed additional measures such as hiring an MAS-regulated financial institution to check for money laundering.

“MAS continues to receive a high volume of applications for tax incentives by Single Family Offices (SFOs).  They are generally processed in 9-12 months upon submission of complete information and supporting documents that are in good order but may take longer depending on the complexity and merits of each case,” MAS said.

“The screening process by MAS has also lengthened in view of the more stringent criteria for tax incentives announced in 2022 and 2023 and greater scrutiny following the money laundering arrests in August 2023,” it added.

Ryan Lin, a director at Bayfront Law, added he had seen a 20 to 30 per cent slowdown in deal flow from clients. “Most [family offices] are putting cash in money market funds and fixed deposits to wait for opportunities,” he said.

Loh of Dentons Rodyk said under the new criteria, more family offices were pursuing deals in areas such as private equity and there might be a “natural culling” of the number of family offices in the coming months.

“Some wealthy individuals may decide putting money in a high-interest private bank account is better than spending $200,000 each year,” he said.





Hello and welcome to the latest edition of the FT Cryptofinance newsletter. This week we’re taking a look at a potential new crypto arms race

Singapore has given blockchain firm Paxos an in-principle green light to issue a stablecoin — a kind of crypto token pegged to a hard currency.

The firm plans to launch the cryptocurrency through its new Singaporean entity. It will be pegged to the US dollar and fully backed one for one by the dollar and cash equivalents.

Close followers of the crypto sector will remember Paxos as the issuer behind BUSD, the Binance-branded stablecoin that has faded to near-irrelevancy ever since falling foul of New York regulators earlier this year.

Nevertheless the Paxos approval marks a potential change of fortune for the crypto sector’s record in Singapore, after the collapse of several high-profile projects in the city state, including crypto hedge fund Three Arrows Capital and stablecoin operator Terraform Labs.

Singapore state-owned investor Temasek was also forced to write off its $275mn stake in former industry bellwether FTX after the exchange’s famous collapse into bankruptcy a year ago. Temasek has said its trust in FTX’s former chief executive Sam Bankman-Fried — now convicted of fraud and other charges — appeared “misplaced”.

Readers of this newsletter will know that the UK has already laid its stablecoin cards on the table, setting out guidelines to regulate the digital tokens in a bid to try to facilitate their use as a payment option for everyday goods and services.

So Singapore’s fresh embrace of a key digital assets market one week later might lead you to believe the international stablecoin arms race is heating up, especially as the large shadow cast by the US Securities and Exchange Commission and its crypto crackdown appears to be here to stay.

While it’s tempting to suggest that the US’s actions on crypto open the door for the sector to boom elsewhere, the available data doesn’t seem to back up the claim.

There is little compelling evidence to suggest demand exists for dollar-pegged stablecoins in Singapore, or even in Asia as a whole.

Identifying the parts of the world where stablecoin interest is highest is a challenge: crypto traders often use virtual private networks, or VPNs, to disguise their location from the prying eyes of regulators or governments that don’t take kindly to crypto trading.

Interest in the market can still be gauged by measuring the largest trading pairs between the world’s sovereign currencies and largest stablecoins. If, for example, one of the top fiat trading pairs for Tether — the world’s largest dollar-pegged token — is the Singaporean dollar, it would be fair to deduce that traders from the city state represent one of the stablecoin’s most popular markets.

But, according to numbers provided by industry data platform CCData, the top five trading pairs for Tether’s USDT token are the US dollar and the euro, followed by the Turkish lira, Thai baht and the British pound.

The outlook for Singapore’s stablecoin push doesn’t improve when you look at Circle’s USDC stablecoin, the second-largest token of its kind with roughly $24bn circulating in the market. Predictably, the US dollar and the euro lead the way, trailed this time by the pound, baht and the Australian dollar.

Other notable stablecoins include DAI — an algorithmic cryptocurrency much like the failed Terra token of 2022 — and BUSD, which, despite hemorrhaging market share since its issuance was banned by the New York State Department of Financial Services, still remains the fifth-largest stablecoin in the market.

Significant trading pairs for these tokens again offer little encouragement for a city state trying to reassert its grip on crypto markets: the Korean won, Brazilian real and Mexican peso all make notable entries for these tokens, while the Singaporean dollar is nowhere to be seen.

Paxos’s push into Singapore, according to Paxos’s head of strategy Walter Hessert, is fueled by its ambition to “open the financial system to everyone, introducing significant opportunities to global markets and billions of users”.

But since its $188bn peak in April last year, the stablecoin market cap has fallen roughly 33 per cent to $126bn today. So while Paxos tries to break new ground in Singapore, it is doing so in a market that is not expanding.

What’s your take on Singapore’s most recent crypto moves? As always, email me at scott.chipolina@ft.com.

During a congressional hearing on illicit activity in the digital assets industry, president of consulting firm Dynamic Securities Analytics, Alison Jimenez, said US legislation aimed at reeling in the crypto sector may not protect consumers against bad actors in the space.

BlackRock’s foray into the crypto space continued this week after the world’s largest asset manager filed with the SEC for a spot ethereum exchange traded fund.

The price of ether jumped modestly as a result, but you might also recall when the price of bitcoin surged a few weeks ago on inaccurate reports that BlackRock’s application for another spot ETF tracking bitcoin had been approved by the SEC.

This week, the speculative nature of the crypto market was seen again when yet another faked filing hit the crypto market, this time for a iShares XRP Trust registered in Delaware. A BlackRock representative told the FT it had not filed for an XRP Trust, but the price of the XRP briefly surged nonetheless.

FT Cryptofinance is this week edited by Laurence Fletcher. Please send any thoughts and feedback to cryptofinance@ft.com.



Singapore’s GIC, one of the world’s largest institutional investors, has advised “doubling down” on Big Tech rather than overvalued start-ups in the booming generative artificial intelligence sector.

Lim Chow Kiat, chief executive of the $700bn sovereign wealth fund, said tech giants such as Microsoft, Alphabet and Meta had begun capturing “a lot of value” in the transformative technology with their existing customers.

“Customers are paying for [their services] already. So, actually, that is quite a good place for investors to double down on,” he said in an interview with the Financial Times. Valuations of start-ups with AI business models were “too high”, he added. “We need to be careful not to get sucked into the hype. But it is more important not to lose interest.”

Generative AI companies, whose technology can create imagery to order and humanlike text in seconds, have raised billions of dollars this year. Major tech companies have predicted that AI will drive their revenues, with Microsoft taking an early lead in incorporating it into its products, helped by its large stake in ChatGPT creator OpenAI.

GIC, which manages Singapore’s foreign exchange reserves, does not detail its investments or break down its portfolio by sector, but it does so by region. Its investments in the US rose to 38 per cent of its portfolio for the 12 months to March this year, against 37 per cent a year earlier, compared with a dip in Asia, excluding Japan, from 25 per cent to 23 per cent.

But it was one of the earliest institutional and sovereign investors to embrace tech, in an attempt to keep the tiny financial hub abreast of the latest innovations.

Of GIC’s $52bn invested in listed companies, $17.4bn is in the tech hardware and semiconductor sector, according to Bloomberg data. Its biggest current holdings in listed tech companies are Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company ($11.1bn), DoorDash ($2.1bn), Sony ($1.56bn) and MediaTek ($1.25bn). This does not capture all of GIC’s investments in public equities, which make up 30 per cent of the fund’s more than $700bn portfolio.

Companies in its AI portfolio include UK analytics group Quantexa; Hong Kong data company MioTech; US AI software and hardware provider SambaNova Systems; and US-Israeli fintech Pagaya Technologies.

Both GIC, as well as Singapore’s other state investor Temasek, have described AI’s potential as transformative for business.

But the frenzy since the launch of the ChatGPT chatbot a year ago has prompted warnings from experts that most start-ups in the sector are overvalued and will fail to make money. AI has similarly stretched the market caps of big tech companies, with trillions added to their collective valuations since last year.

Venture capital firms and larger investors, including sovereign wealth funds, have watched from the sidelines as Big Tech has forged deeper relationships with the top generative AI start-ups. This year, Microsoft has invested billions of dollars more into OpenAI and backed rival Inflection. Alphabet and Amazon have committed up to $6bn to Anthropic.

The companies have been preferred partners because only they can provide the combination of computing power and capital required to build foundation models. In turn, they have received preferential access to AI tools, and are expected to recoup much of their investment from AI start-ups’ spending on their cloud services.

Infrastructure is another important area for investors, including GIC. “We believe there will be an infrastructure layer for AI the same way there was for the transition to the cloud,” said its chief.

Amazon, Microsoft and Google parent Alphabet have boosted investment in cloud computing infrastructure over the past few years. Bank of America analysts predict that the collective cloud-related capex of the three will rise at an accelerated 22 per cent next year to $116bn.

Singapore has taken a more collaborative approach with AI to date, rather than seeking to regulate it. In an annual letter in July on GIC’s performance, Lim warned that there were legitimate concerns that generative AI was being developed too quickly. He cited deepfakes, fake news and cyber attacks.

“Different investors have different ways of cutting the [AI] value chain, but . . . whatever way we cut [it], we have to remember that it is a long game,” he said.

Additional reporting by George Hammond in San Francisco and Mary McDougall in London



Wealthy Asian families are increasingly sending their younger generations to study at homegrown universities, as the region’s powerful economies present greater opportunities for business connections — and business expansion.

Where once rich dynasties favoured American and European establishments for their children’s undergraduate and postgraduate studies, advisers report that many are now opting for the highly-ranked universities in mainland China, Hong Kong and the wider Asia Pacific region.

“There is definitely a growing interest and trend for Asia to become a preferred destination for higher education,” says Winnie Qian Peng, director of the Roger King Center for Asian Family Business and Family Office at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

“For a long time, Asia was far behind the US. Now it’s not,” Peng explains. “It’s therefore very natural that people would view Asia as a good place to study and to work, because that could be the future growth driver.”

While the traditionally leading universities of the US and UK are still highly sought after by many wealthy Chinese families, for both undergraduate and postgraduate programmes, Peng says a growing number of rich mainland Chinese families want their children to study at institutions in the region because they have become highly rated internationally.

Hong Kong is home to five of the world’s top 100 universities according to the latest edition of QS’s world university rankings, including HKUST, while mainland China has another five, including Tsinghua and Peking universities. Singapore has two in the top 100: the National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University.

Peng points out that the number of applications for HKUST’s Master of Science in Finance programme this year was double the pre-pandemic level — with many now coming from mainland China.

“You may find people with similar backgrounds from all those wealthy families, children studying together and becoming classmates,” she says. “This becomes guanxi — a connection — people actually value this a lot, especially in the Asian context.”

US-China tensions, which made it more difficult for some mainland Chinese students to apply to study in the US, have prompted more to look to Hong Kong and Singapore. Japan and South Korea’s universities are also gaining momentum, Peng adds.

Hong Kong’s low tax rates are a further attraction for global families. Meanwhile, Singapore remains a hotspot following an influx of Chinese investors during the pandemic — even though the city-state recently doubled its property tax for foreigners. It is particularly appealing to wealthy Chinese families who wish their second and third generations to gain overseas residency and passports.

Chi-man Kwan, chief executive of Raffles Family Office, a multi-family office dually based in Hong Kong and Singapore, says that, when it comes to deciding on a higher education destination, many wealthy parents will factor in where their family businesses are based, and where they plan to expand their business footprint.

“If I am an entrepreneur in Greater China, and I am looking to expand to south-east Asia, the best place to make my headquarters is very likely Singapore,” Kwan says. “If you are a European family or an American family, [and] your family business is doing very well . . . eventually — maybe this generation but for sure the next generation — Asia and Greater China is definitely going to play a big part of it.”

Wealth managers in the region say that setting up a family trust is usually the best way of facilitating, and financing, a cross-border university move. Family trusts are well suited to planning for a student’s life abroad in Asia, they argue, because they can be registered in Hong Kong or Singapore where there is a low tax regime, or registered offshore where tax can be mitigated further.

Trust structures domiciled either overseas or in the region are especially beneficial if a child “intends to stay in, or even relocate to, the place where he or she is studying”, says Rita Ku, partner at Rita Ku & Ser, a Hong Kong-based law firm focusing on family law and wealth management. They can be set up “if the parent is wealthy enough . . . and they just want to set aside a certain big lump sum for the benefit of the child”, she says.

For example, in the case of families that do not already have a footprint in mainland China but want their next generations to study there, a trust set up in Hong Kong may be an efficient solution, Ku explains. Not only is the territory close to large cities such as Beijing, but there are also multiple tax benefits in Hong Kong that are not available in mainland China.

Easier pathways to residency and citizenship in Hong Kong and Singapore have been an additional factor for many rich Chinese families, she says.

Carol Wu, head of private bank for North Asia at DBS, suggests that rich families who are looking to pave the way for their children to emigrate to Asia could go further and consider setting up a family office in the region — on top of having offshore trust structures.

Many are already doing so. Eric Landolt, global co-head of family advisory, art and collecting at UBS, says the Swiss bank has seen “more interest” from wealthy families outside Asia in setting up family offices in Hong Kong and Singapore. And, in some cases, the families are relocating and bringing their children to Asia with them.

However, early planning is important if a wealthy family is looking to send its next generation to Asia for an education and a career after that, says Annie Koh, professor emeritus of finance (practice) Lee Kong Chian School of Business at Singapore Management University.

“There are stages to getting residency — through graduating from a degree programme to . . . working in a company willing to sponsor your employment pass and eventually your residency,” she says. “Many current generations understand there is a process and the earlier that the children start the integration process, the better.”





Travelling abroad can often spur bouts of “e-envy” — or jealousy over the digital ease of life elsewhere. Whether it is the ability to file a tax form in a click or to renew a passport via a smartphone, business leaders and tourists get an insight into how their government might drain less of their time back home. Immense pressures on the public sector, however, come not only from disgruntled citizens. With debts elevated and demands on public spending growing, governments across the world must work out how they can deliver more, with less.

The public sector already plays a prominent role in advanced economies. It employs around one in five workers while general government spending accounts for 40 per cent of gross domestic product on average. This gives it a significant bearing on national productivity. Ageing populations, climate change, and national security challenges are meanwhile bringing additional burdens on the state. Indeed, with tight budgets and rising debt interest payments, it is now even more essential that tax and spend decisions are not wasteful, and that governments find ways to become more productive.

Defining what public sector productivity means is part of the challenge. It is often equated with cutting jobs or shifting resources from lower priority departments. But this comes at a cost — dilapidated infrastructure, longer healthcare waiting lists, and administrative blunders. Instead, governments need to work smarter, both in identifying and eliminating waste, and also by extracting more — and higher quality — from their existing resources. For measure, research by McKinsey estimates that operational improvements could save the US government $750bn per annum, without reducing the effectiveness of services.

Leveraging technology — for instance by digitising paperwork, using data to generate policy insights, and automating tasks — offers most promise for boosting long-term efficiency and quality. Many nations have already made strides in e-governance, with Scandinavia leading the way, according to UN rankings. Estonia’s e-Tax system sends pre-filled tax forms to be checked and filed within minutes. In Singapore registering a company online can take just 15 minutes. Indeed, digital governance can streamline staffing needs, smooth compliance processes, and raise the productivity of the private sector — small businesses can lose a few working weeks per year grappling with regulation.

The reams of data collected by governments can also be cleaned and analysed to unearth inefficiencies, improve services, and even raise revenues, particularly with the aid of artificial intelligence. America’s Internal Revenue Service, for example, recently announced plans to use AI to collect unpaid taxes. In Britain’s NHS, the auto-generation of cumbersome patient forms could free up time for nurses and clinicians, while machine learning could also help hospitals to manage capacity better.

Ditching outdated technology — particularly fax machines, which are shockingly still used by some governments — for existing best practice is a no-brainer. Adopting newer gadgetry may have an upfront cost, but it can bring significant long-term efficiency gains. Broader operational improvements can also come through developing and attracting talent better, boosting partnerships with the private sector, and encouraging innovation and experimentation.

Revamping vast bureaucratic machines while they are operating is not easy. Governments have to balance the more effective use of technology and data with privacy concerns, cyber security risks, and regulation. The skillsets to manage transformation can be lacking too. These challenges need to be overcome. The cost of not doing so means an ever-growing strain on public services, and ongoing pressure to raise taxes. In the meantime, envious travellers can at least help prod governments into action.



Private equity firms are facing the worst year in a decade for selling portfolio companies after higher interest rates and geopolitical tensions ended the buyout industry’s boom.

In the first nine months of the year, buyout firms generated $584bn from either selling companies outright or through taking them public, according to data from PitchBook.

The amount is more than $100bn shy of what the industry raised during the same period last year and almost two-thirds below the record $1.4tn generated in 2021, when borrowing costs were low and US equities still in a bull market.

Higher interest rates have hammered the market for initial public offerings and made companies wary of making acquisitions. The last time buyout firms made less cashing in on their portfolio companies was in 2013, the data shows.

The figures underline the challenge confronting private equity firms as they try to monetise their investments and return money to investors, who include the world’s biggest pension and sovereign wealth funds. Singapore’s GIC, one of the most influential investors, warned in July that a golden age for the buyout industry had ended.

One industry executive said that buyout firms were still seeking “2021 prices” for portfolio companies, while potential acquirers and public investors wanted valuations that reflected higher interest rates, the weaker economic outlook and a largely moribund IPO market.

Faced with much tougher hurdles in selling portfolio companies at prices they want, private equity firms are resorting to unconventional tactics to realise proceeds for their own investors.

They have been increasingly using margin loans and net asset value financing — secured against shares in their listed companies or their asset portfolios — to fund distributions to investors.

Private equity groups were getting “more creative” in finding ways to generate cash for their investors given the tougher backdrop, said David Martin, a partner at law firm Linklaters.

The willingness to take on more debt has drawn scrutiny from the Institutional Limited Partners Association, an industry body representing private equity investors. The group is drafting recommendations that will call for buyout groups to justify the use of these loans and disclose how much they will cost, the Financial Times reported earlier this month.

In another sign of the strains facing the industry, EQT Group, one of Europe’s largest buyout firms, this week said it was making plans to hold private stock sales for its portfolio companies given the struggles of the IPO market.

Firms are also increasingly using continuation funds, which involves a firm selling an asset from an older fund to one of its newer ones. Investors in the funds are typically offered the chance to cash out during these asset transfers.

A recent survey of 200 UK-based private equity executives found that continuation funds were viewed as a better option for private equity firms looking to monetise their deals than an IPO or running an auction of an asset.



A Silicon Valley law firm that has represented global technology groups for decades is exploring opening a Singapore office, its first in Asia outside of greater China as geopolitical and regulatory hurdles force the firm to consider new markets.

Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati is exploring a move into Singapore as the number of US companies doing tech deals and work in China has collapsed due to deteriorating relations between Beijing and Washington, according to three people with knowledge of the situation.

Chinese president Xi Jinping’s regulatory crackdown on the tech sector has slowed dealmaking and pushed many Chinese investors and companies to expand in Singapore, said another person who had spoken to China-based employees at the law firm.

Larry Sonsini, senior partner and founder at Wilson Sonsini, told the Financial Times the firm was considering opening an office in Singapore, but said a final decision had not yet been made. It was “too early” to comment on the details, he said.

“They are following the money. It makes sense to have a presence here [in Singapore],” one of the people said, who added that the plan was still subject to change. Wilson Sonsini, which has represented technology groups including Microsoft and Facebook, could relocate some employees from the greater China practice, the person added.

Singapore, a neutral financial hub, has been a beneficiary of the capital shift away from China to other parts of Asia, especially south-east Asia. Several China-focused investors have recently expanded or opened offices in the city-state, including private equity firms Hillhouse, PAG and Boyu Capital and venture capital groups GGV and HongShan, formerly Sequoia Capital China. Both HongShan and Boyu have been Wilson Sonsini clients.

One of the oldest and respected technology law firms in Silicon Valley, Wilson Sonsini first established its China practice in 2007 with an office in Shanghai, betting early on the country’s fast-growing start-ups and advising US companies. It built out its Chinese practice with offices in Hong Kong and Beijing several years later.

The firm’s Singapore talks come as Washington’s technology battle with Beijing has made cross-border investments more difficult, with Chinese deal activity in the US falling to its lowest level in 17 years in 2023, according to data from Dealogic. The Biden administration in August said it would ban some US investment into China’s quantum computing, advanced chips and artificial intelligence sectors.

International funding for Chinese start-ups has also dried up as a result of a slowdown in the mainland economy and an uncertain domestic regulatory outlook.

Wilson Sonsini has helped US companies to do mainland deals and has also assisted China-based clients, including internet giant Tencent, chipmaker SMIC and dronemaker DJI, to make investments and acquisitions. Some Chinese clients, such as Tencent, have also expanded in Singapore since the pandemic to support their international growth.

The Silicon Valley firm already has relationships with key Singapore investors. It represented GIC, the Singaporean sovereign wealth fund, on its investment in payments processing company Stripe in March. It advised state investment company Temasek on its deal to lead a major investment in cultivated meat start-up Upside Foods in April last year.



Singapore may subject luxury assets, including cars, watches and handbags, to anti-money laundering controls and increase scrutiny of single family offices as the Asian financial hub reels from a S$2.8bn (US$2bn) money-laundering scandal.

In response to questions in parliament on Tuesday about the probe, Singapore’s government said it would examine extending anti-money laundering requirements, such as tough know-your-customer due diligence checks, to high-value assets including vehicles, handbags and alcohol. Such items are not currently regulated, unlike precious stones or metals.

Family offices serving single families, which are exempt from certain licensing requirements, could also face stiffer rules. The number of such offices registered in Singapore has increased nearly threefold from 2020 to 2022, to more than 1,000.

But the government cautioned against “knee-jerk” reactions to what is now one of the world’s biggest money laundering investigations, saying they could make the city-state a harder place to do business.

The government’s proposal to broaden anti-money laundering regulations comes as the total value of assets seized or frozen as part of the probe has nearly tripled since the scandal burst into the open in August, when 10 people were arrested in an operation spanning Singapore. Authorities also seized luxury cars, designer watches, handbags and expensive wine as well as cash and gold bars.

Foreign and local banks, as well as property agents, precious metals dealers and elite golf clubs, have been caught up in the case.

Singapore has faced public pressure to crack down on illicit activity and questions about how the syndicate — which is believed to have laundered the proceeds of overseas criminal activities and forgery — was able to operate for so long despite the city-state’s strict financial regulations.

The suspects, all of whom had Chinese passports and have been tied to illegal gambling operations originating in the mainland, are alleged to have been operating in Singapore since 2017, and the case first attracted government scrutiny in 2021. Several individuals are still at large and wanted for questioning, according to the Singapore Police Force.

An interministerial committee, led by second minister for finance Indranee Rajah, will be formed to consider further measures to strengthen Singapore’s anti-money laundering regime, the government said on Tuesday.

In addition to the possibility of extending due diligence controls to purchases of luxury goods, the government said it would examine tightening the immigration verification process. Singapore has absorbed rapid inflows of wealth and individuals, particularly from China, since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.

Any new measures would require careful moderation, said Josephine Teo, second minister for home affairs. Singapore has said its antitrust and money-laundering regulations comply with international standards.

“We need rules . . . but let us be careful about knee-jerk reactions, which could make our business environment unfriendly,” Teo said.

The money laundering case has already had repercussions for the hub’s financial community. Wealth managers and other advisers have said that waiting periods to open private banking accounts for clients with foreign passports, including from China, have stretched into four months, up from less than one month previously, while some existing accounts were closed, as authorities tightened due diligence.

The government could also strengthen scrutiny of single family offices, many of which were set up by wealthy mainland Chinese and receive licensing exemptions because they do not manage third-party funds.

One or more of the accused may have benefited from incentives under the government’s family office scheme, according to minister of state Alvin Tan.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore was “reviewing [its] internal incentive administration processes”, Tan said.



India’s government has appointed a new central bank governor, after a sharp decline in economic growth and accelerating inflation dented the outlook for the world’s most populous country.

Shaktikanta Das, the head of the Reserve Bank of India, has been replaced by revenue secretary Sanjay Malhotra, who will start a three-year tenure this week, according to a government notification released on Monday.

Some economists said the departure of the relatively hawkish Das could pave the way for interest rate cuts early next year.

Data published late last month showed India’s GDP growth fell to 5.4 per cent in the three months to September — its slowest in almost two years. Before that, Indian media were reporting that Das was expected to secure an extension to his six-year term.

Das had been praised for his steady hand on the currency and on regulation of India’s financial industry. But ministers had publicly criticised him over the RBI’s resistance to cutting interest rates amid rising inflation, which breached the central bank’s 6 per cent upper target band in October.

As India’s economy showed signs of weakening, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman last month voiced concern over high borrowing costs. Commerce minister Piyush Goyal had also criticised as “absolutely flawed” the approach of considering rising food prices when setting interest rates.The government was “clearly trying to pin the blame for slowing economic growth” on the central bank, said Eswar Prasad, professor of economics at Cornell University.

“This is an unfortunate and unwarranted action by the government that diminishes the independence of the RBI and will hamper its effectiveness in meeting its inflation target,” Prasad said. “The credibility of the RBI is particularly important for managing the balancing act of cooling off inflation without damaging growth.”In an interview last month with the Financial Times, Das said that while India’s economy was showing “a mixed picture”, the central bank’s key focus was on damping inflation.Shilan Shah, deputy emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, said the announcement was a surprise. The exit of Das, who was considered the “most hawkish member” of the RBI’s monetary policy committee, could mean rates would be eased at Malhotra’s first rate-setting meeting in February, or even at an unscheduled meeting before then.

“The appointment of Mr Malhotra could set a new direction for the RBI. Admittedly, at this very early stage not much is known about his monetary policy views,” Shah said. “But in comments last week, he did voice considerably more concern over the health of the economy than Mr Das did during Friday’s policy announcement.”

Malhotra, a civil servant of more than three decades’ experience, last week urged government tax officers to prioritise the interests of the economy and “not kill the golden goose” with excessive demands.

At Das’s final policy meeting last week the RBI kept its key interest rate unchanged at the same 6.5 per cent level where it has been since early 2023. But the central bank also slashed its GDP forecast for the 2024-25 financial year to 6.6 per cent from 7.2 per cent.

Madhavi Arora, chief economist at Emkay Global Financial Services in Mumbai, pointed out that the RBI would have a “very new MPC” early next year, with deputy governor Michael Patra — seen as Das’s “right hand” — set to depart in January. “The dynamics have changed. They are very different from what they were a year ago,” Arora said.  With GDP growth slowing, pressures on India’s currency building and inflation rising, “clearly a stagflationary state requires policymakers to be more tactical in their stance than just ease without looking at the consequences”, she added.



Anyone who grew up in a multilingual society intuitively understands the value of translation, and translators. The gorgeous, flamboyant fiction of Gabriel García Márquez and Julio Cortázar came to Calcutta street bookshops via the late Gregory Rabassa’s superb translations from Spanish to English; my grandmother first read out the Mahabharata to me in Kaliprasanna Singha’s Bengali translation from the original Sanskrit.

I played hopscotch with languages as a child, skipping between Bengali, English, Hindi, grazing alongside French, Spanish, Sanskrit. Translators ferried us from the banks of one language to another, bringing Malayalam writers into Hindi, Pushkin or Isabel Allende into Bengali. A poor translation could kill your love for a book stone-dead; a good translation breathed fresh life into the works of beloved writers. “To translate a book is to enter into a relationship with it, to approach and accompany it, to know it intimately, word by word, and to enjoy the comfort of its company in return,” author and translator Jhumpa Lahiri wrote in Translating Myself and Others (2022).

But will translation remain human for much longer? The debates over AI and machine translation have been fiery this year. A month ago, Veen Bosch & Keuning — the largest publisher in the Netherlands — announced plans to experiment with AI translation for a limited number of commercial fiction titles. Industry giant HarperCollins asked authors for permission to use “select nonfiction backlist titles” to train AI Language Learning Models (LLMs) for Microsoft. There is a widespread fear that these AI models may one day make authors — and translators — obsolete.

My own preference is strongly for human translations, but AI enthusiasts argue that not all human translations are phenomenal, and that a poor translation can kill a novel or a collection of poems. Human translation takes time and can be expensive for publishers; the promise of AI is that it might — if LLM models advance in the right direction — open up a whole new world of literature to readers, instantly. Even for publishers who prefer to keep more creative writing in the hands of a human expert, the temptation to use AI translations for textbooks and bare-bones non-fiction is likely to be irresistible.

In January 2024, the Society of Authors ran a survey, asking their 11,500 members (authors, illustrators and translators) for their views on the impact of generative AI on creative careers. The results speak to both the promise and threat of AI translations: more than a third of translators (37 per cent) polled said they had experimented with generative AI, 36 per cent of translators had already lost work because of generative AI, and 77 per cent believed that machine translation would negatively impact their income.

Can LLMs and machines translate as intuitively as a human? Despite machine “hallucinations”, where generative AI produces false or misleading responses, and other early glitches, AI translation will improve, and will probably be adopted across the corporate world. This threat to the livelihood of creative translators comes at a time when there are more translation prizes, and greater appreciation of the work that they do — visible, and invisible. AI treats translation like a crossword or logic puzzle, looking for one correct answer. Some of the skills that translators possess — creativity, deft selection, an understanding of authorial intent — are purely human acts. And as ambassadors for authors and books, no AI model could hope to replace the figure of the translator.

The translator’s role so often extends beyond the text. Jennifer Croft, who translates works from Polish, Ukrainian and Argentine Spanish into English, spent almost a decade pitching Olga Tokarczuk’s 2007 novel, the Man Booker International winner Flights, to publishers. “I am often the person who also sells those books, acting as a kind of agent for the authors I’m translating,” she said in an interview. “That’s an aspect of translation that I think most people are not aware of.”

Translators are writers, and translation is an act intimately tied to emotion, imagination, bodily experience. Charles Simic, the Serbian-American poet who died in 2023, told the Library of Congress that translation was “an act of love, an act of supreme empathy”; to Daisy Rockwell, another star translator of authors such as Upendranath Ashk and Geetanjali Shree, the translator and the author are “ballroom dancers”. And Idra Novey felt, when she was translating the Brazilian writer Clarice Lispector, “as if I were placing my palms against her palms and could hear the beat of her sentences matching my own”.

None of us can wish generative AI away, and there are plenty of fields where it might be a timesaver, a boon. But publishers must reflect on whether AI translations have any place in our creative lives. Back in 2011, the legendary translator Margaret Jull Costa said, “Every translator will produce a different version, because every reader or listener reads and listens differently.” The miracle of a good translation, to her, was that it was “as seductively fresh and original as the original.” That is what I and other readers respond to so strongly; the dance between author and translator, one palm pressed against the other.

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



India’s central bank on Friday sharply cut its growth forecast for this year, confirming a slowing trend in what has been one of the world’s fastest-growing economies.

But the Reserve Bank of India kept its benchmark policy interest rate unchanged at 6.5 per cent, citing an unexpected increase in inflation, and said the economy was showing signs of bottoming out.

The RBI said it now estimated growth for the 2024-25 financial year would be 6.6 per cent, compared with a previous estimate of 7.2 per cent.

Its downgrade to expectations came a week after India announced GDP growth of 5.4 per cent year on year for the quarter to the end of September, the weakest performance in nearly two years.

India’s recent record of strong economic growth has underpinned support for Narendra Modi, who won a third term as prime minister in June. Modi has vowed to invest in more infrastructure and attract more foreign manufacturers to continue to drive the economy.

Some analysts had expected the RBI could decide to cut interest rates to boost the economy, after keeping the benchmark repo rate at 6.5 per cent since early 2023.

However the central bank said it remained concerned about inflation, which in October surged above 6 per cent, outside its 4-6 per cent target band.

“Inflation has to be brought down in the interest of sustainable growth,” RBI governor Shaktikanta Das told a press conference.

Growth in the second quarter of the financial year “turned out to be much lower than anticipated”, led by a slowdown in industry, he said in an earlier statement accompanying the rates decision.

However, he added that indicators suggested that a slowdown in domestic economic activity had bottomed out and that industrial activity “is expected to normalise and recover”.

“The second half of this year looks better than the first half,” Das said, explaining that elections this year had probably affected government expenditure.

India remained “well placed” to deal with any spillovers from emerging global shocks, Das told the Financial Times this month.

Experts had expected the RBI to revise its growth projections, as India’s economy has shown signs of cooling in recent months, amid a slowing of consumption among urban Indians, an outflow of some portfolio capital, and a sluggish trend in private investment.

“Even though we see sequential improvement from here, we are still sceptical whether we are looking at a secular uptick in the growth story in India,” said Madhavi Arora, chief economist with Emkay Global in Mumbai. “And thus we remain much lower than the RBI in terms of our growth forecast, at 6 per cent.”

Analysts agree that the pace of growth should be better in the second half of the fiscal year.

“What the RBI has rightly pointed out is that growth has been depressed mainly because of the manufacturing sector, but oil and steel have shown signs of a turnaround,” said Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at Bank of Baroda, which forecasts India’s growth will reach 6.6 to 6.8 per cent this financial year.



Just three years ago, India’s pledge to reach nearly 500 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity by 2030 made it a bright spot in the global solar industry. Now US corruption allegations centred on the country’s biggest solar operator have cast a pall over a sector vital to its efforts to combat climate change.

Around the same time that Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi was being feted for his ambitious targets at climate change talks in November 2021, Gautam Adani, billionaire head of the Adani Group, was allegedly involved in a huge bribery scheme to secure solar deals, according to US authorities.

Adani and associates “offered and promised” bribes worth $265mn to Indian government officials in 2021, according to a US criminal indictment announced last month. It accused the 62-year-old Adani, who is widely seen as having close ties to Modi, of personally meeting a government official as part of efforts to “corruptly persuade” authorities.

The allegations have highlighted the barriers to India’s rapid solar sector expansion and raised questions about its ability to meet clean energy targets. Analysts and Modi opponents said they could constrain financing for future Indian solar projects, if foreign investors and creditors increased their risk premiums for lending or avoided Indian projects entirely.

As set out by the US Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission, the events that led to Adani allegedly resorting to bribery began about six years ago, when Indian policymakers were trying to encourage domestic solar panel manufacturing.

India was seeking to transform itself into a clean energy superpower but government officials voiced concerns about its growing reliance on technology made in China, the world’s largest producer of solar panels.

To tackle the problem, officials slapped tariffs on Chinese solar imports in 2018. Meanwhile the state-owned Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), which is tasked with pushing the industry forward, devised a solar power purchase tender with a twist.

Interested companies would have to produce both electricity and solar panels, in the hope this would jump-start domestic production. The tender initially struggled to attract interest, with solar farm developers nervous about taking on risky manufacturing.

But after delays and revisions, in June 2020 two winners emerged: Adani Green Energy, the renewables division of the Adani Group; and Azure Power, a renewables developer headquartered in New Delhi and part-owned by Canadian pension fund Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec.

The deals were transformative for the companies, covering up to 12GW of solar projects — enough for millions of homes — and capacity to produce 3GW of solar panels a year, combined. Analysts at the time said Adani Green would make “more than a billion” in profit from the deals, according to the SEC complaint.

The optimism soon soured. In order to finalise the deals, SECI had to persuade state-owned regional electricity distributors to buy the power at the price the state corporation had agreed with Adani and Azure. Yet with market prices falling, distributors balked, and the deals stalled.

The agreed price of the electricity was unusually high because of the photovoltaic manufacturing requirement included in the deals. That structure proved so unwieldy that India never did a manufacturing-linked auction again. Adani Green eventually opened a solar manufacturing plant this year; Azure never did.

Another obstacle was that most of India’s regional electricity distributors are under financial strain because they are forced to sell electricity below cost.

As months passed, with no final contracts signed with the regional distributors, executives at Adani Green and Azure resorted to corruption, US prosecutors alleged. They alleged the largest bribe of $228mn was offered to an official Gautam Adani met in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh.

The alleged scheme appeared to work: Between July and December 2021, several electricity distribution networks signed deals with SECI, including in Andhra Pradesh, allowing the state corporation to move ahead with its deals with Adani Green and Azure.

In December 2021 — a month after Modi’s appearance at the Glasgow climate talks — Gautam Adani welcomed the finalising of the “world’s largest green power purchase agreement” of 4.6GW with SECI.

Today, Adani Green is the biggest solar operator in India by operating capacity and reported net profits of Rs11bn ($130mn) for the year to March 31.

But the “record-setting” solar awards at the heart of the alleged bribery scheme have not turned out as planned. None of the projects have yet been completed, according to consultancy Rystad Energy.

It took Adani until December 2023 to sell the last tranche of the power it was awarded in the 2020 auction. Azure still has about 2GW of the award unsold, according to SECI data.

Developers across India are struggling to secure electricity sales contracts for renewables projects that have been awarded, stalling construction. About 10GW of this “unsold” capacity is hanging over the market.

Sushma Jagannath, Rystad’s vice-president for renewables and power, said the Adani bribery allegations were likely to have a knock-on effect on the solar sector. “Things like this can often discourage international players from investing in the Indian market,” Jagannath said.

Since the US allegations last month, TotalEnergies, Adani’s biggest foreign partner on renewable and other energy projects, has suspended fresh investment in joint energy projects with the group.

Pawan Khera, head of communications for the Indian National Congress, the country’s largest opposition party, said the allegations against Adani raised concerns that could “impact the quality and cost-effectiveness of solar projects in India”.

“Any reputational damage or financial constraints faced by the conglomerate could cause significant setbacks in achieving India’s climate goals,” Khera added.

Adani is one of a limited number of Indian groups able to execute big projects commensurate with the country’s solar ambitions, said Rahul Tongia, senior fellow at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress, a think-tank.

“Some players have scale, some have manufacturing, some have better financing and global reach,” Tongia said. “There aren’t so many that have all of the above.”

Adani Group has called the US allegations “baseless” and said it was seeking all “possible legal recourse”. India’s government has described the charges as “a legal matter involving private firms and individuals and the US Department of Justice”.

India has made undeniable progress in renewable power. When Modi set a 2030 target of 500GW of non-fossil fuel capacity in Glasgow in 2021, the country had about 150GW, a level since increased to more than 200GW, according to government data.

But the sector has problems beyond alleged official corruption. Jagannath said an unprepared electricity grid and lack of long-distance transmission had become a bottleneck for renewables growth.

Earlier this year, Modi’s government quietly moved its target for reaching 500GW of non-fossil energy back two years to 2032.



JSW plans to launch its own electric vehicles brand, its chair and family owner Sajjan Jindal has said, signalling a move by the Indian steelmaker to become a significant player in the country’s growing EV sector.

JSW’s plans for its own in-house EV brand follow its announcement in March of a $1.5bn joint venture with SAIC Motor to build and sell the Chinese carmaker’s MG-brand EVs in the world’s most populous country and third-largest car market.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Jindal said JSW’s planned car plant in Aurangabad in India’s western Maharashtra state would be devoted to its own brand, revealing for the first time an aim to build vehicles under its own name.

“Our idea is not to be an outpost of a Chinese company to sell products in India,” Jindal told the FT. “We want to manufacture the products in India, value-add in India and sell in India.”

In launching its own brand, JSW would be entering a field of EV makers in India that includes Tata Motors, Mahindra and Ola Electric.

Jindal gave no further details of his group’s plans for investment or the specific vehicles to be produced. However, in a post on X in October, Aurangabad Industrial City, an industrial park in Maharashtra, welcomed JSW for what it said would be a Rs272bn ($3.2bn) investment set to make EVs and commercial vehicles and create 5,200 jobs.

While sales of battery-powered two-wheel vehicles have soared in India in recent years with the help of subsidies, demand for full-size EVs has developed more slowly.

This contrasts with India’s arch-rival China, where government subsidies and incentives for producers and buyers have prompted mass uptake.

Electric car sales in India total only about 100,000 units a year, accounting for about 2 per cent of the passenger car market, according to S&P Global Mobility, but sales are starting to take off among more affluent Indians.

MG Motor India in September launched its Windsor crossover EV, priced at about $17,000. According to the company the model is “fully booked” for the next few months, with sales capped at 50,000 this year because its plant in Gujarat does not have capacity to produce more.

Narendra Modi’s government last year vetoed a proposal by China’s BYD, which is vying with Tesla to become the world’s top-selling EV brand, to set up a plant in Hyderabad in a JV with local company Megha Engineering. BYD recently set up a partnership in neighbouring Pakistan, where it aims to make EVs by 2026.

Modi’s government in 2020 enforced some of Asia’s strictest curbs on Chinese investment against the backdrop of fatal border clashes in the Himalayas, forcing companies from neighbouring countries to secure government approval to invest.

SAIC entered the JV with JSW after finding that cash for its operation in India was “not coming through” because of government controls, Jindal said. SAIC did not respond to a request for comment.

Separately, Jindal described an expected US-China decoupling under Donald Trump’s incoming administration as “a great opportunity for India” because the US would be “friendly” towards it, even as he raises tariffs on goods from China and other countries.

“If you see the way Mr Trump is thinking, Europe is going to suffer in a way, China will also suffer, and the countries that will benefit — the large countries — one is Japan, and the second would be India,” Jindal said.

“There will be tariffs in the US, even for Indian companies,” he said. “But still the US would be friendly towards India — that is what I believe.”



Gautam Adani said that “every attack makes us stronger” in his first public remarks about the US corruption charges he is facing in connection with a bribery scheme.

The Department of Justice indicted Adani and seven others on November 20.

The 62-year-old Indian billionaire said on Saturday that his infrastructure group was committed to “world-class regulatory compliance” in remarks in Jaipur, where he was addressing a gems and jewellery awards event.

“This is not the first time we have faced such challenges,” Adani said. “What I can tell you is that every attack makes us stronger and every obstacle becomes a stepping stone.”

Adani was indicted for securities fraud alongside executives of his Adani Green Energy subsidiary and former employees of a Canadian pension fund in connection with a scheme under which US federal prosecutors allege that more than $250mn in bribes were “offered and promised” in 2020-2024 to obtain lucrative solar power contracts in five Indian states and territories.

His group has rejected the charges, which were announced alongside a parallel Securities and Exchange Commission civil complaint, as “baseless”.

The news knocked billions of dollars off his 10 listed companies’ share prices and presented the Adani group with its worst reputational crisis since a January 2023 report by short seller group Hindenburg Research, which accused the group of share price manipulation and accounting fraud.

Despite what Adani called “vested reporting” on his group’s activities, he said that no one from his group had been charged with any violation of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or “any conspiracy to obstruct justice”.

“In today’s world, negativity spreads faster than facts,” Adani said. “As we work through the legal process, I want to reconfirm our absolute commitment to world-class regulatory compliance.”

After the US charges this week, some of the Adani group’s foreign partners sought to distance themselves from it. France’s TotalEnergies paused investments in joint energy projects with the Indian conglomerate, which it said had not informed it about the corruption probe.

The US International Development Finance Corporation, which had committed a $553mn loan to support the construction and operation of an Adani-backed container terminal project in Sri Lanka’s capital Colombo, said it had not disbursed any funds yet and it was “actively assessing the ramifications” of the DOJ announcement.

Narendra Modi’s government this week also sought to put the case at arm’s length. At a briefing on Friday by the ministry of external affairs, a spokesperson said it was “a legal matter involving private firms and individuals and the US Department of Justice”.

Modi’s political opponents, who have seized on Adani’s past ties with the prime minister to attack him, disrupted parliament this week, demanding an investigation into the allegations.



Little in life is as beautiful as the city by night. Just ask All We Imagine As Light. In this luminous breakthrough from Indian director Payal Kapadia, the backdrop is Mumbai, rhapsodic under blue-black skies. Streets pulse, trains glow. “Evenings are my favourite time of day,” a voice remarks. “In Mumbai, it feels like the day has just begun.”

Yet one of the intriguing things about this poised drama is that the first major character is exhausted by evening. She is Prabha (Kani Kusruti), a hospital nurse both mournful and steely.

But then, the whole film is subtly double-edged. One moment, Mumbai can feel like any other urban centre, all blank commuters and hanging cranes; the next, uniquely itself, with heat and rain as supporting characters. Kapadia’s film won the Grand Prix at Cannes, and comes with classical arthouse flourishes: shades of 1950s Neo-Realism and 1960s New Wave. It also feels distinctly modern, popping with deep colour. The mood is melancholy: Prabha’s husband has left her for Europe. Then it turns airy and jazzy.

Some of that energy comes from a second female lead: brash hospital receptionist Anu (Divya Prabha), who is also Prabha’s younger roommate. We first meet her telling a patient the state now offers 1,000 rupees and a bucket to any man willing to have a vasectomy. That detail sticks in the mind — but the vivid sense of character is more striking still. The film needs only tiny moments to bring alive Anu, the haunted Prabha and their semi-friendship, making them our focus even as it reminds us the city is home to endless other characters.

To underscore that, the voices of actual Mumbaikars sometimes overlay the scenes on screen, discussing what brought them here. (Typically, economics or heartbreak.) But the story too is rooted in the real. Anu has a secret Muslim boyfriend, perilous in contemporary India, while property developers upend a third heroine, hospital cook Parvaty (Chhaya Kadam).

Her part in the film finally nudges it out of Mumbai, into coastal country. What follows is still compelling, but two-sided again: you realise why people leave the city, and why they long to get back there.

★★★★☆

In UK cinemas from November 29 and in US cinemas now



The toyshop at Mumbai airport presents a peculiar dilemma to the traveller seeking a souvenir for a child. There is an impressive collection of educational toys, testament to the aspiration of India’s upwardly mobile middle class, and a wide selection of plastic tat, testament to the preferences of children everywhere. But at least half of these basic items, for sale in the world’s fastest-growing large economy, were manufactured not in India but in the People’s Republic of China.

From a Pinky the Pig plushie (designed in the UK, says the box, with a union jack on the front; country of origin — China, says the label, in small letters on the back) to a plastic lunchbox, it currently makes sense to produce these basic goods in China, with a per capita income of $12,614, pay any applicable tariffs, and ship them to India, where average incomes — and thus labour costs — are just one-fifth of that level at $2,485. This requires some explanation.

What requires even more attention is corporate India’s seeming lack of appetite to seize these markets: business investment is the missing part of the country’s otherwise impressive growth story. While new capital formation is steady at about one-third of India’s economy, driven by spending on housing and infrastructure, corporate fixed assets grew at just 5.5 per cent over the past year, well below the rate of expansion for the economy as a whole, according to figures from the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy.

For a long time, debt and underdevelopment seemed like the natural explanation for this sluggishness. In the wake of the global financial crisis, India suffered from a “twin balance sheet problem”, with an overleveraged corporate sector struggling to service its loans, while banks, weighed down by non-performing assets, were reluctant to extend new credit. The lack of adequate infrastructure — roads, ports, water, electricity — created painful obstacles to industrial development of all kinds.

To its considerable credit, the government of Narendra Modi has tackled these issues. It has invested heavily in infrastructure, maintained budget discipline, and backed the Reserve Bank of India to control inflation and clean up the banks. Macroeconomically, India is now in good shape. With equity markets strong, credit available and an enormous tailwind from India’s youthful demographics, there are no obvious constraints. Slow investment is about micro, not macro; about desire, not ability.

One potential reason for the lack of investment appetite in manufacturing is the extraordinary scale and competitiveness of China, which casts a long shadow over rich and poor countries alike. But the recent success of export-led growth in Vietnam and Bangladesh shows China cannot be the whole of the story. In garments and electronic assembly, they have gained from the desire to diversify supply chains, whereas India has not to the same extent.

Yet from the perspective of a small industrialist in India, who might invest in a toy factory, this is not so hard to understand. They face many hurdles. The government seems to favour large companies and advanced industries: it has offered tens of billions of dollars in so-called production-linked incentives to foster industries such as electronics and semiconductors, but these sectors are too far up the value chain for India to succeed easily, and will not create that many jobs if they do. Then there is the fear of India’s largest conglomerates, which have pushed aggressively into the digital economy, and are widely believed to enjoy political favour. Giants such as Reliance, Tata and Adani are happy to invest. The problem is further down.

Some businesspeople complain that the 2016 revision of the bankruptcy code is harsh and that bankers fear the punishment for non-performing loans too much to take a risk. In many parts of India, it is still costly to start or exit from a business due to labour and other laws. The ability to grow large without attracting a huge rival into the market and to limit downside when a business fails are both essential to entrepreneurs.

If a small industrialist wants to export, meanwhile, the hurdles are even higher. Most trade today is part of a global value chain, but from 2018 the Modi government began to raise tariffs, including on intermediate inputs such as printed circuit boards and displays. Regardless of whether this fosters domestic output of the protected goods, it makes India less competitive. According to the World Bank, India’s backward participation in value chains, where its exports incorporate foreign inputs, fell from more than 25 per cent of total exports in 2010 to about 15 per cent by 2020. Meanwhile, India has few free trade deals with wealthy economies, yet competes with rivals that do. India’s reluctance to join pan-Asian trade agreements and further open its economy to China is understandable. Bilateral trade deals with countries such as the UK, however, make sense.

The good news is that much of the hardest work has been done. Many of the obstacles to Indian industry do not require big expenditures or the most painful reforms; they mainly involve getting out of the way so the dynamism of India’s young entrepreneurs can shine through. Do that, and “Made in India” can become as ubiquitous as “Made in China” is today.

robin.harding@ft.com



For Nelson Amenya, Adani Group’s “secret” attempt to take over Kenya’s main airport in a $1.85bn leasing proposal was always “one big red flag”. Now, the MBA student who exposed the Indian conglomerate’s proposal to run Nairobi’s international airport for 30 years, feels vindicated after the plan became a casualty of US criminal charges against Gautam Adani.“We did it!!! Adios Adani!!!” he said on social media after President William Ruto tore up $2.6bn in proposed deals with companies owned by one of India’s richest men, who is accused by US prosecutors of involvement in a $265mn bribery scheme.

Ruto said in a televised address to the nation on Thursday that he had told officials to “immediately cancel” the proposal for the Adani group to expand Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, as well as a $736mn investment in power lines.

The reversal of the Kenyan government’s support for Adani’s involvement in infrastructure projects was “based on new information provided by our investigative agencies and partner nations”, he said.Kenya’s decision underlined the global ramifications for Adani’s companies after he was indicted for alleged securities fraud in connection with the alleged bribery scheme. It is another blow to the group just as it was seeking to rebuild its reputation after a short seller accused it of stock-price manipulation and fraud last year. Adani Group has said the US charges are “baseless”.The plan for Adani to refurbish and run one of Africa’s busiest travel hubs was part of a strategy to expand its presence on the continent, which had already led to it investing in a port and proposing a $900mn power lines project in Tanzania. Adani is also exploring projects in Morocco, Egypt and Zambia.

But it was the proposed arrangement with Kenya’s aviation authority that thrust Adani into the spotlight as the country was also reeling from mass protests over tax increases. Local critics accused the company and the government of opacity in their dealings.

For Kenyan officials, the proposed deal was touted as a way to fix key infrastructure without adding to the country’s debt, which takes up about 70 per cent of government revenue to service.

But when Amenya exposed the proposal, which was leaked to him by government officials in July, it sparked protests and an online campaign with hashtags #stopadani and #rejectadani.

“Kenya is in a tight spot and I think Adani took advantage of it,” Amenya told the Financial Times.Even before last week’s developments in the US, the problems in Kenya had led to the Adani group souring on its broader Africa expansion plans, which were also seen as key to India’s geopolitical ambitions.“It’s not worth it,” said a person close to Adani. “We just walked into the middle of a brawl” the person added, referring to the protests that forced Ruto to drop the proposed tax measures in June. Kenya’s High Court had temporarily blocked the planned airport concession in September and last month the power line proposal between an Adani subsidiary and state-owned utility Ketraco.

Faith Odhiambo, president of the Law Society of Kenya, one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuits that have stalled the projects, said the proposals were characterised by a lack of transparency.

Amenya also criticised Adani for submitting a “privately initiated proposal” for the airport concession, rather than competing in an open bidding process. However, the person close to Adani said it was Kenyan officials who raised the option of bypassing a tender process.

The plan was also controversial with local activists because it did not oblige Adani to upgrade the existing runway until 2048 or to build a second one unless a jump in passenger traffic justifies the investment. That was despite the government having previously said this would be needed.They were also incensed by a clause that would have given the Indian company an 18 per cent equity stake in the airport even after the concession period had expired.

Local analysts also feared that a recent decision by Adani Power to cut electricity supplies to Bangladesh over an unpaid bill of $800mn could be the harbinger for Kenya if the country partners with the company to build power lines and power stations.

The Kenyan furore was just one sour note in Adani’s patchy international strategy, which has seen his conglomerate set up port projects in Israel and Sri Lanka, while also courting neighbours such as Bhutan.

It pulled out of Myanmar last year following a military coup in 2021, while its ports and renewable project agreements in Sri Lanka fuelled local resentment and led the new government in Colombo to reconsider approving a wind project.

Adani has expanded his businesses in tandem with development goals set by India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, whom he has known since the premier’s days as chief minister of their home state of Gujarat. Modi urged Indian corporates to become “multinational” soon after taking office in 2014, although Adani has always denied receiving preferential treatment from the government. India sees opportunities for its companies from Africa’s natural resources and growing population.

Deals such as those being pursued by Adani can help India expand its influence despite lacking the financial firepower to compete with China in the global south, said Pramit Pal Chaudhuri, south Asia practice head at Eurasia Group. “There are almost no other companies in India with the scale or the capacity to build billion-dollar ports in far-flung parts of the world,” Chaudhuri said.

Adani only came to Kenya because officials in the country had invited the group to consider investing in the refurbishment of the port in Mombasa and to look at the country’s transmission network, the person close to the company said. The airport project only came up later, they added.“The main problem with this Adani enterprise has to do with the process — it was never open and transparent,” said Moses Ndiema, secretary-general of Kenya’s aviation workers union, whose members were among airport workers who went on strike in September chanting “Adani must go”.

Their wishes have come true and Amenya was showered with online accolades both in Kenya and India after Ruto’s decision. “Adani will fall soon!” he said.

This article has been amended since publication to clarify that Gautam Adani was charged with alleged securities fraud



Indian technology grandee Nandan Nilekani expects companies around the world will increasingly build their own smaller-scale artificial intelligence models to streamline operations and boost productivity, dampening hope of a substantial enterprise payday for more powerful generative products.

The chair of IT services major Infosys told the Financial Times he was “not so sure” companies would want to shoulder the high costs and the potential “black box” of data and copyright liabilities associated with large language models behind popular applications, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT.

“When you look at the large firms they’re all saying: ‘How do we take charge of our AI destiny?’” Nilekani said in an interview in Bengaluru, the Silicon Valley of India. “Small language models trained on very specific data are actually quite effective . . . everybody will build models, but I think they don’t have to build these gigantic ones.”

Nilekani said enterprise customers would call in LLMs for specific applications and the technology would fuel competition between the giants, such as Google and Apple, which offer online products to consumers.

But his prediction raises questions about the revenue model for start-ups that have invested in LLMs. Facing hesitation from businesses, the likes of Apple, Google, Meta and Microsoft have all recently released AI models with fewer “parameters” — the number of variables used to train their systems and shape output.

Infosys, the nearly $19bn annual revenue software and consulting business that Nilekani co-founded in 1981, is positioning itself to be an AI provider to the clients it serves across more than 50 countries, helping them to organise their data and train their own models.

Nilekani highlighted Infosys’ company launch last month of two small language models in partnership with AI chip group Nvidia. They were trained on Infosys data and integrated in products such as its digital banking software Finacle.

“We are actually offering a service to our clients to build a model . . . there’s a lot of interest in that because we are demystifying this whole model-building stuff,” he said. “The whole technology has become so easy that you can build models in a matter of months.”

Some analysts have raised concerns that India’s outsourcing industry will suffer as more companies adopt technologically sophisticated AI models, with value flowing to software providers and the so-called hyperscalers of cloud services. If companies build their own models, however, then the technology will be an opportunity and not a threat for companies such as Infosys.

Nilekani, a fatherly figure of Indian tech who has been central to efforts shaping the government’s digital policies and landmark Aadhaar biometric identity system, said AI would replace some functions in his country’s tech industry — but new roles marshalling its power would crop up.

The Indian services sector has struggled with subdued growth and has slowed down hiring in recent years as customers, including Wall Street banks, cut back on IT spending.

Nilekani did not expect a large pick-up in headcount across India’s tech services industry, which employs more than 5mn people. Partly because of advances in AI, but also due to a weak global economy, they “may not grow as they had grown in the past”, he said.

The industry is one of India’s few large sources of white-collar work in a country of 1.4bn people that is struggling to create meaningful jobs to soak up its young and vast labour force.

At the same time, the Infosys chair said Donald Trump’s re-election might spur the industry, even though Indian IT companies were affected by his last crackdown on H-1B visas, which companies in the US use to bring in skilled foreign workers for a limited number of years.

“The bull case is that this will unleash market deregulation, businesses will grow, people will do more acquisitions and therefore there will be more activity and therefore IT guys will benefit from it,” he said. “My own sense is that they will probably support legal migration, which makes sense. I mean really high-quality talent, why would you not do it?”



US investment bank Jefferies was happy to help out Indian billionaire Gautam Adani’s business empire after it was hit with damaging fraud allegations last year, brokering a $1.9bn capital boost for the infrastructure group and cheering it on social media.

Since then it has been the only US bank that has helped the Indian group’s companies raise equity, according to public data.

It is a relationship that helped propel Jefferies’ rapid expansion in India — but one that now puts the New York-based bank in a potentially tricky position following Adani’s separate indictment by US authorities over an alleged $265mn bribery scheme.

People with knowledge of Jefferies and its workings said it was hard to imagine it continuing the relationship while Adani faces US charges. But distancing itself from one of India’s richest men, and the business that flows from his sprawling infrastructure group, could have consequences too.

In a sign of the international impact of the US charges against Adani, French oil major TotalEnergies on Monday announced it had suspended fresh investments in joint projects with Adani Group, saying the conglomerate had not informed it of the corruption probe.

Like Total, Jefferies continued to work with Adani after US short seller Hindenburg Research in January 2023 accused the group of stock manipulation and accounting fraud, allegations it has strenuously denied.

Executives at Jefferies internally debated whether it should keep Adani as a client in the wake of the Hindenburg report, according to people involved in the discussions. The bank was at the time acting as one of three lead managers on a planned $2.4bn Adani share offering, and made the controversial decision to press ahead with it even as international investors took stock of the group’s financial position.

Billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman, a client of Jefferies, questioned how banks involved in the equity offering could allow it to close without proper due diligence on the allegations made by Hindenburg. “There is just too much liability exposure for the banks,” he wrote on X in late January last year.

Adani chose to pull the offering after international investors largely withdrew their interest, but Jefferies had one foreign buyer lined up.

In March 2023, the bank brokered a deal in which Florida’s GQG Partners ploughed $1.9bn into four Adani Group companies. On professional networking platform LinkedIn, Jefferies said it was “pleased to have brokered a landmark transaction” that would be “a compelling long-term value investment” for GQG.

Jefferies’ relationship with Adani has helped the bank to expand quickly in India, a fast-growing market in which it has gone in a few years from being a small player to making more money in fees from advising on equity-raising than any other international bank.

The bank has leapt to second place in a fees league table, figures from Dealogic show, behind only India’s ICICI. Last year, it was in eighth place and in 2019 as low as 32nd.

Two deals that helped propel it to second place were a $500mn Adani Enterprises share sale in October, and a $1bn Adani Energy Solutions fundraise in August.

Last year Jefferies’ investment banking fee revenue in India jumped to $44.9mn, close to four times the sum it had made in any year since at least 2014, figures from the London Stock Exchange Group show. So far this year, it has already topped that, with $57mn in fees. It is not clear how much of that revenue comes from Adani companies.

Aashish Agarwal, Jefferies’ India country head, told the Financial Times last year the bank was “deeply focused on” India, where it had undertaken 50 transactions in the past three years. “Six to seven” were for GQG, he said, including helping it buy stakes in Adani companies after the Hindenburg report.

“We believe in partnering with our clients, in good times helping them to raise money, in tough times consolidating, whatever it requires,” he said.

Jefferies is the only foreign bank to have advised Adani companies on equity issuance since the Hindenburg report, according to Dealogic figures, though the data provider cautioned that it did not have “full visibility” because of Adani Group’s complicated structure.

Some European banks have worked for Adani on debt issuance since the Hindenburg report, though US-based groups have not. Barclays, Deutsche Bank and Standard Chartered were among the bookrunners when Adani Green Energy issued bonds in March. All three banks declined to comment.

The US indictments allege that Adani Green under its executive director Sagar Adani, Gautam Adani’s nephew, engaged in a “lucrative” bribery scheme to win Indian solar power supply contracts. They say the scheme was concealed from US investors and banks from which Adani and associates raised billions of dollars.

Jefferies’ India business was listed as holding a 3 per cent stake in Adani Transmission as of June 2023, filings show, though it is not named in more recent filings. It is not clear whether the bank was holding the stake itself or on behalf of a client.

Jefferies initiated coverage on Adani Green in July with a “buy” rating, largely based on the company’s “prudent capital management” and its “game-changing” project to build the largest solar plants in the world at Khavda in the Indian state of Gujarat.

The bank predicted Adani Green shares could shoot up by 75 per cent in a best-case scenario. After a sharp fall following news of the US charges, the shares traded on Tuesday down more than 45 per cent from the July 1 level.

Jefferies declined to comment on its relationship with the conglomerate or on the US charges against Adani. Adani Group has said the charges are “baseless” and that “all possible legal recourse will be sought”.

As recently as last month, a senior Jefferies executive was privately touting its relationship with Adani as a success. But a person close to Jefferies said it was not currently doing any work for Adani and any future business would be considered as and when it came in, an indication of the difficult line the bank is now trying to tread.

The bank has in the past offered public solidarity for Adani. “One year ago we began a business relationship with @gautam_adani. Today we are proud to be true partners,” Jefferies chief executive Rich Handler posted on the social media platform X earlier this year. The post has since been deleted.

This article has been amended to include the correct figure of $265mn for the alleged bribery scheme



India’s central bank governor has defended the country’s economic resilience, saying it was “well placed” to deal with spillovers from emerging global shocks as the spectre of protectionism and trade wars looms during Donald Trump’s second term as US president.

Reserve Bank of India governor Shaktikanta Das cited “protectionism and tariffs”, as well as “geo-economic fragmentation”, supply chain bottlenecks and surging commodity prices due to conflict as the biggest potential challenges for the world’s most populous country.

“These are issues on which we have no control,” Das told the Financial Times in an interview at the RBI’s headquarters in Mumbai.

But he said India was “well placed to deal with any kind of spillovers that may emanate from any external sources”, pointing to its “strong” $676bn of foreign exchange reserves and the fastest growth rate of any major economy.

“Whatever is happening within India, we can to a great extent influence, but what is happening outside, we have to defend against them,” he said.

While Das declined to comment on the incoming US administration, Prime Minister Narendra Modi enjoyed a good personal relationship with Trump during the latter’s first term in office, and New Delhi has forged a tighter strategic partnership with Washington. But Trump’s anticipated trade barriers could hit critical Indian export sectors, from drugs to IT services.

“It’s a different thing when you assume office,” Das said, when asked about Trump’s campaign pledge of blanket tariffs. “Every government the world over, when they impose tariffs they are fully mindful of what impact it will have on their domestic inflation.”

Das, whose second term expires before the year-end, is grappling at home with accelerating inflation, which breached the RBI’s upper target threshold of 6 per cent in October on the back of rising food prices.

Given those pressures, many economists expect the RBI’s monetary policy committee will hold its key interest rate at its meeting next month at 6.5 per cent, which would make it one of the few large central banks to not yet begin easing.

This month, India’s trade minister argued that the RBI should cut rates to prioritise growth.

Das said the RBI expected prices to begin moderating next month. He added that it was “very risky” to give forward guidance on rates “with so many uncertainties all around”, but noted that “headline inflation is our target and rightly so”.

India’s economy and equity markets are also showing signs of cooling. A set of weak quarterly corporate earnings, and a slowdown in urban consumption, has helped fuel a foreign investor equity sell-off that has pushed benchmark indices into correction territory from their September peak.

Goldman Sachs last week forecast that India’s economic growth would slow to 6.3 per cent in 2025 from an estimated 6.7 per cent this year. The bank’s analysts highlighted a 2 percentage point fall in bank credit growth in the third quarter to 14.4 per cent, after the RBI slammed the brakes on what Das called “exuberance” in unsecured lending.

The governor said India’s economy was “a mixed picture”, but added there was “no evidence” that RBI measures over the past year to rein in retail credit, which was ballooning at a rate exceeding 25 per cent earlier this year, were the cause of a weak urban consumption.

Das, who was appointed to helm the RBI in 2018, has been broadly praised for his stewardship of India’s economy and his management of the rupee, which has remained largely stable thanks to regular central bank interventions in the market.

Indian media have suggested that Das’s mandate is likely to be extended, which would make him the longest-serving RBI governor since the 1960s.

Das’s reappointment would mean “policy loosening is not on the cards for the time being”, said Shilan Shah, deputy chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, calling the RBI governor “one of the more hawkish panel members in recent months”.

“That all said, there is growing evidence that the economy is cooling and we still think that inflation will drop back over the coming months,” Shah added. “That will open the door for policy easing to begin in April, regardless of personnel.”

Das declined to comment on a potential extension of his term. “I have a monetary policy [meeting] coming up, I think my mind is preoccupied,” he said.



French oil major TotalEnergies has suspended fresh investments in joint energy projects with the Adani Group and said the Indian conglomerate had not informed it of a US corruption probe even as the companies pursued deals together.

US authorities indicted the group’s founder Gautam Adani in a bribery case last week. TotalEnergies is one of Adani’s high-profile foreign partners on several Indian renewable energy projects, though these were not specifically targeted in the US investigation.

Adani was named alongside seven others in a criminal case over an alleged scheme to bribe Indian government officials in exchange for advantageous terms on solar power contracts that were set to yield more than $2bn in profits. Adani Group has said the US charges are “baseless” and that “all possible legal recourse will be sought”.

TotalEnergies said on Monday it would not make “any new financial contribution” linked to its Adani ventures until the allegations were clarified. The French group added it “was not made aware of the existence of an investigation into the alleged corruption scheme”.

Shares of Adani Green Energy closed 9 per cent lower after the statement from TotalEnergies.

The Adani Group has been trying to move past claims of accounting fraud and stock market manipulation made last year by US short-seller Hindenburg Research. The company has denied wrongdoing.

Earlier on Monday, the Indian conglomerate said its listed companies had enough cash to cover debt payments over the coming year, as it gave the first snapshot of its operations since US authorities released their indictment.

In a report that a company official described as a “half-yearly compendium of the business”, Adani Group said it had passed $10bn in earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation for the first half of its financial year, and was on track to report $12bn for the full year.

“Each of the portfolio companies has sufficient liquidity to cover all debt servicing requirements for at least the next 12 months,” it said.

Shares of the group’s listed companies plunged after the US unveiled the criminal and civil charges last Thursday, wiping more than $20bn off their market value.

On Monday, shares of Adani Enterprises and Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone closed 1.6 per cent and 2.3 per cent higher, respectively. Despite the rise in share prices for Adani Enterprises and Adani Ports, the group’s dollar bond prices were down.

In India, opposition members disrupted the opening day of parliament’s winter session, demanding a parliamentary committee probe into the alleged bribery scheme.

Adani, 62, is one of Asia’s richest men and has been a vocal supporter of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Congress party president Mallikarjun Kharge said the bribery case had far-reaching implications for the entire country and demanded that all other business in parliament be suspended to discuss this “very important matter”.

“The first step the government should take is to have a detailed discussion on the Adani saga, which has the potential of tarnishing India’s image at the global stage,” Kharge posted on X.



To the public, Gautam Adani is the Indian billionaire who has built a powerful conglomerate stretching across mining, ports and renewable energy. To his alleged co-conspirators in a multibillion-dollar bribery scheme, he went by code names including “Numero Uno ”.

Asia’s second-richest man was this week named in a criminal case filed by the US government that charged him with perpetrating a scheme to bribe Indian government officials in exchange for advantageous terms on solar power contracts that were set to yield more than $2bn in profits.

The US attorney’s office in Brooklyn charged Adani alongside seven defendants, including his nephew Sagar Adani — an executive at Adani Group subsidiary Adani Green Energy — and three former employees of large Canadian pension fund Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec (CDPQ).

The defendants allegedly agreed to pay more than $250mn in bribes to Indian officials between 2020 and 2024, in a plan concealed from the US investors and banks from which they raised billions of dollars.

Prosecutors claimed Adani himself met an official in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh to “advance” the plan.

The charges against Adani include securities fraud, while others were charged with conspiracy to violate the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which outlaws bribing foreign government officials.

It is one of the most high-profile cases pursued by the DoJ in recent years, crossing several jurisdictions and targeting a business magnate in ways that could have economic and diplomatic knock-on effects. It also raises the prospect of what could become fraught extradition proceedings.

Kevin Davis, professor at New York University School of Law, drew parallels with Brazilian construction conglomerate Odebrecht, which was involved in Brazil’s sprawling corruption investigation known as “Car Wash” and later agreed to pay the US and others multibillion-dollar penalties.

In that case, the DoJ did not pursue Odebrecht’s former CEO, “whose stature in Brazil was comparable to Adani”, Davis said. “What’s interesting here is that the Americans are going after the individual . . . but in terms of the economic and political ramifications, the proceeding is similar in scale”.

The case comes just months before US president-elect Donald Trump’s return to the White House in January will usher in a new US attorney-general.

Daniel Richman, a former federal prosecutor, said the timing of the charges may have been “an effort to get the nature of the charges out . . . before the change of administration”.

A new president “may cause those charges to be changed, withdrawn or otherwise impeded, but the allegations will still be out there and at the very least, the market and the public will have a sense of what the investigation has been about,” Richman said. If the government were to drop the case, parties potentially hit by the alleged scheme could “pursue their own remedies”, he added.

Adani earlier this month congratulated Trump on his electoral victory, pledging in a post on X to invest $10bn in US energy and infrastructure and to create up to 15,000 jobs. The billionaire is widely seen as having close ties with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who built a rapport with Trump during his first presidency.

The case follows accusations against the Adani Group of “brazen stock manipulation and accounting fraud” levelled by short seller Hindenburg Research last year — wrongdoing that Adani has repeatedly denied.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has brought a parallel civil case against Adani, his nephew and Cyril Cabanes, a former CDPQ employee who served as an executive at Azure Power Global, a renewables company whose largest shareholder is the Canadian pension fund.

A lawyer representing Cabanes in both cases declined to comment.

Federal prosecutors alleged that three former CDPQ employees, including Cabanes, and others participated in an “obstruction scheme” to hide or provide false information to the US government and destroy documents.

They also allegedly turned on their co-defendants by revealing to US investigators that Adani and others were involved in a bribery scheme, while failing to disclose their own roles in the matter.

The DoJ and SEC allegations against directors of Adani Green were “baseless and denied . . . [and] all possible legal recourse will be sought”, the Adani Group said.

CDPQ said it was “aware of charges filed in the US against certain former employees”, who were terminated in 2023. “CDPQ is co-operating with US authorities.”

The former Azure directors and officers referenced in the charges had been “separated” from it for more than a year, Azure said. “We have been co-operating with those agencies in relation to those and other matters and we will continue to do so,” it added.

The cases appear to be underpinned at least in part by PowerPoint presentations and Excel spreadsheets that allegedly laid out options to pay the bribes and conceal them as a “development fee” or “commercial proposal”.

Tracy Burnett, partner at Morrison Cohen, argued that the defence could seek to cast these documents in their favour.

“Potentially that is a way you could characterise the evidence, that it was so neatly recorded and memorialised that it was transparent,” she said. “Or the argument could be that they were transparent and that counts against the government’s argument that they were knowingly” breaking the law.

The filings revealed messages used to allegedly plot the scheme. Co-defendants referred to Adani under code names including the “Super Aggregator” or “the big man”, enforcers alleged.

For all the allegations in the complaints, prosecutors are still facing complex cases in which they will have to prove the requisite criminal intent.

There “is a heightened standard” under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, said Burnett. “The government needs to prove the defendants knew they were making corrupt payments, knew they were committing bad acts.”



It was “the treasury of the world”, according to Sir Thomas Roe, writing in 1614 to the future Charles I from Agra, where he was England’s first ambassador to the Mughal emperor. The court whose wealth, splendour and culture so dazzled him was that of Jahangir, ruler over ever-expanding territories that stretched from the Himalayas almost to the tip of India. Alongside their political and economic power, Roe witnessed the range and depth of the Mughals’ cultural achievements, with art forms from carpetmaking to jewellery, calligraphy, painting, weaponry, fabrics and more raised to a then unparalleled level of sophistication.

Jahangir is one of the three Mughal rulers in focus at the V&A’s The Great Mughals: Art, Architecture and Opulence, which showcases this golden age of craftsmanship and artistry with a parade of startlingly magnificent objects and pictures.

Jahangir’s father, Akbar, began his 50-year reign in 1556 and was, by all accounts, an exemplary monarch. Islamic invaders from the north-east, the Mughals had subjugated a largely Hindu population, yet Akbar ruled with surprising religious open-mindedness. He expanded and unified his empire not only through military campaigns but also diplomacy and economic cajolery, efficient bureaucracy and conciliation of his highly diverse conquered subjects.

And he vigorously encouraged the arts. Paintings here reflect his ambitious building programmes but we also see his imperial workshops starting to produce luxury goods, textiles and carpets using stunning precious materials. Craftsmen came from across the empire — carpet makers from central Asia, mother-of-pearl inlay masters from Gujarat — but importantly from Iran. The Persian cultural influence is significant at every turn here, and its fusion with more local traditions, especially the Hindu, created what became a distinctive Mughal style.

Most important to Akbar was his House of Books — perhaps oddly, since he could neither read nor write. Yet he built a library of incredible magnificence, judging from the elaborate and intricate calligraphic art on display here, much of it in Persian (the lingua franca of the court) and drawing on the skills of Iranian masters. The painting styles of Akbar’s court show similar influence, but with a distinctive twist — one illustration from an 11th-century Persian epic shows a beautiful princess welcoming her lover by letting down her long hair for him to climb up. Above in the clouds, all is swirling fantasy and romance, but below in the real world the depiction of a garden with its watering system and the ducks on a pond is powerfully realistic.

In fact we glean information about everything from clothing, jewellery and meals to tilework and building techniques from the detail in the pictures here. And the growing extent of international cultural links that mirrored the political. Portuguese traders from Goa imported gemstones along with European thinking, and Akbar invited European craftsmen to teach foreign techniques such as enamelling on gold and silver, which quickly became established in the Mughal skillset. A glorious thumb ring, of gold set with rubies and emeralds and enamelled inside, is one of the almost impossibly intricate pieces shown here.

The working of nephrite jade was another imported material skill brought to stupendous heights in the Mughal courts — an example here is a small elegant wine jug (wine was clearly important throughout this period), made of shaped jade encrusted with gold, rubies and emeralds. It is jaw-droppingly pretty, the epitome of outrageous, just-because-we-can luxury.

There was export too: a hefty circular shield on display here is covered with tiny figures, horsemen and animals among elaborate foliage and patterning (another Persian style, razm o bazm, scenes of the hunt, feasts and war) tightly worked in glittering mother-of-pearl inlay, a masterpiece of metalwork and marquetry. Its chief interest, though, is that by 1599 it had found its way to Florence, in the armoury of Ferdinando of Medici — possibly a diplomatic gift?

By the time of Akbar’s son Jahangir, who had a throne designed by a jeweller from Bordeaux, details in paintings show more and more cultural imports alongside the home production: Ottoman velvets, Chinese ceramics and brocades. Even exotic animals were cultural incomers: painters faithfully depicted a rather sad-looking zebra brought by emissaries from Ethiopia, a turkey cock from North America, every feather and wobbly wattle carefully defined.

This outreach to the world grew even further in the reign of the third king featured in this show, Jahangir’s son Shah Jahan. Paintings show European traders carrying a box of Japanese lacquer, an emerald from Colombia; one intriguing image of a princely garden picnic includes wine poured from a Persian ceramic ewer into Venetian goblets, with Chinese porcelain on a Japanese table, while a guest sports a robe of Chinese brocade. Yet all this cultural input is melded into what is now, by the first decades of the 17th century, a firmly established Mughal style, one that had begun to astonish the world.

Shah Jahan took the throne in 1628, after a brutal campaign — despite the calm and elegance of royal imagery here, successions were a bloody business, chiefly brought about by murdering one’s many competing brothers and cousins. Once installed on the throne, however, he presided over Mughal cultural life at its very peak and is best remembered, of course, for creating the Taj Mahal, mausoleum and loving tribute for his favourite wife Mumtaz Mahal, who died giving birth to their 14th child.

The V&A’s curators give surprisingly offhand treatment to Mughal art’s most famous and enduring monument. A brief video, a model, some explanation of the calligraphy on the tombs . . . that’s about it. The wall texts do make the point, however, that the Taj Mahal’s signature design, of white marble inlaid with semi-precious stones to create multicoloured flowers and leaves delicately curling and twining, gave birth to a long stylistic history in Islamic art. (Even today: look at the pillars, walls and even the central courtyard of the Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi, opened in 2007.)

During Jahan’s 30-year reign, the Mughal court became a magnet for foreign ambassadors and potentates and visitors of all sorts, drawn by its magnificence, its riches, its lucrative market opportunities. Under his rule, the arts flourished accordingly. So how does this story end? The empire still had a long way to go, after Jahan’s son Aurangzeb seized power in 1658 while Jahan was ill, and initiated another 50-year reign. (Jahan recovered, but Aurangzeb imprisoned him for the rest of his life and clung on to the throne himself.)

Although Aurangzeb expanded the Mughal empire to its furthest extent, a long decline set in. The V&A decides to fade us out of the Golden Age with Shah Jahan, bringing their glorious exhibition to a close while the going was good, but making the point that the artists and styles of these three magnificent courts, roughly 1560-1660, had an enduring legacy for centuries afterwards, throughout the subcontinent and the whole Islamic world, and beyond.

To May 5, 2025; vam.ac.uk

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FTWeekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



Indian billionaire Gautam Adani, once the world’s third-richest man, has had a rough week in the markets. Bribery charges filed in the US knocked more than $25bn in value off Adani Group companies on Thursday. Shareholders in its 10 listed company stocks suffered. So might the international investors who have piled into the Indian market in recent months.

The sell-off in most Adani group stocks reversed on Friday, led by shares of Adani Enterprises, the holding company. But for the wider Indian market, this week’s turbulence has drawn fresh attention to the risks and pricey valuations of local stocks.

Just months ago, Indian stocks had been seen as a viable replacement for Chinese equities in global investor portfolios. Shares of Adani Enterprises had been one of the top performers, more than doubling from its low last year. Over the past year, shares had gained 30 per cent up until this week when the chair of Adani Group was indicted in New York in connection with an alleged scheme to bribe Indian officials in exchange for favourable solar power contracts. Adani has denied the allegations.

Those types of gains have not been unusual in the local market. The broader benchmark has been on a four-year rally, more than tripling peak to trough — a period in which Chinese equities have been on a downward trend. Foreign investors shifting funds to India amid faltering growth in China have created a sense of the market’s coming of age.

That shift can be seen in the net foreign capital inflows into Indian equities over the four years to this year, which surpassed $35bn. The figure hit a new record this year. A record number of new retail investor accounts joining the market helped fuel the rally, attracted by brisk economic growth in India.

That has also meant Indian stocks are getting pricey. The Nifty benchmark index trades at nearly four times book value, more than double that of broader emerging market indices. That is even after a fall of a tenth from its September peak.

On a forward earnings basis, the index trades at 25 times earnings, a premium of more than a third to the broader MSCI All-World index. Companies such as Adani Total Gas and Adani Green Energy trade at more than 90 times trailing earnings

Panic selling of Adani group stocks is likely to be shortlived, as it was in 2023 following allegations of fraud, which Adani denied, made by US short seller Hindenburg Research. Shares of Adani Enterprises more than doubled in the year following the sell off. It will be more difficult to avoid being caught up in the market weakness if international investors rethink their affection for India.

june.yoon@ft.com



Battling to win back credibility with investors after a damaging short seller attack last year, India’s powerful Adani Group repeatedly flew business partners and journalists to its showpiece “green” project: a vast solar and wind farm in Khavda in the north-western state of Gujarat.

Now Adani’s renewable power business is itself at the heart of even more perilous allegations levelled against one of India’s biggest conglomerates, a sprawling industrial powerhouse whose rise has shadowed the political ascent of Prime Minister Narendra Modi for two and a half decades.

US criminal and civil charges accusing the group’s founder Gautam Adani of involvement in a $265mn bribery scheme have startled Indian businesspeople and given potent ammunition to Modi’s parliamentary opponents.

For international investors, they raise new questions about the probity and integrity of Indian regulators and business leaders, while casting doubts on the nation’s preferred narrative of an ascending economy that offers a safe alternative to a corrupt and capricious China.

The charges from the Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission could also complicate New Delhi’s ties with Washington, which are already clouded by claims Indian officials were involved in attempts to kill Sikh separatists in the US and Canada.

Since short seller Hindenburg Research last year accused the Adani Group of engaging in “brazen stock manipulation and accounting fraud”, Modi’s opponents have criticised the prime minister for what are widely seen as his close ties with billionaires including Adani.

On Thursday, many called on Indian authorities to follow the example of the US agencies and prosecute.

“It’s now pretty clear and established in America that Mr Adani has broken both American law and Indian law,” opposition leader Rahul Gandhi told a press conference in New Delhi.

“He has been indicted in the United States and I’m wondering why Mr Adani is still running around a free man in this country,” said Gandhi, sitting in front of a large image of Adani and Modi sharing a laugh.

A possible extradition request, legal appeals and long-running court proceedings could add an unpredictable twist to a fast-expanding but complex US-Indian diplomatic, military and trading relationship ahead of the inauguration of a new administration led by Donald Trump. An extradition treaty between India and the US has been in force since 1999, but has only occasionally been used.

“There is an arrest warrant that has been issued in the US,” said Praveen Chakravarty, an official with Gandhi’s Indian National Congress party. “How is that going to proceed? If the US calls for extradition, is Modi going to protect him [Adani], and on what grounds?”

Gandhi and other opposition politicians pointed in particular at one section of the US criminal indictment. It alleges that in March Gautam Adani and his nephew Sagar Adani, executive director of the Adani Green renewables business, had “made or caused” group personnel to falsely tell banks and India’s two stock exchanges that it had not received notice from the US justice department of an investigation.

Chakravarty described the US allegation of misleading investors as a “serious offence” that would require action by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, the stock market regulator.

Sebi has previously investigated the allegations made by Hindenburg and reports in the Financial Times and elsewhere alleging Adani manipulated its own shares, but has not taken any action against the group. In July, Sebi said Hindenburg Research had “deliberately sensationalised and distorted certain facts”.

“This is only the tip of the iceberg,” said Mahua Moitra, another opposition MP who has been scathingly critical of Adani in parliament. “Let’s wait for this fraud and grand larceny to unravel.”

India’s government spokesman and Sebi did not respond to requests for comment. The Adani Group has described the US charges as “baseless” and said “all possible legal recourse will be sought”.

The charges against Adani come at a time when India’s reliability as a like-minded business and diplomatic partner for western democracies was already being questioned.

Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has said there are “credible allegations” of Indian involvement in the killing of Sikh separatist Hardeep Singh Nijjar in Vancouver last year. The US last month charged an Indian “senior field officer” with directing a foiled plot to murder a Sikh activist in New York City.

While India expelled Canada’s diplomats and responded belligerently to Ottawa’s claims of extrajudicial killing, it has been more circumspect with the US, whose officials have demanded accountability from their Indian counterparts.

“Thus far, the United States and India have successfully compartmentalised the fallout from charges linked to India’s ‘murder-for-hire’ scheme, but the charges against several high-ranking Adani executives will create a new source of tension,” said Milan Vaishnav, director of the South Asia Programme at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

“Given that the charges are being brought in the middle of a presidential transition, I suspect there are already back-channel conversations taking place to implore the incoming Trump administration to drop the DoJ and SEC cases,” Vaishnav said.

Some Indian businesspeople speculated that fallout from the charges in India would be limited, with Modi’s government likely to seek to shield a friendly business group pursuing projects central to the prime minister’s infrastructure drive from prosecution both in India and the US.

One CEO, who asked not to be identified, suggested it would be unfair to judge all corporate India by a single case.

“My instinct is that it hasn’t hurt brand India or the credibility of the regulator or the ethos that you can build businesses in India that stand up and thrive and survive,” the CEO said.

In a post on social media site X last week, Adani congratulated Trump on his election and said his group was committed to investing $10bn in US energy and infrastructure projects and was “aiming to create” 15,000 jobs. The post was illustrated with an AI-generated panorama showing the US and Indian flags waving over a city with a port, railway and elevated highways.

If US-India relations “can survive a murder-for-hire allegation against New Delhi, then they can certainly survive this new revelation”, said Michael Kugelman, director at the South Asia Institute of The Wilson Centre, a US think-tank. “President-elect Trump may see Adani as an ally: a fellow businessman who has praised Trump, is close to Modi, and promises to invest in the US and create jobs.”

​Letter in response to this article:

Adani indictment raises questions over US bank / From Lee Jones, Professor, Queen Mary University of London, London E1, UK



Three Bank of America dealmakers in India have left amid an ongoing investigation into allegations of wrongdoing in the US financial group’s Asian unit, according to three sources familiar with the matter.

The bankers resigned on Thursday and their departures were tied to the investigation, according to two sources familiar with the matter.

The internal investigation, which was launched earlier this year following a whistleblower complaint, is probing whether BofA and bankers in its Asian operations had tipped off certain investors of upcoming secondary offerings, allowing those investors to “front run” the stock sales and profit from non-public information.

At issue were meetings the bankers held with corporate executives and hedge funds prior to stock offerings, according to two sources familiar with the matter. The investigation is looking at a number of deals but is focused on a $200mn stock sale in March for the Sun Life insurance subsidiary of Indian conglomerate Aditya Birla.

BofA’s internal investigation is ongoing, and it is not clear what information the bankers shared with the hedge funds or other investors. A spokesperson for BofA declined to comment. The bankers could not be reached for comment.

Bankers in India, and elsewhere, are required to disclose such meetings within one day to stock exchanges and investors. Banks are also required to adhere to a “cooling off” period after private meetings before launching stock offerings.

A person familiar with the investigation said BofA had determined that in some instances the bankers had not properly disclosed the meetings, and that the timing of some subsequent offerings might have been inappropriate.

Regulators in India were looking into the matter, and contacted BofA in September, according to people familiar with the matter.



Almost two years after a US short seller alleged Gautam Adani’s businesses had engaged in accounting fraud and stock market manipulation, India’s second-richest man faces federal criminal charges in the US. Prosecutors allege that Adani — whose business rise has tracked the political ascent of Prime Minister Narendra Modi — and several associates were part of a scheme to bribe Indian officials. The charges pose an even more serious test of credibility for India’s business establishment, regulators and law enforcement. How they respond will be vital for the country’s business reputation. India’s investment case is based not just on its size and impressive growth but on its claim to be a safer alternative to an autocratic China.

Prosecutors in the Eastern District of New York allege Adani and seven other executives were part of an effort to pay or promise more than $250mn of bribes to Indian state government officials to obtain green energy supply contracts worth billions of dollars. They allege the scheme was concealed from US banks and investors from whom the businesses raised millions of dollars of capital. Adani Group said the accusations were “baseless and denied” and added that it would seek “all possible legal recourse”.

News of the charges sent share prices of Adani companies tumbling just as the group was emerging from a lengthy effort to deny the allegations made early in 2023 by Hindenburg Research, a New York short seller, and bolster confidence among lenders and investors. The Hindenburg report was itself a test for India Inc — but one which it ducked. The business and government establishment largely closed ranks around Adani Group, echoing its narrative that the short seller’s report was a “calculated attack on India”.

Though the stock market regulator, Sebi, launched investigations, it has taken little action in response to Hindenburg’s report and reporting by the Financial Times and others that alleged that Adani manipulated its own shares — which the group has vigorously denied. India did not seize the moment to debate whether its corporate governance standards and market controls were sufficiently robust for a global top-five economy which prides itself on being the world’s largest democracy.

The country’s political and business elite should treat seriously the accusations now emanating from US legal authorities, and ensure they are properly investigated domestically. While there may be irritation at perceived interference by overseas agencies, that is the price of tapping international investors. There are also important questions over why it is American law enforcement bodies rather than India’s authorities that are pursuing this case.

The allegations, after all, go to the heart of how economic power in India is concentrated in politically-connected, family-run conglomerates — and investor concerns over “crony” capitalism. Not only does Adani himself have long associations with the prime minister, who is also from Gujarat. His group, spanning ports and airports to mining and green power, is central to Modi’s plans to build up India’s infrastructure as the backbone of its further development. Doing so will rely on foreign investment, and investor confidence.

Advanced economies have issues with crony capitalism, too. Perhaps more than any recent predecessor, returning US president Donald Trump has surrounded himself with billionaire businesspeople competing for favour. But such models typically lead to suboptimal growth. The Modi government’s bold ambitions will best be served by ensuring the emerging economic powerhouse has a sturdy and transparent regulatory and legal environment.



Visiting the US in March 2023, Sagar Adani, nephew of Indian billionaire tycoon Gautam Adani, was suddenly approached by FBI agents who seized his electronic devices as part of a sweeping probe into an alleged years-long kickback scheme involving an Adani group’s renewables business.

Almost 20 months later, US authorities have unveiled bribery charges against Sagar, 30, and his uncle, a hugely influential business leader who is Asia’s second-richest man and widely seen as having close ties to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The criminal and civil cases allege Adani family members and group leaders, along with former executives of Indian renewable company Azure Power and Canadian pension fund CDPQ, schemed to funnel $265mn in bribes to Indian officials to secure solar contracts. The scheme was allegedly concealed from US banks and investors from which Adani raised billions of dollars.

Gautam Adani, 62, personally met a senior government official three times in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh in 2021 as part of efforts to “corruptly persuade” authorities to help seal power supply deals with electricity distribution companies, according to the criminal indictment.

At his conglomerate’s headquarters in Ahmedabad, western India, the billionaire himself allegedly presented “multiple options” for ways to conceal bribes.

The charges pose an unprecedented threat to the Adani Group, which had relaunched ambitious domestic and overseas expansion efforts following damaging separate allegations of corporate fraud levelled against it last year by short seller Hindenburg Research.

“This is more serious than the Hindenburg report,” said Bhaskar Chakravorti, dean of global business at The Fletcher School at Tufts University. “This will definitely make a dent in Adani’s fundraising from international investors.”

Adani Group called the allegations “baseless” and said it was seeking all “possible legal recourse”. CDPQ, an Adani shareholder, said it was co-operating with US authorities and had sacked the named employees last year. Azure said the former executives referenced in the charges had been “separated” from the company for more than a year and it was co-operating with the US agencies.

Adani’s nation-spanning conglomerate has built one of India’s largest renewable businesses as Modi’s government pushes ambitious plans to meet half its energy needs from green sources by 2030.

The indictments filed by the US attorney’s office in Brooklyn and the Securities and Exchange Commission allege the renewables business Adani Green under its executive director Sagar Adani engaged in a “lucrative” bribery effort to win solar supply contracts with Indian government entities between 2020 and 2024.

These included a deal involving the state-owned Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) on the purchase of 7,000 megawatts of power-generating capacity in Andhra Pradesh.

Gautam and Sagar Adani, along with Adani Green managing director Vneet Jaain, as well as former Azure executives, conspired to “corruptly offer” and authorise bribes to officials to gain energy contracts with state electricity companies from Andhra Pradesh to northern Kashmir, according to the criminal indictment.

The SEC alleged that the power purchase agreements were only executed by the state-owned solar company after the Adanis “undertook a massive bribery scheme to incentivise Indian state government officials to enter into contracts with SECI to buy energy at above market rates”.

To keep track of their arrangements, Sagar Adani used his mobile phone to share specific details of bribes offered to government officials, it said. Jaain photographed a document in April 2022 ahead of a meeting in New Delhi with a former Azure executive that summarised bribe amounts Adani would put forward, it said.

A former Azure executive also prepared PowerPoint presentations and Excel spreadsheets to help the CDPQ executives analyse the best “corrupt payment option”, the criminal indictment said.

According to the criminal charges, some of the defendants used code names, calling Gautam Adani “Mr A”, “the big man” and “Numero uno”. They also referred to Jaain as “snake” or “Numero uno minus one”.

Another key charge levelled against the two Adanis and Jaain is that they provided “false and misleading” information about their involvement in instigating bribes as they travelled to the US to seek dollar funding from investors and financial institutions.

Proceeds from a dollar-bond issue in 2021 were directly linked to capital expenditure requirements for various projects, including one “corrupt” scheme, according to the criminal indictment.

The SEC in its separate civil charge said Gautam and Sagar Adani had for years “positioned Adani Green to investors and the public as a leader among its peers and within India in principles of good corporate governance, highlighting Adani Green’s purportedly rigorous anti-bribery and anti-corruption principles and policies”.

They “leveraged that narrative” to sell almost $1bn of Adani Green bonds and notes to US investors in September 2021, it said.

When the former Azure and CDPQ executives were approached by US authorities, the defendants sought to withhold “key information” about the Indian graft efforts, according to the criminal charges. The charges said the executives made selective disclosures to investigators, revealing Adani’s requests for bribes “but concealing their own participation”.

The Azure and CDPQ executives allegedly deleted electronic messages and PowerPoint presentations, while in meetings during 2023 with the FBI and SEC they denied taking part in the Indian bribery efforts. “This strategy was designed to create the appearance that the co-conspirators were reporting misconduct rather than perpetrating misconduct.”

Soon after Sagar Adani was approached by the FBI last year, Gautam Adani “emailed himself photographs of each page of the search warrant executed and grand jury subpoena served” on his nephew, according to the criminal indictment, which alleges the tycoon concealed that information from investors and banks.

Prosecutors noted that the Adani Group said the conglomerate was “unaware” of any investigation against its chair following media reports this year that US probes against the tycoon were under way.

The group’s head of corporate finance is also alleged to have sent more than a dozen emails in March 2024 to multiple investors and financial institutions stating the news was “baseless” and “malicious”.

Early on Thursday morning India time Adani Green suspended a $600mn bond issue planned for this week after news of the charges prompted a major sell-off across the conglomerate’s 10 listed stocks.

The drop in Adani Group shares was “similar to the reaction” following Hindenburg’s damaging allegations last year, said Abhay Agarwal, founder and managing director of Mumbai-based fund manager Piper Serica Advisors. “If this impacts the group’s ability to raise new capital to fund its projects it would be a huge negative.”

However, with Adani’s strong backing at home and extensive control over much of India’s critical infrastructure, Chakravorti at Tufts expects the billionaire “to ride it out much as he did when the Hindenburg report hit” even if it limits his travel outside India.

“Will he be extradited? I don’t think it is likely,” said Chakravorti. “At least not with the current administration in power.”



Indian billionaire Gautam Adani has been charged by US prosecutors over an alleged years-long scheme to bribe Indian officials in exchange for favourable terms on solar power contracts that were projected to bring in more than $2bn in profit.

Shares in Adani Group companies tumbled on Thursday after the 62-year-old tycoon, who chairs the multinational conglomerate and has been a vocal supporter of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, was indicted in New York on charges including securities fraud.

Adani, one of Asia’s richest men, was charged alongside seven others, including executives of Adani energy subsidiaries and former employees of a Canadian pension fund. His nephew Sagar Adani, who is the executive director at a renewables company founded by Gautam Adani, is also among the defendants.

US federal prosecutors said more than $250mn in bribes were “offered and promised” between 2020 and 2024 to people in the Indian government as part of the scheme, which was allegedly concealed from the US banks and investors from which they raised billions of dollars.

They claimed that Gautam Adani met an Indian official to “advance” the scheme.

The US attorney’s office in Brooklyn also charged three former employees of large Canadian pension fund CDPQ in connection with the alleged scheme, saying they obstructed an investigation into the bribes by deleting emails and agreeing to provide false information to the US government. CDPQ, which invests in infrastructure projects, is a shareholder in Adani companies.

The indictments threaten to reignite a reputational crisis for Adani Group, which has been trying to move past claims of accounting fraud and stock market manipulation made last year by US short seller Hindenburg Research. Adani has repeatedly denied wrongdoing.

Shares across Adani’s 10 listed companies dropped on Thursday. The conglomerate’s flagship Adani Enterprises closed down 22 per cent, its ports business fell 14 per cent and Adani Green Energy declined 19 per cent.

US deputy assistant attorney-general Lisa Miller said in a statement: “This indictment alleges schemes to pay over $250mn in bribes to Indian government officials. These offences were allegedly committed by senior executives and directors to obtain and finance massive state energy supply contracts through corruption and fraud at the expense of US investors.”

Prosecutors further alleged that the defendants “extensively documented their corrupt efforts” on mobile phones, on PowerPoint presentations and in Excel spreadsheets “that summarised various options for paying and concealing bribe payments”.

In a parallel civil lawsuit, the US Securities and Exchange Commission said the alleged bribes were paid in order to “secure [the Indian government’s] commitment to purchase energy at above-market rates that would benefit Adani Green and Azure Power”, two renewable energy companies in India.

Adani Green, which is building one of the largest solar plants in the world at Khavda in India’s western state of Gujarat, raised more than $175mn from US investors as part of a $750mn corporate bond while the scheme was ongoing, US regulators said.

Gautam Adani and Sagar Adani allegedly “induced US investors to buy Adani Green bonds through an offering process that misrepresented not only that Adani Green had a robust anti-bribery compliance programme but also that the company’s senior management had not and would not pay or promise to pay bribes”, said Sanjay Wadhwa, acting director at the SEC’s enforcement division.

According to the regulator’s complaint, Sagar Adani allegedly told Azure executives and others about “incentives”, or bribes, he had been proposing to “motivate” state officials to agree contracts with the Indian government’s arm responsible for implementing renewable energy programmes.

Adani Group said in a statement that the allegations by the US Department of Justice and SEC against directors of Adani Green were “baseless and denied . . . [and that] all possible legal recourse will be sought”. Adani Green said it would suspend a planned $600mn bond issue.

CDPQ said: “CDPQ is aware of charges filed in the US against certain former employees. Those employees were all terminated in 2023 and CDPQ is co-operating with US authorities. In light of the pending cases, we have no further comment at this time.”

Azure said former directors and officers of the company referenced in the charges by US authorities had been “separated” from it for more than a year. “We have been co-operating with those agencies in relation to those and other matters and we will continue to do so,” it said.

Gautam Adani has over the past two decades built his conglomerate into one of India’s most formidable industrial groups, diversifying from its core ports and trading business into mining, airports, coal and renewable power.

It has built or bid for power, port and other infrastructure projects in countries including Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Israel, where it operates the port of Haifa.

In a post on X congratulating Donald Trump on his US election victory earlier this month, Adani said his group was “committed to leveraging its global expertise” and would invest $10bn in American energy security and infrastructure projects as part of the partnership between India and the US, with the aim of creating up to 15,000 jobs.

Adani’s rise in business has coincided with India’s drive to harness private-sector expertise and capital to develop its infrastructure, which has accelerated during Modi’s decade in power.

The Indian National Congress party’s Rahul Gandhi, who became India’s opposition leader after this year’s general election, called for an investigation after the Hindenburg allegations and questioned Adani’s record of winning government tenders, as well as his close ties with ruling politicians including Modi, who is also from Gujarat.

On Thursday the party said the US indictment “vindicates” its demands for a parliamentary probe. India’s government did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Additional reporting by Arjun Neil Alim in Hong Kong



One major prison sentence to start: Former Wall Street trader Bill Hwang has been sentenced to 18 years in prison, capping an extraordinary fall from grace for the Archegos founder who was earlier this year found guilty of orchestrating a massive market deception that cost big banks billions of dollars.

And a scoop: Unilever has shelved plans to run a sales process for its €15bn ice cream division to private equity groups and will instead focus on a push to spin off the unit in an independent listing.

In today’s newsletter:

Indian billionaire Gautam Adani has had a challenging two years. In this short timeframe, he went from being Asia’s richest man to defending the business practices at his sprawling business empire.

Problems started when short seller Hindenburg Research published a damaging report in January 2023, which alleged accounting fraud and stock market manipulation. Adani Group, which Adani chairs, vigorously denied the allegations and scrambled to shore up confidence with investors and banks.

But on Wednesday, those months-long efforts came crashing down. Adani and seven other business executives were charged by federal prosecutors in New York over an alleged years-long scheme to bribe Indian officials, in exchange for favourable terms on contracts, projected to bring in more than $2bn in profit.

The allegations are vast. Prosecutors said the tycoon made the payments in exchange for billions of dollars’ worth of solar power contracts — and that those payments were concealed from US banks and investors.

The kickbacks in question aren’t small either. Executives allegedly paid more than $250mn in bribes between 2020 and 2024 to Indian government officials as part of the scheme.

It was already well-known that Adani had close ties to the Indian government, as well as him being a vocal supporter of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Seven other executives were also charged, including managers at Adani energy subsidiaries and former employees of Canadian pension fund CDPQ. This was also a family affair: Gautam’s nephew, Sagar Adani, was among the defendants.

Adani was already in a public relations crisis.

Hindenburg’s report had an immediate and devastating impact. A month after it came out, Adani Group had suffered a $145bn market sell-off. Adani himself suffered a personal blow, losing the title of Asia’s richest man to Indian industrialist Mukesh Ambani.

Yet the charges from the Eastern District of New York are just one of the legal quagmires Adani will have to face.

There’s a parallel civil lawsuit from the Securities and Exchange Commission, which said the scheme included having the Indian government commit to buying energy at above-market rates; that benefited Adani Green and Azure Power.

In October 2014, Stephen Schwarzman reminded Blackstone investors that he had some experience in spin-offs.

Years earlier, an asset management group had been separated from the private equity firm and control had been ceded to an up-and-coming bond trader. That man was Larry Fink and the new firm became known as BlackRock.

Schwarzman has once again struck gold, sending a Blackstone unit out into the world to find its fortune: this time that firm is PJT Partners, which was formed a decade ago as the cast-off of the former Blackstone deal advisory group.

And its most crucial element would be its chief executive: the former Morgan Stanley rainmaker, Paul Taubman. After a huge increase in its share price since the depths of April 2020, PJT has hit a market capitalisation of $7bn.

DD’s Sujeet Indap and James Fontanella-Khan have crunched the numbers in securities filings and have scooped that Taubman’s stake is now worth more than $1bn. Schwarzman, who got his PJT shares in the spin-off and is still the second-largest shareholder, holds shares worth more than $900mn.

PJT at the moment is a big player in some of the fiercest boardroom battles. It has a role advising Boeing, Pfizer and the debt restructuring underpinning a Dish and DirectTV tie-up. The combination of Blackstone’s strength in restructuring and private funds, along with Taubman’s Rolodex, has proved formidable.

Taubman, for his part, takes home a small sliver of what he’s really worth. His salary is a mere $1mn, and his remaining pay comes simply in long-term stock grants that only vest if PJT shares go up.

Taubman bet on himself. And the wager has so far paid off magnificently, both for him and his champion, Schwarzman.

To Dom or not to Dom, that is the question . . . at least if you’re a billionaire with property interests in London.

Britain’s colonial era “non-dom” rules have allowed the wealthy to shelter their overseas income and gains from UK tax, while still living — and spending — in London (or indeed their country estates).

But this convenient arrangement will end next year, under changes announced by the new Labour government. Wealthy “non-doms” with one foot in the UK must now choose whether to pony up more tax, or sharply limit their time in the country to avoid taxable status.

Their predicament has prompted a great deal of hand wringing — not least in the real estate sector — about London’s luxury economy and attractiveness to overseas investors.

Enter Adar and Natasha Poonawalla — whose family company, the Serum Institute of India, manufactured millions of doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and who have invested tens of millions in research and production in the UK.

They own the second most expensive home in London, bought last year for £138mn.

Adar told the FT earlier this year that the tax changes risked deterring investment, and would “make people stay away” from the UK. But he also mentioned that his wife, Natasha, would probably put up with the loss of the tax benefits.

However, in the same month as that interview, it appears as if she doubled down on the UK in a more tangible way. A company controlled by Natasha bought a £42mn block on Grosvenor Square — formerly the Indonesian embassy — as a redevelopment opportunity.

The deal is a corrective to the worst fears about the impact of the non-dom changes to London’s super prime market.

British politics has at least since Brexit (and arguably since the Reformation) thrown up plenty of reasons for the global wealthy to stay away. But DD wouldn’t count London out any time soon.

Oil ‘wildcatters’ Shale barons like North Dakota governor Doug Burgum and oil magnate Harold Hamm are thrilled about Republican plans to reshape the energy sector, the FT writes. Climate activists, not so much.

RFK’s virality The rise of Robert F Kennedy Jr to the helm of health policy in the US was fuelled by scepticism over scientists and vaccines born in the depths of the Covid-19 pandemic, The Wall Street Journal reports.

Google antitrust For years, Google instructed employees to delete messages and avoid certain words in an attempt to avoid antitrust violations, The New York Times reports.

US set to seek Google divestitures in search monopoly case (FT)

Bridgewater’s Bob Prince buys $12mn home in wealthy Hong Kong enclave (FT)

Comcast to spin off cable TV networks and drive streaming growth (FT)

Robert Kennedy considers upheaval to US Medicare doctors’ billing system (FT)

SpaceX abandons attempt to catch Starship booster as Donald Trump watches (FT)

Nvidia revenue nearly doubles as AI chip demand remains strong (FT)

MicroStrategy takes fundraising to $7bn for push into bitcoin (FT)

Target chief defends strategy as shares plummet over weak outlook (FT)



India’s winter air pollution season has arrived this year with a vengeance, blanketing New Delhi in a sickly-looking, toxic yellowish haze. November is when smoke from winter stubble burnt by farmers to the megacity’s north and west mixes with the usual fumes from cars, factories and power plants. This then gets trapped by cooler air, giving the capital some of the world’s foulest air.

In India pollution measured with an Air Quality Index of 400 or higher ranks as “severe”. Delhi’s air monitoring stations cap readings at 500, but this week the AQI reached as high as 1,743, according to the IQAir app. Even a few minutes outdoors leaves you feeling ill and gasping for breath.

During the miasma, some of Delhi’s rich retreat to their houses, where air purifiers offer some respite; others decamp for the cleaner climes of Himalayan hill stations. But the poor have to put up with the poison air as with so much else.

One of the sillier rituals of winter pollution season is the political blame game that accompanies it. Critics of Narendra Modi fault his government for failing to tackle a national health emergency that shortens lives, and which a 2019 study estimated was costing India 1 per cent annually in GDP. Supporters blame the Aam Aadmi party, which runs local governments in Delhi and Punjab where much of the stubble burning happens.

Environmentalists believe both sides miss the point. “Enforcement and implementation of policy is where the big gap lies,” says Mohit Beotra, CEO of the Air Pollution Action Group. “But it’s also an opportunity: if someone at the top decided this was something they could address, they could chip away at the problem.”

What Indian media primly labels the “winter haze” is a collective action problem. Activists believe it will need both large-scale individual action, government leadership — and ideally cross-border co-operation too.

Some of the smog now blanketing Delhi comes from the brick kilns, factories and farms of Pakistan and as far afield as Afghanistan. The wind in south Asia tends to blow from north-west to south-east, so the pollution will also carry on eastward to Bangladesh.

China, India’s geopolitical rival, has succeeded in bringing down its worst air pollution levels over the past decade. But unlike India, with its decentralised, federal democracy, China is a one-party state where orders are issued at the top. India, say environmentalists, needs a more granular and co-operative approach.

“One first step would be an air pollution conclave,” says Bharati Chaturvedi, founder of environmental non-profit group Chintan. Smaller steps are also within reach. Municipal governments have so far undertaken theatrical but ineffective measures such as spraying water in the air or deploying mechanical road sweepers. Instead they could work more effectively on dust control or invest in public transport.

To aid overburdened officials, business should also step up. “You need a high-level meeting with the top corporate heads in Mumbai where you can say: ‘What can you take responsibility for?’” says Chaturvedi.

One key lies in enforcement: stubble burning, for example, is a punishable offence. Thermal power plants and dust-creating businesses like brick kilns and the stone-crushing industry need to be made to comply with legislation. Officials might also focus on measures such as repairing roads to ensure vehicles do not throw up dust. Garbage should not be dumped and burnt.

In Delhi and 12 other north Indian cities, a programme targeting “dispersed sources” of pollution uses surveyors contracted by municipal authorities to identify sources of dust or illegal waste dumping and act. An IIT Delhi study found a 15-26 per cent reduction in PM2.5 levels, a dangerous particulate matter which penetrates the bloodstream and lungs, in areas where it was implemented.

In the past, Indian governments have shown themselves willing to shoulder big projects, such as Modi’s Swachh Bharat (“Clean India”) campaign which built more than 100mn toilets. Tackling air pollution requires a similar mission-like approach — and a big push from the top. Delhi’s suffering residents live in hope that this year’s smog season could prove a tipping point.

john.reed@ft.com

Letter in response to this article:

India’s toxic smog problem has some clear solutions / From Alok Bhargava, Professor, School of Public Policy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, US



Mohammad Shakib lives in two cramped rooms in the rubbish-strewn Mumbai slum of Dharavi along with his wife and newborn son, his parents and two brothers.

But the 32-year-old fruit merchant is dismayed at plans by Indian billionaire Gautam Adani to transform the area into a “world-class” district. The scheme would result in his family’s expulsion and loss of his livelihood, Shakib said. “There’s only one person who will benefit,” he added.

Shakib’s anger reflects growing concern in Dharavi over Adani’s redevelopment plan, which is expected to displace an estimated 700,000 of the roughly 1mn people crammed into what is one of the world’s most densely populated areas.

Adani, a powerful tycoon widely thought to have close ties to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, won a contract in 2022 to remake the roughly 600-acre slum, which sits on prime real estate in India’s overcrowded financial capital in the western state of Maharashtra.

But Dharavi’s future has become a political flashpoint ahead of state elections this week. Opposition parties trying to wrest back control of Maharashtra from an alliance led by Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party have vowed to scrap Adani’s redevelopment contract, which they allege was wrongly awarded.

“This government handed over Dharavi to Adani,” Rahul Gandhi, India’s most prominent opposition leader, told a rally last week. Gandhi has accused Modi of enriching cronies such as Adani, whose business interests have expanded in step with the prime minister’s ambitious nation-building plans.

“They got airports, ports, roads, and now they are getting Dharavi,” Gandhi said.

Adani has denied benefiting from government favouritism, and supporters of the project say that if it proceeds successfully it can become a global model for slum redevelopment.

Dharavi was the “most complex” part of a wider overhaul of Mumbai’s strained infrastructure, said one person familiar with the government plans for the revamp, which they estimated would take seven years or more and cost Adani at least $4bn.

“If a man like Adani cannot do it, then I don’t think anyone can in the same model,” the person said.

A migrant settlement on the fringes of colonial Bombay in the late 1800s, the area has been enveloped by Mumbai’s explosive growth. Today it is just a stone’s throw from the Bandra Kurla Complex, a modern business district home to banks, diplomatic missions and gleaming arts and convention centres owned by Mukesh Ambani, Asia’s wealthiest businessman.

But Mumbai’s reinvention has hardly touched Dharavi, the famous setting for the 2008 hit film Slumdog Millionaire.

Resistance from residents along with bureaucratic and political inertia has for decades stymied efforts to redevelop the area, a maze of brick and corrugated-iron shacks mixed with small workshops where workers toil to recycle plastics or churn out pottery or leather products.

In 2022, a BJP-led political alliance won control of Maharashtra’s government and issued a new tender to remodel Dharavi after an earlier redevelopment deal was cancelled by the previous administration.

Adani’s conglomerate, which also runs Mumbai’s airport and distributes electricity to the city, won the tender with a $619mn offer, more than 2.5 times the next highest bid. The group has an 80 per cent stake in the project, with the remainder held by the state.

Seclink Technologies, a Dubai-based consortium that initially won the cancelled 2018 tender, has challenged the new contract, alleging in the High Court of Bombay that the process “unlawfully” favoured Adani by raising bidders’ net worth requirements and limiting consortium members.

The Maharashtra government has said no contract had been agreed with Seclink, that a new tender was ordered because the financial and economic situation had been changed by factors including the coronavirus pandemic, and that the consortium was not excluded.

“It’s a type of match fixing,” said Raju Korde, a lawyer who grew up in the slum and is a founding member of the Save Dharavi Movement. “Was this project for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of Dharavi or was it for making Adani more prosperous?”

Adani Group and the state authorities have denied any wrongdoing. The conglomerate and Maharashtra’s Slum Rehabilitation Authority did not respond to requests for comment.

Adani, who worked as a teenager in Mumbai’s diamond trade in the late 1970s, wrote last year that he “was mesmerised by the industrious chaos that I saw in Dharavi’s alleys” and was inspired by “the community’s struggle for survival”.

“When this opportunity to renew Dharavi came calling, I seized it with both hands,” he wrote, promising to provide “eligible residents” with gas, water, electricity, sanitation, recreational facilities and a “world-class hospital”.

A person close to Adani said the tycoon saw Dharavi as a legacy project. “It’s not going to make us a lot of money,” the person said. “[The area] is more tightly packed than a can of sardines . . . the challenge is incredible.”

But the redevelopment master plan has yet to be made public and uncertainty is mounting among Dharavi residents.

The 2022 tender states that only households able to prove residency pre-2000 will be rehoused for free in a 350 sq ft apartment in the area.

Many residents with documents proving their pre-2000 residence are keen to take up Adani’s promise of more spacious new housing in the area.

“Development is good,” said Sheikh Shahin Banu, a 53-year-old widow who depends on her son’s wage as a leather worker and wants to stay on in Dharavi. “It’s centrally located . . . all of my relatives are here.”

For the majority who like Mohammad Shakib face relocation, Maharashtra’s government recently approved the acquisition of nearly 400 acres of land on a salt pan and garbage dump in Mumbai’s north-eastern suburbs, an area that Vinod Shetty, a human rights lawyer, said was “not habitable”.

The scheme was in effect “wiping the slate clean” in a valuable area near the BKC business district and then “handing it over to somebody who’s close to the government”, Shetty said.

Adani’s surveys to verify residents’ residency have “met with a lot of hostility”, said the person close to the group, who also accused some people of falsifying documents to try to show they lived there before 2000.

Many in Mumbai are deeply sceptical about Adani’s intentions, including Shaikh Mobinuddin, a businessman who grew up in Dharavi and owns a number of shops there.

“He will make people ineligible and the land will be resold to the Mumbai free market,” Mobinuddin said.



BrewDog, the UK’s biggest craft beer brand, has closed its two flagship Mumbai bars, in a blow to its plans to scale up in the country and tap the growing number of drinkers.

The BrewDog bar in Bandra West, a suburb that is home to many Bollywood stars and is known for its liberal nightlife, as well as its bar in the office district of Lower Parel, have been closed since the summer.

The company’s logos have also been taken down from the locked-up properties, according to checks by the Financial Times. BrewDog now has only two bars open in India, having first set up there in 2021.

Pratekk Chturvedi, a director of Aloha International Brewpub which operates the BrewDog India franchise, told the FT that the landlords had wanted the bars to close and that the franchise operator had filed legal cases to reclaim “business losses that we are facing”. BrewDog declined to comment.

Even before the closures, BrewDog had struggled with obtaining consistent beer supplies in India’s financial capital. Chturvedi, who is also chief operating officer of BrewDog India, said that the brewer had also faced issues with the department that regulates and taxes alcohol in Mumbai’s home state of Maharashtra.

“Mumbai was an extremely important market for us, it is ground zero, it is where we began,” Chturvedi said. “I am fairly certain that in the coming time, maybe in the next, say, three to four quarters, we will find a new location and start up in [Mumbai] again.”

BrewDog’s Mumbai setback illustrates the difficulties faced by alcoholic drinks companies in India, even as drinking has become more acceptable in a country where it has typically been frowned upon and consumption heavily regulated.

In April, a brewery owned by Heineken’s Indian business, United Breweries — which is the country’s biggest beermaker and the producer of Kingfisher lager — was raided by authorities in the southern state of Karnataka.

United Breweries’ chief executive Vivek Gupta told the FT that “excessive” regulatory action and the patchwork of different rules across India’s states and territories, some of which prohibit the sale of alcohol, were hurting sales in a “priority market”.

The closures are also a setback to BrewDog’s plans for overseas expansion. Only last year, it announced plans to open 100 bars in India over the next decade.

Chturvedi said the Mumbai closures were only a blip in BrewDog’s India plans. He added that the local franchise was operationally profitable and would focus on the country’s north where it had two bars in the cities of Gurugram and Amritsar.

“We are looking at aggressive expansion in the coming year . . . we are looking at one opening every quarter,” Chturvedi said, adding that a new bar would open in Chandigarh in the coming weeks.

“India is a booming craft beer market,” he said. “It is a very lucrative, very profitable market.”

James Watt, BrewDog’s founder, stepped down as chief executive in May after he was accused of overseeing a “toxic” workplace culture. In its most recent results, the company reported an almost doubling of losses to £59.2mn in 2023.



Britain is on course to fall far short of its targets for developing new solar and wind power despite the government’s efforts to lift barriers and boost the industry, according to new analysis.

Practical hurdles and uncertainty over market reforms mean that the UK is set to miss its clean energy targets by 32 gigawatts, enough to power tens of millions of homes, said consultancy Cornwall Insight in a report.

The findings are a blow to Sir Keir Starmer’s government, which has made decarbonising Britain’s electricity system by 2030 a key goal.

Tom Musker, modelling manager at Cornwall Insight, said the analysis “underscored the urgent need to address both the operational and investment barriers slowing renewables growth.

“Timely investment in infrastructure, clarity on market reforms, and support for innovative project delivery are vital to unlocking the UK’s clean energy potential,” he added.

In order to meet its target of a clean electricity system in five years, the government said last year it wanted the UK by 2030 to have 43-50GW of offshore wind, 27-29GW of onshore wind and 45-47GW of solar power.

At present, the UK has 14.7GW of offshore wind, 15.7GW of onshore wind and 17.6GW of solar power, according to government and industry figures.

However, Cornwall Insight forecast there would be only 37GW of offshore wind, 17GW of onshore wind and 29GW of solar by 2030 — leaving a combined shortfall of 32GW.

Ministers have taken steps to boost conditions for the industry, including lifting restrictions on onshore wind in England, awarding planning permission to new solar farms and increasing the budget for subsidies for renewable energy.

The National Energy System Operator has also acted to cut the time it takes to connect to Britain’s massively oversubscribed electricity grid, including pausing new applications in order to tackle the backlog.

Last week the government also confirmed it would cut the number of times opponents to an infrastructure project can apply for judicial review, after concerns that objections from nearby residents risked delaying new projects.

But Kate Mulvany, principal consultant at Cornwall Insight, said even with such measures “it’s fair to say we are not there yet”.

“The messaging has been strong; there were some very definite decisions during the first month in office,” she added. “But that isn’t the same as getting wholesale planning reform agreed, and given the contentiousness of wholesale planning reform, there is a degree of caution around how rapidly that will ultimately be delivered.”

Developers are also cautious about investing while waiting for the government to decide on whether to push ahead with major potential changes to the electricity market, such as splitting it into different pricing zones, Mulvany added.

To make its forecasts, Cornwall takes into account a range of factors including market sentiment and project announcements. In a similar forecast this time last year, it predicted Britain would have 17GW of onshore wind, 31GW of offshore wind and 21GW of solar by 2030.

Last year’s figures for offshore wind and solar were lower than its new predictions, suggesting the government’s policies will have made some difference.

However, Cornwall cautioned that the forecasts were not directly comparable because of changes to the way it carried out its modelling.

The Department for Energy Security and Net Zero said it did “not recognise” the forecasts, pointing to NESO analysis that showed “clean power by 2030 is achievable”.

“We are cleaning up a dysfunctional grid system to connect the most important projects, speeding up decisions on planning permission and expanding the renewable auction process to stop delays, unlocking growth”.



Good morning. What should we be talking about in the wake of the Southport murders?

On Friday, I set out why Axel Rudakubana did not fit into either of the British state’s models for dealing with people who might end committing crimes such as his. For people with specific mental illnesses, hopefully they end up being detained under the terms of the Mental Health Act. And for people who would kill for a cause, hopefully they are spotted by Prevent and dissuaded from supporting or committing terrorist acts. (Or they are stopped and arrested before carrying out a terrorist plot.)

Whether the UK’s approach to identifying and combating terrorism should change as a result, and if so how, are going to be a topic of serious debate over the coming days, weeks and months. We expect the imminent publication of the review into when Rudakubana came into contact with Prevent and what the counter-terrorism programme could have done differently. I will set out my thinking on it once I’ve digested the report.

For now I want to talk about the arguments advanced by the leader of the opposition, Kemi Badenoch, that what we really should be talking about in the wake of these murders is “integration”, partly because some of what she is missing is important to my concerns about the broader criticisms being made of the UK’s Prevent programme. Some more on that below.

Axel Rudakubana was born and raised in the UK. His parents, who were Tutsis who had left Rwanda before the genocide, were Christians (like 92 per cent of people in Rwanda). They were both churchgoers. As an 11-year-old, he appeared in a commercial for Children in Need dressed as Doctor Who. But as he entered his teenage years, something changed. He became obsessed with violence. He came into contact with various bits of the state, none of which spotted the danger that he posed.

So when Kemi Badenoch says “it is absurd that we are debating online knife sales more than we are integration and how we safeguard our societies from ideologies and violence”, it is hard, frankly, to see how that relates to this case.

In terms of the broader question of “how do we keep British citizens safe from terror”, yes. According to the most recent data release, there were 234 people in prison in Great Britain for terrorism-connected offences. Of those, 65 per cent are categorised as holding Islamist-extremist views, 27 per cent are categorised as following extreme rightwing ideologies. The remainder hold “Other” ideologies — mostly causes that have been the inspiration for terrorism in the recent past, such as animal rights. Their threat has, for the moment, been pretty comprehensively dismantled by counter-terrorism police and the security services.

Safeguarding the UK from ideologically motivated terrorism is a much bigger deal and challenge than random acts of violence motivated by obsession with violence, at least at the moment. Identifying and tackling problems of ideology is both what Prevent is set up to do, but it is also how we distinguish between terrorism and all other forms of crime.

And indeed, one important thing that we need to balance when we consider how and if the UK’s approach to countering terror and extremism should change is whether any alterations would damage our efforts against these much larger threats. (That, and other topics, is the subject of a must-read piece by the UK’s independent reviewer of anti-terrorism legislation, Jonathan Hall, which you can read here.)

But in terms of the specifics of this case, no. Actually “just how hard should we make it for the rest of us to buy knives?” is a relevant policy debate. “What does the UK do well and badly in terms of integrating people into the country?” isn’t. Badenoch was pressed on the topic by the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg yesterday and she gave the following answer (emphasis mine):

I am really not sure where Badenoch has got this idea from: Rudakubana had materials about genocides and atrocities, yes. The more than 164,000 pieces of material he had ranged from Gaza, to Grozny, to Iraq, to the genocide in Rwanda and the Holocaust. I suppose some of that could be categorised as “white genocide” but Badenoch seems to have unearthed a motive and a consistency to Rudakubana’s interests that neither the Crown Prosecution Service nor the police have. (Over on Bluesky, Sunder Katwala offers a plausible theory as to the source of Badenoch’s belief.)

When pressed by Kuenssberg on where she had the evidence for her claims about integration, Badenoch responded:

But Badenoch’s background is not similar to Rudakubana. She was born in the UK (in an era when being born in the UK still gave you an automatic right to citizenship) but she spent the first 16 years of her life in Nigeria. Rudakubana was born in the UK and grew up in the UK. These backgrounds are about as far apart as well, the 2,000 or so miles separating Nigeria from Rwanda.

This is part of what looks to be a pattern: that Badenoch does not familiarise herself with the particulars of a policy row or a subject but defaults to what her prior convictions tell her, regardless of whether they fit the facts or not.

I think that her failure to do the reading also explains this Guardian scoop. In 2015, when Badenoch was a member of the Greater London Authority, she was one of the co-authors of a report that criticised Prevent, suggesting that the programme could alienate communities. Such terms are near-identical to the ones she now castigates Keir Starmer and Yvette Cooper for signing up to. (She said on X last week: “When the Conservatives were trying to toughen the Prevent anti-extremism programme, [Keir] Starmer and [Yvette] Cooper were running for office on manifestos worried about Prevent ‘alienating communities’.”)

I don’t think that her failure to write a dissenting opinion, as one other member of that GLA committee did, is because her “true” opinions are closer to Labour’s 2019 manifesto than she lets on. I think it’s because in 2015 she didn’t do the reading, just as she has yet to demonstrate a grip on a topic at Prime Minister’s Questions. This is obviously a problem because our system works best when the leader of the opposition is across the detail of what the government is doing.

But it is particularly important on this topic, because the specifics of this case are so unlike most of the threats the UK faces. When the government proposes some potentially far-reaching changes to our response to terrorism works, the leader of the opposition really needs to be across the facts of this specific set of crimes to do her job properly.

For reasons I don’t fully understand, when I try and read a grown-up novel in January and February, my brain revolts: I read slowly, fitfully and there is no pleasure in it. I used to fight against this but the only consequence was to prolong the problem. So in the first two months of the year, I either read non-fiction or children’s literature. At the moment I am rereading what I think is actually my favourite of Salman Rushdie’s many excellent novels, Haroun and the Sea of Stories, one of two novels he wrote for his children.



The writer is director-general of the British Chambers of Commerce

This is a difficult time for British business, but the economy is not on its knees and decisive government action can still lift the gloom. The challenges we face are well understood. Rising employer costs, including the increase in national insurance contributions, are squeezing margins. Post-Brexit customs arrangements continue to create complexity for companies trading with the EU.

The British Chambers of Commerce quarterly economic survey — the largest poll of business sentiment since October’s Budget — found confidence at its lowest level since autumn 2022. Companies need ministers to provide a clear pathway to sustainable economic growth and one of the keys to this is investment in infrastructure. The evidence is clear: well-planned infrastructure projects not only create jobs, they also generate lasting economic benefits that hugely benefit regions and often the whole country.

Consider Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR). This potentially transformative project — a modern railway between Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds and more — exemplifies the multiplying potential of infrastructure investment. The link will do more than simply connect these cities: it will serve as a powerful economic catalyst, injecting £118bn into the northern economy by 2050. Through increased capacity and reduced journey times, it will forge stronger business connections and expand labour markets, creating opportunities for millions.

But the benefits stretch further. NPR and other projects like it are a massive stimulus through the supply chains of any local economy. They support the obvious industries — construction, manufacturing and logistics — as well as retail, hospitality for visiting workers and tech support.

The returns on such investments are compelling. Take the Ely and Haughley junction improvements, which promise to deliver nearly £5 in economic benefits for every £1 invested — a return that would impress any business leader.

In aviation, Gatwick’s Northern Runway Project demonstrates how private investment can drive public benefit, with £2.2bn of private capital creating 14,000 new jobs and contributing £1bn annually to the local economy. The recent announcement by the chancellor of support for this project — alongside expansion at Luton and a third runway at Heathrow — are big promises and show a government unafraid to take difficult decisions to deliver growth.

We applaud this and welcome planned limits on spurious lawfare that allows vested interests to seemingly delay every proposal. Judicial review is too often a tool for the few to stand in the way of the interests of the many.

But the battle is far from won. The government must now deliver on its promises. Because it isn’t just transport projects affected right now. Every day wasted is another solar farm pushed back and another high-voltage undersea cable becoming that much more expensive.

Energy infrastructure is crucial to our economic future. The Sizewell C nuclear reactor represents more than just power generation. It embodies economic regeneration and a vote of confidence in the UK, 25,000 construction jobs and opportunities across the supply chain.

Economic growth and meeting net zero targets are not a zero-sum game. Strategic investment in energy infrastructure has the unique potential to benefit the entire country, while helping to meet our climate goals. In the long term, we will benefit from cheaper, more secure supplies — but only if we build capacity now.

Our international competitors are not standing still. To avoid being left behind, the UK needs streamlined planning processes and stable policy frameworks to encourage private investment. The business case is clear: strategic infrastructure investment is not an expense — it’s a downpayment on our collective future. There is no time to waste.



UK banks have urged the Bank of England to dilute its plans for handling failing lenders, arguing that they go beyond equivalent rules in the US or the EU, and will impose “significant costs” on the sector.

The City of London’s clash with the central bank comes as the government is pressing regulators to do more to revive economic growth by slashing the bureaucratic burden faced by businesses.

Trade body UK Finance said the BoE would “create capital instabilities” and be “burdensome” for the sector if it gives itself extra powers to wipe out a special form of debt that is designed to be written-off during a crisis.

The lobby group’s response to the BoE, seen by the Financial Times, said the central bank should raise thresholds for which banks need such loss-absorbing debt more than it is currently planning. Failure to do so would be “a disincentive to investors” and harm the sector’s competitiveness, it said. The thresholds are set by asset size and number of active accounts. Financiers estimate that at least five fast-growing banks, such as Revolut, are likely to soon be caught by the requirement to issue the loss-absorbing debt.

Under rules introduced after the 2008 financial crisis, banks above a certain size need an extra layer of debt that regulators can wipe out or convert to equity in a crisis, known as MREL — minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities. This is designed to avoid governments ever needing to use taxpayer funds to rescue failed lenders.

The rules came under fresh scrutiny after the BoE intervened to transfer the UK subsidiary of failed US lender Silicon Valley Bank to HSBC over a weekend in 2023.

In response, the government introduced new legislation allowing the BoE to use funds from the sector’s deposit insurance scheme to finance the transfer of a failed bank to a rival.

The BoE said in October it planned to introduce a “contractual trigger” into loss-absorbing debt that allowed officials to wipe it out if the foreign parent of a British bank is put into resolution, even if the UK subsidiary remains operationally viable.

UK Finance said regulators in other jurisdictions “have not taken such an expansive approach to the use of contractual triggers” and warned the plans would create “significant challenges” for lenders.

The sector fears that it would be costly to rewrite the terms of billions pounds worth of loss-absorbing debt to give the BoE this extra power, while warning it could change the accounting treatment of the securities. UK Finance said the central bank should at least exclude existing debt.

In October, the BoE said it planned to raise the size threshold above which banks need to raise such debt from total assets of £15bn-£25bn to £20bn-£30bn. It also said banks caught by a separate threshold based on the number of active accounts would no longer have to raise this loss-absorbing debt.

UK Finance called for the central bank to go further by increasing the size threshold to £40bn-£50bn to take account of inflation since the rule was introduced in 2015. It also called for the active account threshold to be scrapped or raised from 40,000-80,000 to 100,000-150,000.

Revolut, which was granted a UK banking licence last year, increased its total assets from £14.1bn in 2022 to £17.4bn in 2023. The bank declined to comment.

UK Finance said its proposals were designed to “reflect technological advances and consumer preferences, alongside regulatory reforms in the past few years and to be consistent with major international jurisdictions such as the EU and US”.

The BoE said the consultation ended on Friday and it was considering responses.



The writer is senior vice-president and economist at Pimco

UK government bond yields are off to a volatile start to the year. After rising sharply in the first two weeks — by roughly 0.3 percentage points for five-year gilts — they have now returned to where they started. While there is noise around fiscal policy, the moves have largely been driven by global factors. US bond yields have exhibited similar volatility.

Bond markets in the UK may be more sensitive to fiscal credibility following the turbulence after the 2022 Liz Truss budget. But fiscal sustainability in the UK does not significantly differ from some peers, including France, which has a higher fiscal deficit and more rapidly rising debt.

The UK remains an outlier, however, on the other side of the policy ledger. The Bank of England’s policy rate of 4.75 per cent is now the highest among large developed countries. That is weighing on activity. Economic growth has stagnated since the summer, and labour demand has fallen sharply. Inflation has eased in the past year and is now in the “two-point-something” range, close to the BoE’s target of 2 per cent. It’s no surprise, then, that at its December meeting the BoE repeated its intention to lower its policy rate ahead.

But how low will it go? Unlike many other central banks, the BoE has not provided clear guidance. Estimating the equilibrium rate, where monetary policy is neither tight or loose, requires a great deal of humility. It depends on factors affecting the supply and demand for capital, which naturally change over time.

A simple way to estimate it is by looking at economic growth. High-growth countries attract more investment and encourage less saving, pushing rates higher. By this measure, the market’s expected long-term interest rate in the UK seems high. Productivity has only increased by 0.5 per cent (annualised) since the pandemic began, slightly below its pre-pandemic rate and less than a third of that in the US — and actual productivity may be even lower owing to ongoing issues with the labour force survey data, which probably under-reports employment levels.

Inflation puts upward pressure on interest rates, too. Although core inflation in the UK — at 3.2 per cent over the past year — remains slightly higher than in most other developed countries, it’s trending down. Underlying price pressures, excluding one-time tax shocks, are easing, especially in services. Based on medium-term inflation expectations, the central bank’s credibility is intact and we see few reasons why the UK will have structurally higher inflation than in other countries.

Yet markets remain sceptical, expecting only a few cuts ahead to a final destination of around 4 per cent. This outlook may reflect concerns that increased government spending could lead to higher inflation. Markets might also question the government’s commitment to its new fiscal rules, given its recent history of adjustments. Like Italy, but unlike most other large, developed countries, the UK borrows money at a much higher interest rate than its underlying economic growth rate, worsening debt dynamics.

We have a more benign central view for inflation, even if we acknowledge that fiscal policy adds uncertainty. Despite increased government spending, taxes will rise too, leaving fiscal policy tight. The net effect will probably drag on activity and employment, as already evident in recent surveys. Firms may pass some of the National Insurance hike on to consumers, but that would be a price level adjustment — like a value added tax or tariff hike. Typically, that is something central banks look through. And we would be very surprised if the government did not adjust taxation or spending to meet its fiscal rules, given the bond market’s recent volatility.

As such, we expect UK gilt yields to decline. The five-year gilt yield is now only a fraction lower than that in the US and we expect it to fall below the US level over time, similar to the five years before the pandemic. While the risks of rates going higher remain — near-term inflation expectations have edged higher in recent months — there are more reasons to expect rates to fall, given increased global trade uncertainty, tight fiscal policy and a generally soft growth outlook.

As for the policy rate, our internal models point to a neutral interest rate of 2 to 3 per cent in the UK. Even if the BoE is cautious with rate cuts in the first half of this year, we see room for the rate to fall by more than the market expects. The BoE might eventually follow other central banks, including the European Central Bank, Bank of Canada, Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Riksbank in pivoting to faster cuts.



The early weeks of 2025 have been awash with news headlines about a bond market sell-off. However, investment platform AJ Bell points out that there are always two sides to every market story — and the rise in yields as bond prices fall means retail investors’ appetite for UK government bonds is picking up.

In January, the UK Treasury sold £4.25bn-worth of five-year gilts at an average yield of 4.49 per cent, with £12.74bn-worth of bids received. AJ Bell customers were among those fuelling this strong demand in the auction.

And they were not alone. At the end of last year, many analysts were pointing out that the time had come to invest in bonds. The recovery from 2022, the worst year for bonds, has been robust. “Some high yield managers have been doing as well as global equities over the past two years,” points out Tideway Wealth’s investment director Nick Gait.

Bonds can offer an attractive income that is regular, predictable and contractual. But they are also good portfolio diversifiers, able to offset poor performance when equity markets decline in value — and some wealth managers already believe the bull market in equities is looking a bit long in the tooth.

Tideway Wealth even has some clients whose self-invested personal pensions (Sipps) are 100 per cent invested in fixed income. The rationale is that, while the US-led bull market in equities may continue, the downside risks are increasing. Bonds with real yields may be a good alternative for older investors — or those in pension drawdown.

“The higher government bond yields go, the greater the competition against equities for investors’ money,” says Dan Coatsworth, investment analyst at AJ Bell. “At some point, investors will take the view that they can get a decent yield from bonds for lower risk compared with investing in stocks.”

Another factor that has made fixed income look more attractive is a slowdown in inflation after years of rapidly rising consumer prices.

“Inflation moving from a high rate to a low or normal rate is not something we have experienced in a generation, so investors have forgotten just how attractive this environment can be for fixed income,” notes April LaRusse, head of investment specialists at Insight Investment.

Mateusz Malek, head of bond research at Killik & Co adds: “Although we have recently entered the period when inflation is expected to reaccelerate slightly, overall, it is forecast to remain contained and below the level of yields offered by bonds.” Interest rate cuts could also boost bond returns.

However, Thomas Becket, co-chief investment officer of Canaccord Genuity Wealth, thinks gilts have been selling off partly because of a repricing of UK interest rate expectations.

This wobble in the market also serves as a reminder that bonds are not risk free. “Investors are worried about extra borrowing by the UK government to achieve its plans, and the uncertain outlook for the economy given widespread pessimism by businesses and consumers,” says Coatsworth.

However, some view the recent yield movements as largely an overreaction to global political uncertainty.

“We believe gilt yields will fall over 2025/26, as the Bank of England unwinds their current restrictive stance, and will eventually reach a level consistent with the fundamentals of the UK economy,” says Matt Tickle chief investment officer at Barnett Waddingham.

In the UK, private investors can access gilts and T-bills, but investing in corporate bonds is heavily regulated and limited only to professionals. Some wealth managers, such as Killik, will build portfolios of corporate bonds for their clients. Others, like Tideway, use professionally managed bond funds, such as Royal London UK Government Bond, or, for investment-grade credit, the Man Group Sterling Corporate Bond. “We have spoken to our bond fund managers in the wake of recent movements and they are optimistic of high single-digit returns again in 2025,” says Tideway’s Gait.

Even so, investors should always be aware of the two core risks: duration (the measure of interest rate risk the portfolio aims to take) and credit quality (how much risk you’re willing to take to achieve returns).

“Having any certainty over the longer end of the yield curve is perilously hard,” Becket says. “There is no clarity on the outlook for any of interest rates, inflation and government policy improving.”

Gait adds: “The greater than 5 per cent return now available on long duration gilts is clearly attracting retail investors, particularly on low coupon bonds where gains will be tax free. But many, I suspect, will underestimate the risks when you buy longer duration.”

The most popular gilts with retail investors using the Interactive Investor platform at the end of 2024 included T26 and TN28, maturing at the end of January 2026 and January 2028. Because these gilts have coupons of 0.125 per cent and trade below their par value, most of the return comes from the £100 redemption value of each gilt on maturity, which is capital gains tax free — making them popular with investors holding them outside of tax-advantaged individual savings accounts, or SIPPs.

“Gilt prices move when market conditions change, but gilts maturing soon are less volatile than longer-dated gilts,” says Sam Benstead, fixed income lead at Interactive Investor. “If you want a near-guaranteed return, then direct gilts are a good option, particularly bonds maturing soon.”



The US owner of Birmingham City football club has said the UK can unlock a wave of inbound investment “incredibly quickly” if the government makes tangible progress on its pledge to speed up planning approvals.

Tom Wagner, co-founder of Knighthead Capital, told the Financial Times that Britain’s record of under-investment and slow growth could be turned around if Labour made good on its vow to remove obstacles to development.

“There are lots of projects that we are looking at in the UK that we’d love to pursue if the process can be made easier,” he said. “And we’re not the only ones. If things change by just a small amount, there’ll be a lot of capital inflow and a lot of excess growth.”

Knighthead has acquired more than 60 acres of land around Birmingham City’s stadium since taking control of the third-tier team in 2023. The New York-based hedge fund plans to build a new 60,000-seat venue as part of a large £3bn regeneration project involving housing, retail and entertainment space in one of the UK’s poorest neighbourhoods.

The firm manages about $9bn and has yet to submit formal planning applications for the project, which hinges on local authorities agreeing to set up new transport links. A proposed extension of Birmingham’s tram network through the area has been repeatedly delayed over several years.

Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer has sought in recent weeks to prop up business confidence in the sluggish UK economy, as increased public borrowing and sterling weakness prompted warnings from billionaire hedge fund manager Ray Dalio that the country was heading towards a “debt death spiral”.

While Starmer wooed business before taking power in July, promising to “bulldoze through barriers to British success”, including with an overhaul of planning rules, relations were damaged by a £40bn tax-raising Budget that weighed heavily on companies.

Wagner said he was still “very bullish” about the UK’s long-term prospects, saying the country had a “highly educated, diverse, dynamic economy” and the “single most exciting city in the world” with the capital London. He conceded that Knighthead’s bet on the UK appeared “contrarian”, but that broader “animal spirits” could return swiftly.

“That can change incredibly quickly if the government begins making progress on its initiatives, which I believe they will do. You’ll see that turn. Once you start seeing some positive momentum, that leads to more positive momentum.”

With Donald Trump’s return to the White House expected to usher in a period of heightened economic competition and increase the gravitational pull of the US, Wagner said the onus was on governments around the world to make decisions that lowered barriers to investment.

“Capital is highly mobile, it will find the path of least resistance,” he said. “When governments begin making things harder, vis-à-vis other jurisdictions into which that capital may flow, they will suffer.”

In the UK, Wagner said planning remained the biggest obstacle to investment. “The solutions aren’t that hard to get right. And when I see relatively easy solutions that are in the way of progress and capital investment, I tend to think that the right path will be found,” he said.

Labour has led an overhaul of England’s national planning policy and proposed to limit the influence of local committees, as well as curtail attempts to block development through the courts. But experts have warned the changes could take years to take full effect.

Wagner, a former Goldman Sachs distressed debt trader, said Birmingham city council’s financial woes — it was declared bankrupt last year and forced to make drastic cuts to spending — had “very little” impact on Knighthead’s plans so far, and the firm was continuing to buy up land in an area just over a mile away from the city centre.

“We’re hearing all the right things in our conversations. What we need to see now is a bit more action,” he said, adding that he wanted to see real progress this calendar year on the potential extension of the city’s Metro tramline to the site of the proposed new stadium. “We’re confident that they’ll do what needs to be done. If they can’t for this project, well then maybe I’d be more pessimistic on the UK economy more broadly.”

Knighthead’s plans also rely on something even harder to predict: sporting success. Birmingham City were relegated to League One in their first season under US ownership, but are now top of the table of English football’s third tier.

The team are still getting average attendances at home games of more than 26,000, higher than several Premier League sides, while former NFL star Tom Brady is now an adviser and shareholder at the club.

Wagner said the goal was to take Birmingham City back to the Premier League and stay there for a “long period of time”, and in the process rekindle the fierce local rivalry with Aston Villa. “It’s an incredibly ambitious and probably a bit cocky thing to say, but, why bother if that’s not the objective?”



Workers at military contractor Serco are set to strike over a deal being negotiated by the company and the UK’s Royal Navy, which they say could cut “essential” support for Britain’s nuclear deterrent.

Trade union Prospect said up to a quarter of Serco’s UK marine workforce will walk out for a day next month.

The union wants the company to pause discussions on a 10-year contract to replace Serco’s existing £1.2bn deal with the navy that is expiring this year.

Union representatives told the Financial Times they were concerned that the new contract could lead to cuts at Serco’s marine business, which employs about 600 people.Under the current contract, Serco operates 91 vessels that provide services such as transporting personnel and moving larger ships to and from land, including the UK’s nuclear submarines and aircraft carriers.

Prospect said it was told in a meeting with officials last year that savings of £250mn were being targeted over the duration of the new contract and up to 96 fewer Serco employees would be required.

“The services covered by this contract are essential for national security and for the continuous at-sea deterrent,” said Sue Ferns, senior deputy general secretary at Prospect. “Pausing now and reconsidering will avoid a costly and dangerous mistake.”

The UK’s “continuous at-sea deterrent” involves a rotating fleet of nuclear-armed ballistic missile submarines, with at least one submarine at sea at any given time.

The government has said this provides “a credible and effective response option to extreme aggression”.

But Prospect, which has more than 150 members in Serco’s marine business, said it was concerned the company would struggle to provide a continuous service towing submarines and other navy vessels if the cuts went ahead.The union also warned that it would be difficult to get more staff at a later stage if the navy realised it did not have enough people because it can take years to train replacements.

It said 87 per cent of members who participated in a ballot voted to strike.“If it continues as planned [this] will mean the loss of vital jobs which it will not be then possible to replace when the navy inevitably realises that it has made a mistake,” Ferns said.The navy services provided by Serco were privatised through a 15-year contract worth £1bn from 2007, with the company getting a 27-month extension worth £200mn in December 2022.

Negotiations for the new contract are being finalised as the new Labour government is enforcing spending controls to ease pressure on its finances. The Ministry of Defence asked major suppliers in August to identify opportunities for budget cuts.

Serco said discussions on the new contract were “ongoing” and that “the level of service we provide on our current contract remains unchanged”.

The MoD did not comment on the new contract but said operational priorities would “not be affected during the strike”.

This article has been updated to amend details of a meeting involving Prospect last year about Serco’s proposed new contract with the Royal Navy.



Rachel Reeves will on Monday call on Labour MPs to back her plans to boost growth, including a highly contentious proposal to expand Heathrow airport, as a survey pointed to new signs of private sector pessimism about the UK economy.

The chancellor is facing criticism from some in her party for allegedly siding with business over consumers and for backing a third runway at Britain’s busiest airport, amid fears it could hit the government’s environmental objectives.

But Reeves will seek to face down her critics when she meets the Parliamentary Labour party on Monday, telling MPs that without growth she will be unable to fund the improvements to public services they want.

Her intervention comes as a new survey by the CBI employers’ group found that private sector companies expect another significant fall in activity over the next three months, with a weighted balance of -22 per cent.

According to the CBI’s latest Growth Indicator, expectations are broadly unchanged from December, which were the weakest in more than two years, with particular gloom over the consumer services sector at -49 per cent.

Reeves, who met investors at the World Economic Forum in Davos this week, will also spend the next two days meeting chief executives in an attempt to persuade them that she has a credible growth strategy.

Many business leaders fear her policies, including a £25bn increase in employers’ national insurance contributions, have contributed to a stagnating economy.

On Sunday Reeves in effect confirmed that she would endorse the construction of a third runway at Heathrow when she makes a “growth” speech on Wednesday, insisting the aviation industry was becoming greener.

Asked about claims by London mayor Sir Sadiq Khan that the policy would hit clean air and net zero targets, Reeves said: “A lot has changed in terms of aviation.”

She told the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg that more sustainable aviation fuels were becoming available, and that “a third runway will mean that instead of circling London, flights can land at Heathrow”.

Reeves said she had already agreed the expansion of London City and Stansted airports and she is also expected on Wednesday to approve expansion at Gatwick and Luton, marking a huge expansion of London airport capacity.

A third runway was first proposed by the last Labour government in 2003 on economic grounds, but subsequent Conservative administrations tried and failed to progress the scheme.

Khan and environmental groups have long opposed it, citing the UK’s legally binding target to reach net zero carbon emissions. But this week energy secretary Ed Miliband, who threatened to resign over the issue during Gordon Brown’s government, said he would not quit his role if the third runway was approved.

Paul McGuinness, chair of the No Third Runway Coalition, said: “Expansions at other London airports undermine the case for Heathrow’s uniquely complicated and costly third runway, making it an even riskier, if not uninvestable proposition.”

Left-wing Labour MPs are also worried that Reeves is tilting the regulatory landscape in favour of big business and away from consumers, with one saying: “She’s throwing herself at big corporations.”

But the chancellor insisted on Sunday that without some radical changes Britain would have inadequate growth and that the government would fail to meet its target of 1.5mn new homes in this parliament.

“Too often the answer to new development has been ‘no’. But that is the attitude that has stunted economic growth and left working people worse off,” she said. “I don’t believe low growth is our destiny.”

Reeves announced new plans to speed up the construction of new homes near commuter train stations, as part of reforms under a new planning and infrastructure bill.

The Treasury said the new rules would ensure that when developers submit an application for acceptable types of schemes in key areas — such as near commuter transport hubs — the default answer would be “yes”.

Reeves also backed a regeneration project around Old Trafford in Manchester, which has been championed by Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham.

The Treasury said it would see “new housing, commercial and public space as a shining example of the bold pro-development model that will drive growth across the region”.

Manchester United have plans to rebuild or redevelop Old Trafford, which city leaders claim could drive one of the UK’s “biggest ever urban regeneration projects”.

The Premier League club will decide by the end of this season whether to build a new 100,000-capacity ground, creating the country’s biggest stadium, or upgrade and expand the existing one.

Burnham dubbed the proposal “the largest opportunity for urban regeneration” since the 2012 London Olympic Games.



The UK government has revived a strategic plan to build transport links and housing between Oxford and Cambridge, the latest sign that Labour is focusing on high-productivity areas of the economy in its push for growth.

The decision to back the Oxford-Cambridge Arc marks a return to political favour for a scheme that was shelved three years ago after then Conservative prime minister Boris Johnson prioritised “levelling up” poorer regions.

Science secretary Peter Kyle on Monday said the government wanted to double the economic output of the science-rich region that stretches between Britain’s two best-known universities, with the manufacturing and logistics hub of Milton Keynes in between.

“The Oxford-Cambridge Arc is already an engine of prosperity, but we can go even further. We are determined to unleash research and development as a driving force in our mission to grow the economy in every corner of the country,” he said.

No new money was announced for the Arc on Monday. But the government committed in the October Budget to deliver the East West Rail project that will revive the “Varsity” railway, which connected Oxford and Cambridge until it was closed in 1967.

Fast-tracking the scheme, which is inspired by the science clusters of Boston and San Francisco in the US, would add £78bn of GDP to the UK economy by 2035, according to research by consultancy Public First for the Oxford-Cambridge Supercluster Board, which comprises industry and university leaders.

The announcement, which comes ahead of UK chancellor Rachel Reeves’ “growth” speech this week, was welcomed by the vice-chancellors of Oxford and Cambridge universities as well as senior executives at pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca UK and computer chip designer Arm.

Supercluster board chair Andy Williams said its members, “which include some of the world’s largest investors, see extraordinary potential and in this commitment it is abundantly clear that the government does too”.

The original plan was devised in 2017 by the National Infrastructure Commission and was a top priority of successive Conservative governments, most recently coming back into favour under former prime minister Rishi Sunak.

It promised to deliver an extra 1mn homes and 700,000 jobs but met with a fierce political backlash from local groups opposed to new developments.

However, Sir Keir Starmer, prime minister, has signalled he is prepared to confront such objections, promising to construct 1.5mn homes in this parliament and to “put builders not blockers first” to boost the stagnating economy.

Mike Davey, Labour leader of Cambridge City Council, welcomed the backing of the Arc but cautioned it would require investment in more affordable homes, as well as improved water and transport infrastructure.

“The government should learn from the mistakes the Tories made on the Arc — we need to bring local communities with us and they need to see the benefits,” he said.

While praising ministers’ ambition for the Arc, senior executives said the plan would require improvements to infrastructure alongside reforms to deliver faster planning permissions, easier access to global workers and capital.

Oxford and Cambridge have suffered from shortages of water and electricity that have led to environmental regulators temporarily blocking housing and science developments.

Richard O’Boyle, chief executive of Pioneer Group, which runs life sciences campuses, said OxCam could be a big driver of growth “with the right support” but “to fully unlock its potential we need investment, better infrastructure, and policies that support growth”.

In a sign of the difficulties of development in the area, a decision on whether to relocate a sewage works in north Cambridge was delayed for a second time in January, in effect freezing a 5,600-home development.

Nick Pettit, senior partner at real estate adviser Bidwells, said it was an indication of the strength of interest in OxCam that global investors were attracted to the region despite the difficulties with planning and procurement.

“The reality is that small policy changes are all it takes for this region to make an enormous difference to its contribution to national growth,” he added.

The government has said it is committed to investing in regional growth as part of its Industrial Strategy, although offering such high-profile backing to Oxford and Cambridge risks fuelling accusations that the south of England is being favoured in the push for growth.

However, Dan Thorp, chief executive of advocacy group Cambridge Ahead, said backing OxCam was “not a zero-sum game” and Cambridge was working with other groups, such as the Northern Powerhouse Partnership, to create “connected clusters” that shared in growth.

“The big bang benefit for the government’s growth mission can come from linking what happens in OxCam to the rest of the UK,” he added.



In the 20 years since she set up her chain of coffee shops, the business climate has never felt as difficult as it does now, according to Helena Hudson, whose Real Eating Company has 10 outlets in market towns and cathedral cities across south-east England.

Even in prosperous areas, “people are still very much watching the pennies”, she said, leaving her little hope of offsetting a £127,000 rise in her tax bill in April through price rises alone. Nor can Hudson hold down wages, since a minimum-wage increase of 6.7 per cent will apply to many of her staff.

So she is cutting jobs: closing a café in London, making a long-standing manager redundant and asking part-timers to work longer hours or leave, since they will no longer fall below the threshold for employer national insurance contributions. “It’s not what we want to do,” Hudson said.

Businesses across the UK are making similarly uncomfortable choices as they calculate how best to respond to the tax and wage increases announced by Rachel Reeves in the October Budget.

The policies — which the chancellor said would help restore “stability to the public finances” and pay for public services — will sharply increase labour costs, particularly in low-wage sectors such as retail and hospitality.

The question the Bank of England must answer is whether a weaker jobs market will finally bring down wage growth — or whether stubborn pay pressures will persist, keeping inflation above the official 2 per cent target.

There is mounting evidence that employers have cut headcount in the wake of the Budget announcements, with official data showing payroll employment fell in November and December as vacancies kept sliding.

Survey data published on Friday suggested the share of businesses cutting staffing levels was higher in January than at any point since the 2008-09 financial crisis, except the pandemic period.

Liz Martins, economist at HSBC, said the combination of a weaker economy, higher costs and new scope for artificial intelligence-related efficiencies felt “like a perfect storm” for the jobs market.

Last week, retailer J Sainsbury said it was axing 3,000 jobs, from its head office to its in-store cafés, while an executive at Associated British Foods, owner of the low-cost fashion chain Primark, said people were starting to buy fewer clothes because of worries about job security.

But despite such retrenchment, wage growth has accelerated. Data last week showed private sector earnings grew at an annual pace of 6 per cent in the three months to November, excluding bonuses — double the 3 per cent pace the BoE thinks broadly consistent with the inflation target.

One contributing factor, highlighted in a recent trading statement by retailer Next, is that increases in the minimum wage have a lasting “ripple” effect on pay higher up the scale, as employers seek to maintain incentives for promotion to higher grades.

Andrew Wishart, economist at Berenberg bank, described this situation as a “massive headache” for the BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee, which is expected to cut interest rates from 4.75 per cent to 4.5 per cent when it next meets on February 6.

He said the minimum wage was “becoming a serious problem” because it prevented low-wage employers absorbing the £25bn NICs increase by holding down pay.

Yet even as they shed jobs, other businesses would still be able to pass on higher costs to consumers, keeping services price inflation above 4 per cent and pushing headline inflation above 3 per cent later this year.

The BoE, which watches services inflation closely, was still likely to lower interest rates in the short term in order to prevent a “horrible” outcome for workers, but it might need to stop cutting the cost of borrowing in the second half of the year, Wishart said.

Other economists believe wage growth will slow over the course of the year, as companies will no longer fight to recruit higher-paid professionals who cannot wring a salary rise out of their current employer.

Martins of HSBC said that trend was “in the past now”. While April’s changes might lead some companies to raise prices initially, she argued that all the other ways they might respond — replacing workers with AI, squeezing pay, cutting jobs or offshoring work — would eventually lower inflation.

But wage growth may not subside fast enough for the BoE’s comfort.

Four-fifths of employers planned to make lower pay awards this year than in 2024, according to a poll conducted by analysts at Incomes Data Research and published on Monday. Most said the increase in NICs would make them less generous than they otherwise would have been.

But the survey found that more than half of employers who had not yet decided their award expected it to exceed 3 per cent. Where pay deals had been agreed, more than 40 per cent of employees were receiving 4 per cent or more.

“All business surveys illustrate the same conundrum for the MPC. Payroll tax hikes, global uncertainty and tariff threats are driving inflation and output in opposite directions,” said Elliott Jordan-Doak, senior UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics.

This meant that even with growth weak enough to warrant rate cuts, inflation remained strong enough to require caution, he added, noting that tax increases were affecting both jobs and prices more than rate-setters had expected, with little effect on wages.

If this remains the case, unemployment may need to rise further than previously thought for the BoE to keep inflation down.

“Wage growth will take a little longer to come down than the BoE might like, but we think that remaining pressures are being driven by government policy, not a tighter labour market,” Martins said.



One in five UK-listed companies sounded the alarm on profits in 2024, underlining the impact of rising costs and businesses’ reluctance to commit to optional spending.

A total of 19 per cent of London-listed companies issued profit warnings, the third highest proportion this century and exceeded only by the figures in 2001 and 2020 when the dotcom bust and pandemic hurt performance, according to a report published by EY-Parthenon on Monday.

The figures come after S&P Global survey data last week showed that UK businesses were cutting jobs at the fastest pace since the financial crisis, excluding the Covid-19 pandemic.

The bulk of the 2024 profit warnings stemmed from companies’ reluctance to spend money buying goods and services from other businesses, according to EY-Parthenon.

“We don’t expect a huge uptick in insolvency levels in 2025, but we are now seeing more distress, and more stakeholders viewing insolvency processes as a real option,” said Jo Robinson, head of turnaround and restructuring strategy for EY-Parthenon in the UK and Ireland.

The report found that 34 per cent of the warnings cited contract and order cancellations or delays as reasons for reduced profitability, up from about a quarter in 2023.

The companies worst hit included business service providers, industrial suppliers and recruitment companies — sectors vulnerable to corporate customers reducing their spending. Retailers and software and computer groups were also among the worst affected.

A series of high-profile companies warned investors about plummeting profits last year, underlining the growing pressure on businesses. Those to issue warnings included Frasers Group, owner of UK retailer Sports Direct, and housebuilder Vistry, both of which were relegated from the FTSE 100 in December.

Businesses had shied away from recruitment costs and optional investment in 2024 amid “global geopolitical uncertainty and policy upheaval”, causing stress at businesses reliant on that spend, said Robinson.

The proportion of companies warning on profits rose slightly from 18.2 per cent in 2023.

Kirsten Tompkins, director at EY-Parthenon and author of the report, said the prevalence of the profit warnings was linked to over-optimism by companies’ management.

Companies kept expecting their performance to improve by relying too heavily on past performance, even though “in some markets you’ve seen really drastic [permanent] changes”, she said.

This raised questions about whether companies were adjusting their mindset to account for the level of volatility in the economy, Tompkins added.

Increasing costs triggered nearly one in five of the warnings last year.

Despite the sustained pressure on their earnings in recent years, a ready supply of cheap, long-term debt and taxpayer-funded pandemic support had provided “breathing space” that helped many companies to avoid going bust, Robinson said.

But that could change with higher borrowing costs, particularly for companies that need to refinance over the next three years, she added. “More companies are now reaching a tipping point as cumulative pressures build.”



UK businesses are set to offload a record £70bn of pension risk to insurers this year as healthy scheme funding levels support a flurry of dealmaking, according to a new forecast. Funding levels of defined benefit pension schemes have improved after higher government bond yields reduced the value of future liabilities. That has made bulk annuity deals, where companies sell their pension schemes to insurers who then take responsibility for meeting pension obligations, more attractive.

Companies have sought to hand over their pension liabilities to insurers because it means they no longer have to report the pension surpluses or deficits in their own accounts — or assist with any shortfall — while such deals have become an important source of revenue for insurers. Pension consultants WTW has forecast a combined £70bn in sales this year, made up of £50bn of bulk annuity transactions and £20bn in longevity swaps, where pension schemes insure against members living longer than expected, from just under £60bn in 2024.

Forecasts for a buoyant 2025 follow volumes that were slightly lower than predicted last year as some employers decided to keep their schemes or delay buyouts, in anticipation of higher surpluses.

The Conservative government last spring explored options to allow companies to access scheme surpluses, estimated to be worth more than £100bn on a low-risk measure, causing some well-funded schemes to run for longer in order to take advantage of the expected improved access.

Chancellor Rachel Reeves is expected to soon lay out plans to allow companies and scheme members to benefit more from surpluses in defined benefit schemes.

Shelly Beard, managing director in WTW’s pension transactions team, said funding levels had “generally continued to improve” over the past year, enabling companies with smaller schemes to transfer their pension obligations to an insurer.

Royal London and Utmost both completed their first bulk annuity transactions last year, bringing the total number of insurers operating in this market to 10. Last summer private capital giant Brookfield applied for a licence to operate as a UK insurer to enable it to make bulk annuity deals.

“The defined benefit de-risking market is the envy of the global insurance world . . . [It is] bigger than any other, including the US,” said David Richardson, chief executive officer at Just Group, which completed 129 bulk purchase annuity transactions last year.

More than 35 per cent of the UK’s 4,900 DB pension schemes, which manage a combined £1.2tn of assets, are fully funded on a buyout basis, meaning they could afford to hand over their schemes to an insurer, according to the Pension Protection Fund, which was set up by the government to compensate pensioners if their employers’ scheme fails.

Bumper bulk annuity transactions have also attracted scrutiny from regulators, with the Prudential Regulation Authority earlier this month warning of the risk of funded reinsurance deals where UK life insurers pass some of their pension liabilities to overseas reinsurers.

Concerns include whether, in the case of a reinsurer’s default, assets brought back to the books of UK insurers would be sufficient to cover their risks.

Charlie Finch, partner at consultancy LCP, said his firm had been lobbying the PRA to give better disclosure on funded reinsurance as “a vacuum of information has made people worry more than they might need to”.



Donald Trump and Sir Keir Starmer “agreed to meet soon” in the course of a 45-minute phone call on Sunday, following a declaration by the US president that he liked the UK prime minister “a lot”.

Starmer hopes to visit the White House soon, while Trump, who professed his “respect and affection” for the British royal family, said he may visit the UK on his first foreign trip since re-entering the White House.

The call, described as “a very good conversation” by one person briefed on its contents, has raised hopes in London that Trump could have a constructive relationship with Starmer, in spite of past tensions.

A key feature was what was not discussed: those briefed on the call said there was no mention of potential tariffs on the UK or on Starmer’s choice of Lord Peter Mandelson as his ambassador to Washington.

In spite of criticism by Trump allies of Starmer’s plan to hand sovereignty of the Chagos Islands to Mauritius in return for securing the long-term future of the US-UK Diego Garcia military base, that issue was not raised either.

The president’s reticence on all those questions has raised hopes in London that Britain may escape some of the hostile attention that Trump has so far reserved for the likes of Colombia, Mexico and the EU.

An official UK readout of the call said Starmer discussed with Trump, among other things, “how we are deregulating to boost growth”, a policy which chimes with the president’s war on red tape.

Starmer’s plan to streamline planning and to curtail judicial reviews also came up. Trump has been involved in his own wrangles with environmentalists over his Aberdeenshire golf resort.

Downing Street said Starmer also praised Trump for his “role in securing the landmark ceasefire and hostages deal in Gaza” between Israel and Hamas. The two leaders “agreed to meet soon and looked forward to further discussions then”, Number 10 added.

The White House readout of the call said Trump and Starmer discussed “how both countries can promote a fair bilateral economic relationship”.

Speaking before the call, Trump told the BBC on Air Force One he had a good rapport with Starmer. “I get along with him well. I like him a lot,” he said.

“He’s liberal, which is a bit different from me, but I think he’s a very good person and I think he’s done a very good job thus far. I may not agree with his philosophy, but I have a very good relationship with him.”

Trump met Starmer for dinner last September at Trump Tower in New York, in what was seen by both sides as a positive encounter.

The expectation in London is that Trump will not oppose the appointment of Mandelson as Britain’s new ambassador to Washington. The former UK minister is due to start in the post next month.

Allies of Starmer also hope Trump will not block the contentious Chagos Islands deal. “It hasn’t been number one on my list, I’ll be honest with you,” the president told reporters.

Asked where he might go for the first international trip of his second White House term, Trump said: “It could be Saudi Arabia, it could be UK. Traditionally it could be UK.

“Last time I went to Saudi Arabia because they agreed to buy $450bn of US merchandise.”

A meeting with Britain’s royals would appeal to Trump and is seen in Downing Street as a key selling point to the president. No dates have yet been set for the mutual visits.

Starmer this month told the Financial Times in Kyiv he had a “constructive” relationship with Trump, in spite of numerous criticisms of the president by Labour ministers in the past.

Trump railed against the involvement of Labour staffers in Kamala Harris’s unsuccessful presidential campaign. Technology billionaire Elon Musk, named by Trump as a “waste-buster” in his new administration, has called Starmer “tyrannical”.

David Lammy, UK foreign secretary, previously called Trump “a woman-hating, neo-Nazi-sympathising sociopath”. Lammy has said the two patched up relations in the Trump Tower dinner in September.Trump’s positive comments about Starmer contrast with those he has made since his inauguration about countries including Canada and Denmark.

On Sunday Trump imposed tariffs and sanctions on Colombia after it declined entry to US military flights carrying deported migrants.

Jonathan Reynolds, UK trade secretary, has argued that Britain should not be hit by tariffs, given that trade between the UK and US is mainly services-based and is broadly balanced.



Chancellor Rachel Reeves is looking to free up billions of pounds from the UK’s £1.2tn defined benefit pension system in her latest attempt to kick-start growth.

The government is preparing to allow companies to access scheme surpluses — estimated to be worth around £100bn — to encourage them to invest in more risky assets, according to people briefed on the chancellor’s thinking.

“The devil is in the detail but we are positively inclined,” said one government insider.

The Treasury declined to comment on the discussions — first reported by Sky News — but City sources said Varun Chandra, Sir Keir Starmer’s top business adviser, had discussed the possibility of using so-called surplus to boost the economy.

A shift in focus to DB schemes comes as the chancellor is gearing up for her growth speech on Wednesday. Pension experts estimate allowing companies to access scheme surpluses could unlock up to £100bn for investment.

The government had previously focused its pensions review on consolidating defined contribution (DC) and local authority pension assets. A review into pensions adequacy, which the government had hoped would drive more investment into the UK, has been delayed indefinitely.

In an interview with the Financial Times in November, former pensions minister Emma Reynolds said she had prioritised reforming DC workplace schemes because that was “where the growth is”.

She pointed out the majority of corporate DB pension schemes were closed to new members and “naturally had a less long time frame” as schemes move into less risky assets as they wind down or sell their pension obligations to an insurance company.

However, industry insiders said a radical improvement in the funding position of DB pension schemes in recent years following a rise in government bond yields meant many were now in a position to take on more risk, if the rules enabled companies and scheme members to benefit from it.

“The reason the government announcements have been about DC and the Local Government Pension Scheme is because they’ve not really understood DB and think it’s too big to touch . . . but the implications of not touching it are worse for the government and I think they realise it now,” said the chair of a multibillion pound DB pension scheme.

David Lane, chief executive officer at TPT Retirement Solutions, which manages DB and DC pensions, said allowing companies to access scheme surpluses was “likely to be a more effective way of channelling pension assets in to the UK economy than some of the consolidation initiatives that have been announced . . . it’s direct if the employer reinvests that money into its business”.

Access to scheme surpluses could slow the pace at which pension funds have been offloading their pension obligations to insurance companies, with around £50bn of assets transferred in so-called bulk annuity transactions in each of the past two years, according to pensions consultancy WTW.

Halting this trend could help support UK government bond and equity markets in the longer term because insurance companies typically sell gilts and invest in higher-yielding corporate bonds — many of which are overseas — as well as infrastructure to make their profits.

Zoe Alexander, director of the Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association trade group, said she backed surplus release, with the right protections in place to ensure member benefits are secure.

“Lowering the legislative threshold for allowing returns of surplus could potentially encourage trustees (in conjunction with their employers) to adopt a more ambitious mindset and take on slightly riskier investment strategies for their DB assets, including greater investment in UK assets,” she said.



Welcome readers. I’m backpacking in Vietnam and Laos this week, so I’ve prepared something slightly different.

As readers know, the aim of Free Lunch on Sunday is to present analysis that counters conventional wisdom. For each piece, this often involves discussing positions with economists and market strategists that are not necessarily their house view.

So for this edition, rather than the usual synthesis of my findings, I wanted to share more of what the analysts told me. I asked experts to sketch out a bullish scenario for the British economy over the next decade, and what it would take to get there. Here’s what they said.

First, the global backdrop. Labour’s large parliamentary majority means the UK now stands out for its (relative) stability. France has an unstable coalition and Germany faces an election in February. Political views in the EU are splintering. In the US, President Donald Trump appears more interested in fomenting uncertainty.

As for trade disruption, Britain’s specialism in services — and position outside the EU — puts it less in the line of fire of Trump’s tariff plans. The US president is more focused on the trade in goods, particularly with China and the European trading bloc.

Labour has already eaten into this “stability dividend” by lumbering companies with high taxes in its autumn Budget. Still, Marko Papic, chief strategist at BCA Research, reckons that the autonomy Britain has from being less restrained by internal politics and trade wars could be a boon:

Building on this advantage would require a targeted approach to striking agreements. Deals on the trade in services could allow Britain to export its comparative advantage in high-value services further and wider. And reducing the red tape involved in trading with the EU, the UK’s largest trading partner, would boost supply chains.

Less Trump exposure is also why some of Wall Street’s biggest institutions are betting that UK equities will outpace the rest of Europe’s this year. They believe banks and energy companies — which have large weightings on the London Stock Exchange — could experience a boost from Trump’s deregulation and pro-oil policies. Low valuations also look attractive.

But British stocks will still need a catalyst to drive equity values up. I asked Hugh Gimber, global market strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management, where it may come from:

Indeed, Britain ranks third in Capital Economics’ index of advanced economies best-placed to benefit from AI adoption, given its large services sector and flexible labour market.

Efforts to unshackle Britain’s vast pension capital — the largest in Europe — could support more investment in public and private equities, both at home and abroad. But Gimber suggests there are better levers to pull:

A few studies suggest slashing stamp duty on shares could raise revenues in the long term by boosting growth.

And with tight public finances, “removing hurdles” is where Sam Dumitriu, head of policy at Britain Remade, thinks the UK can get the biggest bang for its buck.

Labour’s Planning and Infrastructure Bill is expected in the coming months. If it can streamline regulations, speed up approvals and clear more land for development, investment could jump.

The government’s industrial strategy, due to be published this spring, is set to unveil opportunities to crowd-in private investment into key infrastructure projects. It is also supposed to outline plans to boost Britain’s existing strengths in high-demand growth sectors. These include financial and professional services, university research and education, renewables (wind, carbon capture and storage), life sciences, aerospace technology, artificial intelligence and creative industries. (Less red tape, wider investment incentives and improved access to training and high-skilled talent would all help.)

That Britain does these complex things pretty well, but struggles with simpler tasks, is a reason to be optimistic, adds Kallum Pickering, chief economist at Peel Hunt.

Indeed, until the past couple of years, Britain struggled with political stability. Now that it has some, investment has returned. Add a few bespoke trade deals, a plan to strengthen its comparative advantages and planning reforms — and things can only get better.

Dumitriu added: “If we stay good at what we’re good at and get less bad at what we’re very bad at, then the next decade could be a very good one for Britain.”

Thoughts? Rebuttals? Message me at freelunch@ft.com or on X @tejparikh90.

Greenland is in the spotlight. Trump wants to buy the icy island for its apparent treasure trove of rare earth metals. But the Danish territory’s accessible riches may not be all they’ve been made out to be. America could be better off mining for minerals at home.



Affluent Britons are increasingly gifting money to family members as concerns mount that Rachel Reeves could make the inheritance tax regime more punitive, according to wealth managers.

Tax advisers told the Financial Times they had seen an increase in gifting and enquiries about mitigating death duties since before the October Budget, when the chancellor set out plans to levy inheritance tax on pensions and agricultural land.

Reeves last month ruled out an emergency spring Budget. But some analysts and advisers have warned that she could cast the inheritance tax net even wider in a bid to shore up the government’s fiscal plans.

The fears have prompted more people to gift money under the current regime, which does not apply IHT at 40 per cent to gifts unless the benefactor dies within seven years.

“The seven year rule is now up for grabs, that seems to be the next target,” said Nimesh Shah, chief executive of accountancy firm Blick Rothenberg. “You could widen it to 10 years. Inheritance tax is now at the fore of concerns.”

Olly Cheng, financial planning director at Rathbones, said the wealth manager was “seeing a lot of concern about where the government will target next” after its measures targeting pensions and farmers.

“There is a feeling among a lot of people that there will need to be more tax increases to balance the books, and the consequence of this uncertainty is that people are bringing forward gifts that might have been made later,” he added.

Concerns about increased IHT come even as the government’s receipts from the levy continue to climb, with HM Revenue & Customs, the tax authority, collecting £6.3bn between April and December 2024.

The government raises less than 1 per cent of total revenue from death duties, but Reeves’ pledge during the general election last year not to increase rates of income tax, national insurance or VAT has left her little wriggle room to raise revenue.

This week Reeves signalled a softening of tax reforms for wealthy non-doms following warnings that her proposals were driving people to leave Britain. But Shah said the changes would “have no impact on the direction of IHT”.

Wealth managers said that many more of their clients faced the prospect of their estates falling within the scope of IHT over the next decade, with some attributing the increase in gifting to the changes to HMRC’s treatment of pensions and agricultural land.

Unused pension pots will be included in estates from April 2027 and subject to the standard 40 per cent IHT rate. Meanwhile, landowners will from April 2026 be subject to a 20 per cent levy on agricultural land above a threshold of between £1.3mn and £3mn, depending on whether they are married and if they own a home.

Emma Sterland, chief financial planning director at Evelyn Partners, said the reforms to pensions and land taxation were behind a rise in “clients thinking about making financial gifts to their families”, with the Budget evidence that IHT was “in the Treasury’s crosshairs”.

Ian Cook, a chartered financial planner at Quilter Cheviot, said he was encouraging clients to “consider gifting more strategically” in view of the upcoming pensions taxation reforms after more had begun “exploring ways to pass on wealth during their lifetime”.

The Treasury did not immediately respond to a request for comment.



Harland & Wolf suppliers owed millions of pounds fear they will not be paid as the bankrupt shipbuilder is taken over by Spain’s Navantia, warning of a hit to UK supply chains if they are replaced by European contractors.

The 164-year-old company best known for building the Titanic fell into administration last September, hobbled by large losses and steep interest payments on its debt.

A deal was struck in December with state-owned Navantia which the UK government vowed would protect 1,000 jobs at H & W’s four yards in Northern Ireland, England and Scotland.

But suppliers say jobs are already being lost in the supply chain and they have little prospect of getting their invoices paid.

Russell Downs, the bankruptcy and restructuring expert brought in as interim executive chair in July, told the Financial Times in December the sale to Navantia “regrettably” would mean losses for creditors and suppliers.

On January 14, the four yards that had been continuing to operate followed the parent company into administration.

“It’s very stressful,” said the chief executive of one British-based supplier who, like others, asked not to be named. “They owe us £10mn plus, a reasonably big chunk of our business . . . We’re an SME. That kind of money does have an effect.”

He added: “Until just before Christmas, the assumption was that H & W would be sold as a going concern and Navantia were going to stand behind its debt . . . Looking ahead, I would imagine Navantia are going to use their own suppliers now — they’re not going to want to take liabilities.”

Tan Dhesi, chair of the defence select committee at Westminster, asked John Healey, UK defence secretary, in a letter last week for “comprehensive answers” by February 3 on how government is helping H & W’s supply chain.

“The immediate effects on the UK supply chain and employment landscape are huge,” said the head of one company supplying H & W’s Appledore yard in England and Belfast.

“There’s a lot of angry local people and not much support from anybody,” said a supplier of services in Belfast, who said his company and clients were owed £22mn.

“It’s a horrible situation . . . It’s a bit like David and Goliath,” he said. “It’s been cloak and dagger the whole way through . . . Basically, the rug has been pulled. The headlines are saying they’re saving jobs. I know [supply chain] companies have already started laying people off.”

Navantia understands suppliers’ concerns and is committed to developing H & W’s capabilities and “supporting the local industry,” said one person familiar with the company’s plans. It aims to “redevelop a healthy industrial ecosystem in order to support their [suppliers’] viability,” the person said.

The sale to Navantia is expected to close on Monday. Staff were told in an email last week seen by the FT that “the next chapter in the shipyard’s history is about to begin”, with Navantia bringing “the experience, stability and investment that is desperately needed”.

The Belfast and Appledore supplier said the so-called prepack sale was “being used as a means to write off debt at the expense of the trade creditors” which are mainly SMEs.

The UK government and Navantia have refused to disclose financial details, including the size of what Jonathan Reynolds, business and trade secretary, said was a “relatively minor” increase to the £1.6bn contract to build three Royal Navy support vessels in which Navantia and H & W are partners. Navantia had pushed for a boost to clinch the deal.

A government spokesperson said it “has not given any direct financial support to Navantia” and the deal contained “the minimum changes to the contract necessary — on commercial terms — to ensure its continued delivery”.

Hilary Benn, the UK’s Northern Ireland secretary, on January 15 blamed unpaid invoices to suppliers on “the failure of the old H & W”.

“It now falls to Navantia to decide which of the invoices it wishes to pay, but it will want to secure a relationship with suppliers contributing to the fleet solid support ship programme,” he said.



Three of England’s most senior judges are set to hear a legal challenge brought by businesses that were forced to close during the pandemic over whether insurance companies can deduct furlough funds from payouts under business interruption policies.

Lawyers said hundreds of millions of pounds were at stake in the precedent-setting case, which is the latest front in a broader legal battle over insurance coverage for businesses during the pandemic.

The Court of Appeal is due this week to hear the dispute about whether insurers are right to deduct government furlough funds — subsidies paid to businesses during lockdowns to cover wages and prevent mass redundancies — when they calculate the insurance payouts.

Insurers Liberty Mutual, Allianz and Aviva have argued that they are entitled to subtract the furlough payments. But businesses bringing the legal challenge, which include Starboard Hotels and Arena Racing, owner of racecourses such as Chepstow and Bath, said the furlough funds were not designed to subsidise the insurance industry.

“It shouldn’t be the insurers that end up being the ultimate beneficiaries” of furlough, said Aaron Le Marquer, partner at law firm Stewarts, which represents Arena Racing.

The UK government launched its furlough scheme at the height of the pandemic in 2020. It allowed for staff to be paid 80 per cent of their salary or wage up to a cap of £2,500 a month.

Payments were made to 1.3mn employers, costing the government about £70bn.

In a judgment last year, the High Court found that insurers were permitted to take furlough payments into account when calculating insurance payouts.

However, the judge, Mr Justice Jacobs, granted policyholders permission to appeal on the grounds that it was an “important marketwide issue”.

The case before the Court of Appeal is due to be heard on Tuesday and Wednesday by Lord Justice Popplewell, Lord Justice Phillips and Sir Julian Flaux, chancellor of the High Court.

Lawyers for the claimants said the furlough dispute arose in “many thousands” of other business interruption claims beyond those of the claimants.

In a letter to the Association of British Insurers in 2020, the Treasury wrote that it expected “that grant funds intended to provide emergency support to businesses at this time of crisis are not to be deducted from business interruption insurance claims”.

Liberty Mutual, Allianz, Aviva and the UK government declined to comment.



If talking about growth delivered it, Britain would be supersized. But the cash-strapped, tax-raising government is still scratching around for ideas that can make a difference. Its abrupt replacement of the chair of the antitrust regulator last week gives the impression that a looser approach to competition enforcement is in its sights. It is not a good look.

Forcing out Marcus Bokkerink, the chair of the UK Competition and Markets Authority, might be intended to send a message about Britain’s openness to investment. Complaints that it was closed for business were hurled around in 2023 when, unlike peers, the watchdog initially blocked Microsoft’s takeover of the gaming developer Activision Blizzard.

After a modified version of the deal was approved, Microsoft described the CMA as “tough and fair”. Even so, the government is doubtless anxious to hear fewer complaints from potential investors about the regulator. The return to power of a US president intent on defending American interests abroad is another salient factor. The EU is wondering whether to adjust or scale back its own tech probes.

Sir Keir Starmer’s government may want to go no further than a symbolic change of leadership and rhetorical flourishes about “supercharging” the economy with pro-business decisions. If it does want to consider changes to competition policy it would not be alone. A new team of US trustbusters is expected to relax the tough approach to dealmaking imposed under Joe Biden, though a return to traditionally conservative antitrust policies is not guaranteed.

In Europe, former European Central Bank governor Mario Draghi argued that domestic champions should be allowed to bulk up to compete with Chinese and US giants in last year’s blockbuster report on EU competitiveness. He favoured consolidation in the telecoms sector to give companies the muscle to invest, although sceptics say there is little evidence that telecoms mergers boost investment.

The CMA is well aware of the trade-offs. It noted that intense competition can be detrimental to innovation, in research published earlier this month. Last year it gave the green light to the Vodafone-Three UK joint venture, on condition it committed to certain infrastructure investments. It has also signalled a willingness to approve mergers on the basis of behavioural, rather than structural, remedies.

Overall, it is hard to argue the CMA takes an overly aggressive approach. The number of mergers it investigates that are rejected or abandoned is small and falling. The UK has seen a modest weakening of competition, measured by cost mark-ups, over the past 25 years.

Ministers should avoid giving the impression they want to influence competition decisions. Keeping powerful incumbents in check can help other businesses flourish. Antitrust enforcement is generally a spur, not an impediment, to growth and productivity gains. Moreover, competition policy should be stable and predictable. Political interference fuels uncertainty, and there is little that businesses hate more.

vanessa.houlder@ft.com

Letter in response to this article:

World of profitable exits and killer acquisitions / From Simon Holmes, Visiting Professor in Law, University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK



“We wanted to create an enfilade and I should use that word sparingly for want of sounding pretentious, but it’s like creating streams so you get the width, depth and full use of the spaces,” smiles architect John McAslan describing the masterplan behind the renovation of his Victorian home in south-west London. “It really is a pull of energy, to move you through from the front door to the garden,” adds his wife, Dava Sagenkahn, dressed in vibrant Issey Miyake Pleats Please.

The journey – or enfilade – through the McAslan home, situated on a leafy, residential street, begins at a knee-height bespoke wooden gate. This unusual design is the initial welcome into the expansive, expressive interior that lies beyond the front door.

The hallway, with original geometric period tiling, features an oblique, narrow glass window that frames an olive tree planted in an external side return. On the left, it bursts open into a living area, and straight ahead segues into a big kitchen that swings out perpendicularly into a dining area with a vast Vitra table. A wall of sliding glass garden doors filters light across the entire ground floor.

Scotsman McAslan, who founded John McAslan+ Partners in 1993, is a pioneer of intervention and preservation – an architectural approach that favours repurposing (rather than demolishing) old buildings. His multi-award-winning practice is behind some of the most impressive transport hubs in the world including King’s Cross Station, Sydney Metro’s Central Station, the upgrade of Penn Station in New York and Bond Street station on the  Elizabeth Line, alongside residential towers, education centres and museums such as the revamped The Burrell Collection in his home city of Glasgow. While different, each project is underpinned by human-centric architecture that improves the quality of urban life.

When it came to conceiving this house, the McAslans were not interested in statement-making grandeur but in creating a beautiful environment in which to live, love, think and work. For John, the methodology is the same. “It was about transforming the old into new, which is what a lot of the work of the practice is about. We wanted to open it up, retain what we could, set a budget and develop a language of architecture and design that was an expression of us,” he says. “The central idea here was to get the energy of the house circulating front to back and retain, remodel and upcycle what existed to varying degrees – we had an ecological, fabric-first approach.”

Since the early 1980s, the couple lived in four different properties in Notting Hill. As John was building his business, Dava was working in recruitment while raising three children, Hannah, Flossy and Renwick, who have now all left home. There was no urgency to move, rather a gentle yearning for more light, sky and a sense of expansiveness, which is hard to find in the densely occupied city.

Moving south of the river was not on the agenda until their daughter Hannah, a lawyer who lives in the area, spotted the property and went for a recce, iPhone in hand. She sent the video to John and Dava who were on holiday at their restored farm south of Florence. They swiftly put in an offer. “We’ve never done that before. We’re normally forensic,” laughs Dava of the almost blind bid and the serendipitous events that landed them the keys.

The core renovation with the construction company Davies & Daughters involved knocking down walls, opening up all the spaces, building out into the garden and ripping out a “circus tent” conservatory. “It was an awful octagonal makeshift ’70s one – boiling in the summer and leaky in the rain,” says John, rolling his intense blue eyes. It was reconfigured into a punched-out space that now frames a small kidney-shaped garden landscaped by Jack Newlyn and enclaved by bamboo and neighbouring trees.

The first floor hosts John and Dava’s bedroom, a private sitting room and an emerald-Bisazza-tiled en suite bathroom with a curvilinear wall. The top floor houses two super-size flexible sleep-living spaces for guests and family, with extended eaves that create new volumes and light. The upstairs bathrooms are vivid lime green “cubes” with a painted floor, ceiling and wall in the same wake-me-up hue. “The layout of the house is clear and direct, with flexibility: the ground floor is entirely open, engaging the hall, reception spaces, extended kitchen, garden room and fully opening into and through the garden,” says John, who admits he has an aversion to rooms with closed doors. “The first floor is our apartment, and the top floor is a suite of connected spaces that can open or close as needs be.” “I feel I can use every room,” says Dava. “There are times when I take my laptop and go all the way up to the top of the house and it’s just great.”

There were a few trouble spots, including a damp, rotting cellar that required gutting and fixing to make way for a utility area. “How we avoided electrocution, I don’t know!” says Dava of the early renovation. They moved in permanently in March 2024. Perhaps unusually, the couple were aligned on pretty much all aspects, including the wood-panelled walls and simple single strips of shelving (by John Cherrington of Windmill Furniture) that feature throughout. The Strong White (Farrow & Ball) wall paint changes with the light, accented by breezy voile curtains, citrus-green blinds (that beam optimism from the street view) and the wide oak floorboards.

The couple first met in the late 1970s in Boston at the canteen of the architectural practice Cambridge Seven Associates, where John had just landed an internship as a recent graduate from Edinburgh University. Dava was working as an executive assistant to one of the partners. It was a coup de foudre. “I said to myself, well, I’m going to marry her. This was she! So I stayed my year and I think on the last day I asked you out or something,” smiles John, who returned to London to work at Richard Rogers and rack up a phone bill calling his sweetheart. A transatlantic courtship ensued before Dava moved to the UK in 1981 and they wed. “Not really knowing each other, but enough to know,” laughs Dava. “This was not anything I ever planned when I was burning my bra with my feminist sisters: a, to get married; or b, to marry someone I didn’t know very well.”

The couple share a love of adventure, travel, family and collecting that is writ large in their collection of furniture, art and artefacts. The cane and teak furniture is a combination of original armchairs designed by Pierre Jeanneret for Chandigarh in the 1950s, with a number of pieces recently made by Phillips Antiques in India in reclaimed teak. The wooden screens by Artek were designed by Alvar Aalto in 1936, and they own a standout Brazilian petal table by Jorge Zalszupin from the 1960s. “We dressed the interiors with an array of panelled wall assemblies – some open and some closed – for our library. The artefacts, collected over time and very personal to us, express our journey individually and as a family,” says Dava.

There is a luminescent collection of Bakelite pieces (many found in Martha’s Vineyard) perched on cabinets; a vintage Missoni rug alongside colourful abstract floor coverings, some sketched by John and handwoven by Shyam Ahuja in Mumbai. The artworks, casually leaning on the narrow shelves and coursing up the stairwells, range from an exquisite sketch of two female bottoms by their daughter Flossy (John swears it is better than Klimt) to contemporary Indian abstract painters, and a very early American 1869 Shield, Eagle and Flags stamp (one of a series purchased for their children) to celebrate Dava’s US roots.

By contrast, there are photographic works by the Indian artist Raghu Rai, alongside Wolfgang Tillmans and Simon Starling. The couple are patrons of emerging artists and the collection is diverse, esoteric and autobiographical – with many humorous anecdotes attached. “We began collecting around 40 years ago when we first married, starting with Peter Blake’s pencil studies of a lady’s bottom made in 1955 when he was a student at the RCA. From there we focused on European expressionists like Paul Klee, Jean Metzinger, Erich Mendelsohn, Marc Chagall, Sonia Delaunay and Giorgio Morandi,” says John. They also share a love of abstract Indian painters including Ram Kumar, Tyeb Mehta and Francis Newton Souza – a founding member of the Progressive Artists’ Group.

The duo are strong believers in community and in preservation. In 2010, they fundraised £3.5mn with the local community in Argyll to save Dunoon Burgh Hall, an 1874 arts venue in the seaside town of Dunoon, where John grew up. The building was in danger of being torn down, so they bought it for £1. It is now a thriving cultural hub and there are plans to establish a library and archive centre with their vast collection (around 2,500) of architectural and art books. McAslan is also lobbying the GLA and central government as part of a Social and Affordable Housing Initiative calling for the adaptive reuse of redundant “grey belt” office space (estimated at 24mn sq ft) as a sustainable alternative to the push for new-build homes.

One of the biggest eye-openers for John is the newfound joy of crossing the Thames en route to work. “I think of the Kinks and ‘Waterloo Sunset’, romantic meetings and all that stuff. But the big change is having that distance between work and home,” he says. Not to mention the novelty of using the Overground and Underground. “When he first got on the train, we thought he might not come back!” says Dava. But now both have the pleasure of coming home through an elegant front gate. Four neighbours have already inquired after its provenance. “It is our gate!” they laugh in unison.



The writer is an author of fiction, cookery books and poetry anthologies. Her latest book is ‘The Dinner Table’, a collection of food writing

If you will forgive the Victoriana kitsch opening: spare a thought for the humble chimney sweep. Not only frozen in the public imagination as a Dickens-y grimy child, the chimney sweeps of Brighton and Hove now suffer a greater practical indignity: being asked to park their vans several streets away from their intended address, and approach on foot with all their gear, that their chimney-owning employers should be shielded from the wrath of eco-friendly neighbours.

A “Cosy Killer” campaign haunts the streets of Kemptown: Brighton council seeks to invoke the spectre of innumerable pollutants in the fight against wood-fired stoves and open fires. It feels like a particularly bruising battle on both sides: impossible not to root for better air quality, but equally impossible not to understand that the days are short and the nights are wild, and the rush of a real wood fire feels like the only thing that might see you through to spring. A friend’s toddler daughter, having never seen a real fire, caught a glimpse of Netflix’s Fireplace For Your Home: Crackling Birchwood Fireplace. She ran off, fetched her little chair, and pulled it up close to the screen: totally transfixed. We stole it from the gods for a reason, and — Brighton council might say — they kept it from us for a reason, too.

Fire is always dangerous, one way or another, and the only difference between the fire we want (cosy, contained) and the fire we fear (house-consuming) is the chimney sweep. The chimney sweep, however far away you make him park, knows things you don’t know about fire; about smoke; and how thin a line there is between civilisation and what simmers beneath.

It’s funny that it’s taken this long for chimney sweeps to dip into the stigma associated with all the other ways wildness takes over a home: nobody likes to have the exterminator parked outside; nobody wants the neighbours to know they’ve had to call pest control. What if they think their mice came from inside our walls? I have, as a long-term city dweller, had to call both bedbug man and pest control in my time: bedbug man mutely fogged our home, white-suited and booted, while we took our shame out of town for the weekend.

The mouse man was a different — and wiser — story. He looked like something out of a Roald Dahl book: small, bright-eyed, and with a large, silent son in tow. “Fourth generation!” The son nodded. “He’s learning the trade,” he said. The son nodded. “Tell the ladies how a rat ran up your arm last week, Stephen!” Stephen mutely held out an arm. The mouse man beamed with pride. “When I was his age, I thought I’d be the world’s first no-kill mouse man,” he said, tucking little square boxes of poison into the kitchen corners. “Tried everything. Can’t be done! You have to fight with everything you’ve got.”

He was in his heart, he confessed, a photographer. Mainly of flowers, but other botanicals also. Some animals. He showed us the pictures on his phone. They were lovely. “But you can’t quit a job like this. The mice always come back.” He looked thoughtfully around our flat. “My dad did this one. So did granddad. Stephen’ll do it in 10, 20 years.” This exact house? This exact house.

“We just keep fighting with everything we’ve got,” said the mouse man, cheerfully. “You done them boxes, Stephen?” Stephen nodded. Then, to us: “Did you follow my Instagram?” We nodded. “Best get on,” said the mouse man. “Lots to do!” Off he went, his son at his heels, following in the footsteps of his forefathers.

As we all do, if you think of it in primeval terms. More ancient than the Victorian chimney sweep, we can’t get away from the stuff that goes deep: the desire for fire, the fight against the wild, and the hope that nobody will cast us out, with our shame, into the darkness ourselves.



Drugmakers are growing frustrated with the NHS after a clawback tax unexpectedly soared, with pharmaceutical companies warning that investment in the UK may be at risk.

The industry association’s chief executive and board met with health secretary Wes Streeting last week to complain about having to pay 22.9 per cent of their UK sales back to the government this year, far more than the 15 per cent predicted.

The tax rate changes annually and the new rate surprised drugmakers when it was published late last year, after they had made their budgets for this year.

In 2024, the rebate tax was 15.1 per cent, and the year before that, under the previous agreement between the health department and the industry, it was 26.5 per cent.

NHS England said purchases of potentially curative cell and gene therapies, and medicines for conditions including cancer, diabetes, eye diseases rose more than expected in 2024, which led to the rise in the tax rate.

Richard Torbett, chief executive of the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, said he would like to review the deal, as the UK lags behind other European countries in what it pays for drugs, putting it in a “very very difficult position” if it wants to grow its life sciences industry.

“There comes a point where the NHS has to be at least in the ballpark of being a good customer. Not necessarily the best in the world, but it is really hard if the NHS is the worst,” he said.

“We can only continue to add billions to GDP in this country and create more medicines for the future if we make sure the system is working well for life sciences,” Torbett added.

One senior figure at a major pharmaceutical company said the impasse was already making the company reconsider investment in clinical trials and the launch of new drugs in the UK.

The person warned that the higher rate of taxation would challenge Streeting’s goal of positioning health as a “growth department”, adding that it sent a “‘do not invest here” sign to life sciences.

Fiona Bride, interim chief commercial officer at NHS England, said the voluntary scheme for branded medicines pricing and access had been a “triple win” for patients, taxpayers, and the life sciences sector.

She added that the higher rate showed the deal is working as intended because it is delivering more new medicines to patients. Estimated sales of new drugs rose from £7.8bn in 2023 to £8.9bn in 2024.

“The NHS is delivering more newer branded drugs to patients as companies have brought forward new innovative treatments at cost effective prices,” she said.

The UK is home to world-leading scientific research, particularly in the ‘Golden Triangle’ of Oxford, Cambridge and London, and large pharmaceutical companies AstraZeneca and GSK.

But efforts to encourage the life sciences industry to grow have faltered because of concerns over the NHS not adopting new medicines quickly enough and paying less than other countries.

Germany charges the industry a similar clawback tax but recently lowered it to 7 per cent of sales and Ireland’s tax is 9 per cent.

After months of tense negotiations in 2023, the pharmaceutical industry and the government reached an agreement on a five-year deal on pricing.

The senior figure at a pharmaceutical group said that when the tax deals were signed last year, only the Department of Health was able to provide modelling, and the scenarios presented to pharmaceutical companies were “misleading”.

They added that pharmaceutical groups were frustrated because the NHS had received its biggest cash injection in decades in the Autumn Budget. “A massive budget increase has been given with zero added to the medicines budget,” they said.

“The pharma industry are really pissed off,” said one person familiar with the matter.

Mark Dayan, head of public affairs at the think-tank the Nuffield Trust, said the agreement was based on the principle of variable rates based on sales trends for newer medicines.

“This provides an element of predictability and control over the medicines bill and in all four countries of the UK, the NHS budget is extremely tight, often with overspends, so it will be a difficult conversation to think about reopening that deal so soon after it was signed,” he said.

But he said this rise is close to the clawback rates seen in the last year of the old deal, which were hitting up against the limits of what was acceptable to pharma companies.

The Department of Health said the pharmaceutical sector plays a vital role supporting the NHS and boosting UK growth: “We look forward to continuing to work in partnership with companies to tackle these together wherever we can”.

Letter in response to this article:

UK pharma groups try to have their cake and eat it / From Mark Samuels, Chief Executive, British Generic Manufacturers Association, London EC2, UK



The writer is the UK’s independent reviewer of terrorism legislation

The case of the Southport killer Axel Rudakubana raises urgent questions about how the law should apply to users of extreme violence for its own sake. Various arguments have been made in favour of amending the terrorism definition.

First, it might be an appropriate label because only “terrorism” captures the social revulsion at Rudakubana’s acts of violence. Second, it might help prevention, pulling in the superior resources and capabilities of the UK counter-terrorism apparatus.

Third would be a legal function, possibly unlocking greater investigative powers and widening the net of criminal liability to allow police intervention and prosecution before an attack can occur. For example, a lone actor who takes early steps to a mass slaughter commits an offence — but only if it is defined as terrorism. Each argument merits real consideration but each has drawbacks, quite possibly terminal.

If the present definition of terrorism is thought to be too narrow because it does not apply to extreme violence for its own sake, a new test will be needed to distinguish between it and ordinary crime. The current test — which requires a motive of advancing a political, religious, racial or ideological cause — tackles attempts to change our way of life through violence. Terrorism without subversion is a very different proposition, but the current definition is still wider than it seems. It does apply to new, internet-driven ideologies that justify ultraviolence, even though they may be unfamiliar and therefore harder to spot, such as end-of-days anti-system dogma, and certain variants of Satanism and “incel”-related beliefs.

Sir Keir Starmer this week floated the possibility of a new test: “violence clearly intended to terrorise”. This risks too many false positives, such as domestic violence, unless the intended target is clearly the wider public not the immediate victim. Even this would still catch extortion by criminal gangs and serious hooliganism. The prime minister is, however, right about factoring in desire for notoriety, a major motivator in US school massacres.

As to resources, a wider definition will not automatically focus counter-terror police and MI5 manpower on future Southports. The national security apparatus has major threats to manage, including Isis-K and Russian sabotage. Unless the amendment was very tight, the system could be overwhelmed with dangerous and apparently dangerous individuals, vying for attention as potential terrorists.

Perhaps few would argue with extending investigative powers to avert atrocities: allowing 14-day pre-charge detention in suitable cases, suspicion-less stops at air and seaports, and applying terrorism offences like possession with intent or preparatory acts to violence-obsessed individuals. But doing so would expand the harshest powers of the authorities, and the authorities can make mistakes about human motivation.

What’s more, terrorism legislation does not just apply to violence, so every inciter, encourager or publisher of atrocity-promoting material would become a terrorist, liable to special post-release measures. Complaints are already made about the scope of UK terrorism laws. Although I support the current definition as workable and adaptable, I would be cautious about pushing the law too far.

Possibly the solution lies in borrowing from the tactics of counter-terrorism. Where a “subject of interest” is on the books, police use a range of tactics to disrupt or deter, by prosecuting non-terrorist offending or imposing anti-social behaviour injunctions. Rudakubana’s danger was fizzing off him, but after he exited Prevent, the deradicalisation programme designed to divert potential extremists away from violence, there was no one to manage this risk. By which I don’t mean longer-term interventions such as therapy or medical help and family support, but immediate public protection by law enforcement.

This is not about definitions, it’s an organisational issue and I think a major one. It suggests the need for a wholly new capability to deal with those motivated by non-instrumental extreme violence. Operating at regional and national level, it would sit alongside counter-terrorism and serious and organised crime but separate from both.

Then there is Prevent. Invented with al-Qaeda in mind, the multi-agency programme has uneasily juggled proto-terrorists and violence-lovers for years. It has been stretched to maximise police contact with school massacre obsessives and young people without any single identifiable terrorist motivation.

Even if non-terrorist violence is kept within Prevent, there is a serious need for humility and imagination in the face of internet influence. Children in their bedrooms are tempted to violence by images, peer-to-peer chat and dark transgressive humour absorbed over hours and hours online. Today’s reality makes the traditional model of deradicalisation years out of date.



People whose loved ones have died face waits of several months for bereavement counselling, “elongated” by unwieldy NHS systems.

NHS “talking therapies”, which are recommended by GPs to people seeking support with bereavement in England, were set up primarily for anxiety and depression sufferers, the clinical director of the UK’s leading bereavement charity has said.

Andy Langford of Cruse said that people referred to talking therapies by their GP must wait for a general assessment before being referred for a second time to a specialist bereavement provider. “In the vast majority of instances, a talking therapy service will go: ‘we don’t work with grief so you’re going to have to go to Cruse’,” he said.

It could take a couple of weeks for the charity to allocate a trained bereavement volunteer or several months, he noted.

“Someone’s waiting time is elongated by having to wait for talking therapies to do the assessment and then the conversation [to say] that’s necessarily not the right service. Then they refer on to us or another provider,” Langford said.

Demand for bereavement support is rising, say charities. More than a quarter of a million people called The Samaritans in 2023 seeking bereavement support.

Waiting times for talking therapies were six weeks or less for 92 per cent of referrals, according to recent NHS data. But many say they have to wait far longer for the right support.

Cruse has 83 branches in England, covering 60 per cent of areas. It also operates in Northern Ireland and Wales. The bereavement charity supported more than 22,000 people one-to-one in 2022 but is now struggling with demand.

Hannah Coom lost her mother to cancer in March 2024 and found herself caught between different services. She sought support from an Essex hospice but encountered a 10-month wait.

The 28-year-old instead chose to see a GP but was told to wait six months before seeking general counselling. “But the reason I went to the GP instead of the hospice was because I was so unwell,” she said.

Five months after her mother’s death, she was contacted by NHS talking therapies personnel. She had two-to-three rounds of assessment before they decided she needed “employment support”. “So I didn’t actually get any talking therapy sessions,” she added.

Having passed the six-month “checkpoint”, Hannah, who said she had experienced suicidal thoughts, saw a second GP who left her without the support she needed.

“I was turned away from that appointment with nothing, that if I didn’t want to take antidepressants then there was nothing else they could do for me,” she said.

“I’m still having symptoms of inability to sleep, flashbacks, nightmares. I’ve just found myself to feel continually shocked that a person can be in so much pain and going to so many places asking for help and there isn’t anything.”

Amelia Wrighton co-founded her charity Suicide&Co in 2020 to help people bereaved by suicide, nine years after her mother took her own life. “When we did our research into the sector, there was just a gaping hole in service provision for people bereaved by suicide,” she said.

Demand for Suicide&Co services has soared since its creation, with wait times tripling from two to six weeks last year.

Cruse experienced similar trends during the Covid pandemic. Langford said demand initially dropped in 2020 when people parked their “emotional needs” to prioritise physical health but struggled to meet demand when services moved online during lockdown. The emergence of “suppressed emotional experiences” post-crisis had resulted in a demand surge.

“There aren’t any big grants, there isn’t an NHS contract . . . effectively what we’re doing is subsidising the NHS,” he added.

“Losing a loved one can significantly impact our lives . . . which is why we’ve invested record amounts into bereavement services and suicide prevention,” said Claire Murdoch, NHS England’s national director for mental health.

The NHS has invested £57mn into suicide prevention and bereavement services during 2019-2024. Despite the increased funding, the fundamental hurdle remains the lack of a joined up network, according to charities.

“A lot of services are quite disjointed,” Anna May, 2020 founder of the Student Grief Network, said. “Some GPs might have a brilliant understanding of how to support someone through grief, or which services they can signpost to, other GPs won’t at all.”

Langford at Cruse said there was a need for a restructuring of NHS services. “There needs to be a network approach to funding services, not a focus solely on what is at the highest clinical need.”

If you are struggling after a bereavement you can contact Cruse, the Student Grief Network, The Samaritans or Suicide&Co



Donald Trump has ratcheted up the pressure on Egypt to take in Palestinians from Gaza, raising the prospect that the US president could use substantial aid as leverage for his idea of resettling people from the shattered enclave.

Speaking to reporters on Air Force One on Monday, the US president repeated his call — which has sparked outrage from Palestinians and Arabs across the Middle East — for both Egypt and Jordan to take in Gazans and help “clean out” the strip. He added that he had spoken to Egypt’s President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi.

“I wish he would take some. We helped them a lot, and I’m sure he’d help us,” Trump said when asked how Sisi had responded. “He’s a friend of mine. He’s in a very rough part of the world, to be honest. As they say, it’s a rough neighbourhood. But I think he would do it, and I think the King of Jordan would do it too.”

Egypt denied “what some media outlets reported” about the call between the two leaders. Since Trump first made the suggestion over the weekend, Cairo and Amman have vehemently rejected the idea, arguing it would undermine Palestinians’ long-held hopes of establishing their own state and the security of their own countries.

Analysts said Trump’s comments, which came just days after secretary of state Marco Rubio ordered an immediate halt to work on virtually all US foreign aid programmes, underscored the potential leverage Washington had over both Egypt and Jordan, as well as the US president’s willingness to flex it.

“This a classic Trump negotiation tactic, coming in with an extreme position in order to . . . get somewhere in the middle,” said Sanam Vakil, director of the Middle East and north Africa programme at Chatham House. But she said Trump’s demands touched on “real existential” questions for both Jordan and Egypt.

On Tuesday, the front page of Egypt’s state-owned Al-Ahram daily featured a large picture of displaced Palestinians streaming back to north Gaza with the headline: “Egypt [speaks] as one man: The people reject displacement and support efforts to protect national security as the Palestinians write their ‘epic of return’.”

Jordan’s foreign minister, Ayman Safadi, was similarly dismissive, saying on Sunday that “the solution to the Palestinian issue lies in Palestine”.

“Jordan is for Jordanians and Palestine is for Palestinians,” he said.

Arabs have for more than a year warned against any moves to push Palestinians out of Gaza, saying it would be akin to 1948, when hundreds of thousands were forced from their homes or fled in the fighting that accompanied Israel’s founding. Palestinians refer to that period as the Nakba, or catastrophe.

Michael Wahid Hanna, director of the US programme at the International Crisis Group, said that while it was not clear how far Trump would go, one pressure point on Egypt would be the $1.3bn of annual military assistance received by Cairo to buy US weapons and spare parts for US materiel purchased in previous years.

The assistance, which started in 1978 when Cairo took the first steps towards a peace deal with Israel, signed the next year, has been “the backbone of ties”, said Hanna. It has amounted to more than $50bn over the years.

Military assistance to Egypt and Israel has been exempted from the three-month hold on international aid announced by Rubio.

Hanna added that if Trump tried to coerce Egypt into taking Palestinians displaced from Gaza, it would be a “big change to the relationship”.

“The US has worked for a very long time on the assumption that it would be dangerous for Egypt and was something to avoid,” he said. When the idea of resettling Palestinians was floated at the beginning of the Gaza war, he added, Egypt argued it could threaten domestic stability because neither the military establishment nor public opinion would approve.

“A massive influx of Palestinians would raise fears of rekindling the insurgency [by an Isis affiliate] in the Sinai because of a mixing of Palestinian and Egyptian militants,” said Hanna.

Analysts said the US could use similar pressure against Jordan, where Washington is the biggest provider of foreign aid, on which Jordan’s fragile economy is heavily dependent.

According to the US embassy in Amman, the US has provided $31bn of bilateral assistance since relations were established in 1949, and the two countries recently signed a memorandum of understanding under which Washington would provide $1.45bn a year until 2029.

Diplomats said officials in Amman were rushing to understand Trump’s intentions, and that in addition to withholding aid, the US could also apply pressure by imposing tariffs. “Given where Jordan’s economy is at the moment, any move could have a bigger impact than you might think,” said one.

A large influx of Palestinians would have significant ramifications for Jordan’s delicate political and economic situation: the 11mn-strong country is already home to more than 2mn Palestinians, while its economy has been strained by the cost of supporting hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees.

Implementing Trump’s idea would “really threaten security dynamics in both countries, and the political legitimacy of the leaders”, Vakil said.

“It will be very hard [for them] to kowtow on these issues and see a quick turnaround like we have seen in the case of Colombia or Canada [when pressured by Trump]. This is a very different dynamic.”



Good morning and welcome to White House Watch! Today let’s get into:

Fighting inflation is quickly falling down the list of President Donald Trump’s priorities as he pursues his isolationist policies at a clip.

Voters consistently ranked economic issues including the cost of living as the most important issue in deciding their choice for president, according to the FT-Michigan Ross poll. But those voters are set to be disappointed, economists have warned, as Trump pursues aggressive tariffs.

“The policies he’s pursuing have a high risk of inflation,” Adam Posen, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics think-tank, told the FT’s Claire Jones. Instead, attacking US trade partners is “a higher priority than the purchasing power of the working class”.

Economists, on average, have revised up their inflation projections from 2.2 per cent to 2.6 per cent for 2025, according to forecast aggregator Consensus Economics, on signals that Trump’s “America first” protectionism will raise prices. In this scenario, the US Federal Reserve could be left struggling to cut interest rates, which Trump is pressuring chair Jay Powell to do.

If rates don’t come down quickly, there could be fresh tensions between the two men. Fed officials are almost certain to hold interest rates steady at their meeting tomorrow — and the median view among rate setters is that there’ll be only two quarter-point cuts this year.

During the past several years, US consumers experienced price increases of more than 20 per cent — the worst inflation surge in a generation.

“If you really thought this guy was going to do something about the price of eggs, then you are probably going to be brutally disappointed,” said Mark Blyth, professor at Brown University. “[His stance is] ‘We can’t give you cheap groceries, but we can give you the Gulf of America’.”

Another thing economists are worried about: what will happen to inflation if and when the president’s mass deportations come about, since worker shortages usually raise wages.

There are roughly 11mn undocumented people in the US, and deporting them all is a central pillar of Trump’s Maga agenda. But a genuine mass deportation could also face enormous financial, legal and logistical hurdles at every step of the process: identification, apprehension, detention and expulsion [free to read].

Even at an improbable rate of deporting 1mn people annually, it would take more than 10 years and cost almost $1tn, according to the American Immigration Council, a pro-immigration non-profit group. Lawsuits are also expected at every turn.

“The idea of 1mn to 2mn [deportations] a year is . . . aspirational. It’s probably unrealistic, given the resources that are available to do it,” Doris Meissner, a former commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, a predecessor agency to Immigration and Customs Enforcement, told me. “The numbers are not likely to be dramatically greater [than they are now], at least for a while.”

In fiscal year 2024, under the Biden administration, Ice deported 271,484 unauthorised immigrants, a 10-year high. The peak under Trump’s first term was 267,000 in fiscal year 2019. Trump and his border tsar, Tom Homan, have said they will prioritise people with criminal histories, a more politically palatable way to get started.

The administration has already launched showy raids in Chicago, and went to the brink of a trade war with Colombia after Bogotá rejected military repatriation flights. The dramatic clash left Latin American nations reeling as they prepare for an emergency summit on Thursday to respond to mass deportations.



Do as I say or I might be crazy enough to blow everyone up. That is the essence of the Dr Strangelove playbook — that acting the madman will scare your enemies into concessions. In the movie, budget-constrained US generals save dollars by nuking the Soviet Union. Donald Trump is highly unlikely to launch nuclear weapons. But he would surely be happy if others thought that he might. Nor is he insane for believing the Strangelovian approach might work. It has served him well for his first 78 years.

There is no need to retread how a serially bankrupted Trump menaced creditors during his casino days, or how supporters storming Capitol Hill to stop the count became a rallying cry for his re-election. Playing the lunatic has been a routine tool of Trump’s career. Never give the middle finger to your creditors; avoid at all costs describing fallen soldiers as losers. Had Trump heeded such advice he would not be president. In his mind, reasonable people are clueless about power and negotiating. “It is the rational optimist who fails, the irrational optimist who succeeds,” wrote GK Chesterton. “He is ready to smash the whole universe for the sake of itself.”

Reactions to Trump’s first week in office are unlikely to damp his instinct for unpredictability. His avalanche of executive orders, collective firings and sweeping pledge to usher in a new golden age was meant to give the shock and awe impression that he was remaking the world. One of Trump’s billionaire donors even compared his first seven days to the almighty. In fact, Trump’s big win — securing a ceasefire and hostage deal in Gaza — came several days before he was inaugurated (or said “Let there be light!”, depending on your grip on reality). Neither Hamas nor the Israelis cared that Joe Biden had been pushing for a ceasefire for many months. With Trump, they obeyed in advance.

Trump can also claim that he shocked Colombia into accepting his terms for sending them illegal immigrants. But the moral of last weekend’s scrap is fuzzier than that. Trump announced a tariff war and a visa ban on the South American republic after it refused to accept two US military planes carrying shackled deportees. President Gustavo Petro responded with florid insults while quietly sending a civilian plane to collect them. Cue Trump victory dance. In reality, Colombia has accepted hundreds of US deportee flights in recent years, which means Petro did not concede much. Yet other countries might now think twice before crossing Trump.

Denmark’s European neighbours have also been prompted to rethink their ideas about standing up to bullies. Trump shocked Mette Frederiksen, the Danish prime minister, by haranguing her for 45 minutes earlier this month over why the US should acquire Greenland, an autonomous Danish territory. The principled stance would be for France, Britain and others to link arms with Denmark and say, “Enough! America cannot trample over other countries’ sovereignty.” But that would be a crazy thing to do, right? Their actual response has been predictably supine. Europe’s liberal democracies are behaving exactly how Trump expected they would — with fawning towards the source of the problem. They might as well have invited Trump to keep going.

The bigger test case is the Panama Canal Zone, where the US is treaty-bound to accept Panamanian sovereignty. Even if Trump browbeats Panama to revoke its ports contracts with CK Hutchison, the Hong Kong-based conglomerate, his win could be pyrrhic. Panama’s president has been notably more robust than his Danish counterpart. So have Panama’s neighbours. In contrast to Canada’s outgoing Justin Trudeau, Mexico’s president Claudia Sheinbaum set limits before Trump took office in her gutsy response to his threat of a tariff war. Colombia’s Petro was also tenacious. It is no coincidence that a Chinese diplomat on Sunday said that Colombia-China relations were their strongest in 45 years.

In the short term, Trump’s tactics could well yield more wins than Biden, whose diplomacy looked better on paper than in practice. It is likely that Europeans will step up defence spending for fear of Trump’s ire. He has said that Russia could “do whatever the hell they want” with allies that spend too little. Over time, however, Trump will sow distrust about America’s word. Deals will start to dry up. Large parts of the world long ago gave up on the notion of a US-led liberal international order, which makes them sanguine about the ascent of the “ugly American”. Yet they will be hunting for insurance. It would be no surprise were China in the near future to win more friends and influence in Trump’s hemisphere.

edward.luce@ft.com



Vincient Arnold is a researcher at the Yale Program on Financial Stability and publishes research notes on his blog, Discursive Etc. The views expressed herein are his own.

The United States would seriously like to maintain the supremacy of the US dollar as an international reserve currency, and BRICS coin — unseriously — would like to replace it.

Whatever the (lack of) merits of a BRICS coin, there are real, lurking challenges to the dollar’s role abroad. A forward-looking response to the dollar threats of tomorrow, not just today, would be to lead the pack in the development of a cross-border wholesale central bank digital currency (wCBDC): ie, the offshore digital dollar. However, President Trump just signed an executive order banning the development of all CBDCs in the US, while supporting the development of stablecoins.

Now, I have no qualms with the value of stablecoins in supporting the dollar system, as I’ve written elsewhere. But, as experiences in the Eurodollar market have shown, privately-created money — while a great complement to central bank money — is no perfect replacement. A CBDC is still worthy of consideration, and Mr. Trump’s order is, on that front, shortsighted.

I’m not convinced, though, that the executive order is really targeting wCBDCs in the first place? In it, CBDCs are defined as “a form of digital money or monetary value, denominated in the national unit of account, that is a direct liability of the central bank.” As many FT Alphaville readers are very likely aware, we already have digital money that is a direct liability of the Fed: reserves. Surely Mr. Trump is not suggesting that we get rid of the Fed’s balance sheet?

Given previous Republican opposition to CBDCs, it’s pretty clear that their issue is retail CBDCs — in other words, a digital form of cash — over privacy concerns. What I humbly suggest should still be on the table (and may still be, given the vague wording of the EO) is simply the crypto-ification of existing central bank reserves. It would be far from straightforward and would come with costs as well as benefits. But it seems the possibility should at least be considered, particularly given that it would be complementary to offshore dollar stablecoin issuance.

How would that differ from today’s reserves? Currently, reserves are limited to US commercial banks and exist in ledger form. Unlike traditional central bank reserves, policymakers could design a wCBDC to be tokenised, meaning that the liability on the central bank balance sheet would be to whomever holds a token representing some quantum of reserves.

Similar to the distinction between checking accounts and cash, the distinction between current digital reserves and a wCBDC is that the former is account-based, whereas the latter is token-based. More radically, this wCBDC would be cross-border, with foreign banks able to hold the tokens.

Such a leap holds great appeal. The Eurodollar market — including, crucially, stablecoins — would operate on firmer ground and, given the nature of fractional reserve banking, the quantity of dollar deposits abroad would balloon, strengthening and entrenching the appeal of the dollar. More dollars abroad under a system of programmable tokens would mean more offshore transaction information — fortifying American sanctioning capacity and restricting the financing of terrorism. Broadened access to dollar accounts abroad might even help the world digest spates of ever-expanding Treasury issuance. And reasoning defensively, China already has a first-mover advantage on a cross-border wCBDC, putting the US at risk of being left behind.

How would the offshore digital dollar work? Start with the obvious design decision: access. You’d probably have a tiered system, such that commercial banks in higher-risk (in an AML/CFT sense) countries with under-developed financial systems and poor bank regulation would have very limited access; moderate-risk nations would have moderate access; and so on, on a sliding scale. With tokenisation, the digital tokens would be programmed with various parameters (“this can’t go to accounts in North Korea”), which would aid in risk control. It would almost certainly be limited to depository institutions.

The Eurodollar market — that is, dollars created/intermediated outside of the US (including offshore stablecoins), or the offshore dollar market — has operated for decades with no official backstop from the US. Foreign commercial banks promise dollars on demand to their customers (in the form of deposits), with dollar assets backing them. But if they ran out of dollar assets? They don’t have access to the Fed. There’s no FDIC for the offshore dollar market. Even so, partially out of self-interest and partially in the interest of broader global stability, the Fed has episodically intervened in the Eurodollar market to provide backstop liquidity. That would very quickly need to become official.

Would foreign commercial banks have access to the discount window? Almost certainly not. But there would need to be some kind of parallel system, even if it were intermediated by foreign central banks (like an expanded network of swap lines or repo facilities). If stablecoins are meant to support the dollar offshore, the need for such a formalised backstop would only grow.

Precisely because of the above, American commercial banks holding Fed reserves are supervised by the Fed. The Fed can’t, and wouldn’t, supervise offshore banks, so co-operation with foreign bank supervisory authorities would be crucial. The tiered system would help limit the complication, but multilateralism, in short supply these days, would be a must.

Direct claims on the Fed already circulate widely around the world: crisp green cash. But that cash doesn’t earn interest. In an interest-on-reserves policy world, the Fed’s hand would probably be forced in remunerating all its reserves, inclusive of a tokenised wCBDC.

In practice, the Fed already in effect maintains an offshore dollar monetary policy: the floor is set by the rate on the FIMA reverse repo pool and the ceiling by the FIMA repo facility. With stablecoins offering higher rates, such an offshore wCBDC deployment would in effect create an offshore parallel to the onshore dollar hierarchy between official money and private money, interest rates and all.

The risk of volatile capital flows would pose a regulatory challenge to both stablecoins and any offshore wCBDC. If I’m an emerging market central bank, and I’ve sorted out capital flow regulations (and gotten the IMF off my back about it), I probably don’t want a bunch of digital dollar wallets sprouting up all over the place.

What could be worse for capital flows/foreign exchange stability than the ability for citizens to run out of their native currency into dollar accounts in their own country? Here, wCBDCs have an advantage over stablecoins and, developed in careful co-operation with foreign authorities (in potentially bespoke nature, given their programmability), could calm the nerves of host country policymakers.

The offshore digital dollar is pretty radical — more radical, perhaps, than it initially sounds. Many benefits would likely await the US, but, like everything in economics, there’s no free lunch here. The peril of becoming lender of last resort to functionally the whole world, political indigestion from paying interest on the reserves, and bureaucratic complexity.

Yet, it’s also less radical than it sounds. Direct offshore claims on the Fed already exist in the form of cash, a much dirtier dollar. And a wCBDC wouldn’t be creating the offshore dollar market; it already exists. To the extent the Fed would have to provide emergency liquidity, it’s unclear that’s something it’s not already doing.

If the plan is to have stablecoins around the world, better to pair them with an official version: the offshore digital dollar. While Washington tinkers, Beijing toils. Food for thought.



For years, a US flag was painted on the floor of Iran’s presidential compound, strategically located so that visitors would trample over the Stars and Stripes on their way in.

Shortly before Donald Trump’s inauguration, however, the flag was quietly removed. There was no official explanation from Iranian officials. But the move captured a quiet shift in Tehran’s thinking, in what is shaping up to be its most consequential year since the 1980s Iran-Iraq war: with the country at its most vulnerable point in years, officials hope they can avoid confrontation and even strike a deal with the new president.

The return of their bête noire to the White House is happening just as Iran’s long nuclear stand-off with the west comes to a head. It also follows a year of conflict that has changed the power dynamics in the Middle East at Tehran’s expense, with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu emboldened by a string of battlefield gains that dealt the Islamic republic and its regional proxies devastating blows.

Israel, which traded two rounds of tit-for-tat strikes with Iran last year, claims to have destroyed much of its air defences; Tehran’s main proxy, the Lebanese movement Hizbollah, has been debilitated; and the toppling of the Assad regime in Syria has robbed it of a key ally. With this in mind, analysts say Iran can ill-afford to antagonise Trump and risk more military conflict with Israel and even the US.

“It is a very critical year, largely because the strategic context for Iran has changed drastically,” said Vali Nasr, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. “What Iran has lost is a way of managing Israel and . . . its hand is weaker with the Europeans and the Americans.”

The expectation is that Trump, who in his first term abandoned the 2015 nuclear deal Tehran signed with world powers and ramped up sanctions in a “maximum pressure” campaign, will return to his hardline policies.

But there are also hints he may be willing to bargain. Trump has delegated his Middle East envoy Steve Witkoff to explore whether diplomatic accommodation with Iran is possible, saying last week that “it would really be nice if [tensions over Iran’s nuclear programme] could be worked out”.

Western diplomats say the government of reformist President Masoud Pezeshkian has for weeks signalled more willingness to agree to a negotiated settlement to secure relief and ease domestic economic pressure, but also because of Iran’s weakened position and desire to avoid military confrontation with the US and Israel.

But they warn that, if that fails, Iran is on a collision course with the west. European powers that opposed Trump’s maximum pressure during his first term have become more angry with Iran’s behaviour, including the continued expansion of its nuclear activity, its arms sales to Russia and its alleged targeting of citizens in the west.

With Iran enriching uranium close to weapons-grade level — and closer than it has ever been to having the capacity to produce nuclear bombs — diplomats say they want action not words.

The 2015 accord’s “sunset clauses” are set to expire in October, which will lift restrictions on Iran’s nuclear activities and in effect signal the termination of the moribund agreement.

As that date nears, a risk for Iran is that western powers trigger the so-called snapback process that would lead to the reimposition of UN sanctions and further international isolation if there is no alternative deal.

Inside Iran, reformists have begun public debates to pressure Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, and the elite Revolutionary Guard to negotiate, arguing that this may be the regime’s last chance to avert a crisis.

Pezeshkian “has the opportunity to take significant steps for Iran”, said Hossein Marashi, a senior reformist politician, during a speech this month. “His first mission should be a new chapter in foreign policy. We no longer hold leverage in Lebanon, Syria or Iraq.”

Iranian analysts said, however, that Tehran does not want to be seen to negotiate out of desperation.

“While we resist US pressure, we will also signal a willingness to negotiate,” said a relative of Khamenei. “Iran is working to minimise actions that might provoke Washington, even if no agreement is eventually reached.”

The relative of Khamenei acknowledged that Israel’s attacks on Iran and the so-called “axis of resistance” of Tehran-backed militant groups, including Hizbollah and Hamas, had led Iranian leaders to reassess their perception of the republic’s power in the Middle East.

But he added that Tehran retains tools “to alter the battlefield”, without elaborating: “The Islamic republic has suffered blows, but there will be no strategic U-turns in its domestic and foreign policies.”

“The Iranians don’t see themselves as weak in the way in which they’re being portrayed. They have inherent weaknesses, there’s no question about it,” Nasr said. “But they estimate that there are constraints on Trump if he doesn’t pursue the diplomatic path, and that the risks are quite high for a military conflict that the US cannot then control.”

When Trump implemented his “maximum pressure” strategy against Iran during his first term, Iranian forces were blamed for sabotage attacks on tankers in the Gulf and a missile and drone strike in 2019 on Saudi oil infrastructure.

But Trump also displayed his unpredictability. After initially indicating that he was not willing to use military action, he in 2020 ordered the assassination of Qassem Soleimani, Iran’s most powerful commander, pushing the foes briefly to the brink of war.

Some experts said the blows to the axis, which have diminished Iran’s regional influence, could mean Tehran would be more willing to strike a deal with Trump to seek security guarantees that it would not be attacked by Israel.

Sanam Vakil, director of the Middle East programme at Chatham House, said Tehran needed to entice Trump into a deal quickly if it was to avoid more US “maximum pressure” and the threat of further Israeli strikes.

“Without offering something bigger, they risk a third round of strikes from Israel that will be supported by this US administration,” she said. “What’s at stake is the viability of the regime. The economic viability of the regime and their ability to rehabilitate themselves and build back legitimacy.”



Hours ahead of the reinauguration of Donald Trump as US president last week, Goldman Sachs hosted its annual investment summit in its London office, and one big so-called Trump trade kept on cropping up: the dollar.

The new US president’s economic policy platform remains tough to parse or predict in any kind of detail. But investors, especially speculative hedge funds, have been pretty settled on the idea that Trump means a strong buck — the result of American exceptionalism, stubborn inflation, or both.

For many clients it is, as one of the bank’s most senior traders outlined to the assembled fund managers, “the most obvious trade in the world”, especially in relation to the Chinese renminbi.

Later that same day, Trump made his way back to the White House. On his way, at the inauguration ceremony, he returned to his precious topic of tariffs — one of the key policies that snagged him his historic election victory. This time, however, it came with one big problem for the “obvious” trade: Trump directed his toughest intentions at Mexico and Canada, not China, which he has previously suggested was the main target.

Cue a sizeable jump in the Chinese currency that has fuelled a drag on the dollar across the board. The euro, sterling and yen have all picked up from recent lows — an alarming development for dollar bulls.

This is far from the only supposedly slam-dunk strategy for the president’s second stint in the White House that has run into early trouble.

The message in the run-up to the reinauguration of Donald Trump has been that his zeal for deregulation, low taxes and American goods for American consumers all add up to a strong positive case for buying and holding US stocks in preference to the rest of the world. The icing on the cake is the artificial intelligence revolution, forged in the US and dominated by US-listed companies. Some investors see it as not just a commercial imperative but a strategic geopolitical imperative to stick as closely as possible to this theme.

Then came the latest market shock: the emergence of DeepSeek, a Chinese challenge to US hubris in artificial intelligence. This took a little while to really get on to investors’ radar. But at the start of this week, it did so with a bang, sending US tech stocks sliding fast. The market value of Nvidia alone sank by more than $600bn — an unprecedented daily drop for a single company. Remember: just seven AI-adjacent US stocks account for fully one-third of the entire S&P 500 benchmark index of US equities. If it turns out that the moat around them, and particularly around chipmaker Nvidia, is not as wide or as deep as investors had hoped, this whole fairytale starts to unravel.

French bank Société Générale points out that without Nvidia and its top four customers — Microsoft, Google, Amazon and Meta — the entire US benchmark index would be some 12 per cent below where it is today. With “American exceptionalism in full force”, as Manish Kabra, head of US equity strategy at the bank put it, it is little wonder that broad US markets are feeling the pain. Tilting towards an equal-weighted S&P 500, rather than the standard version favouring monster-size tech stocks, makes sense here, he added.

Ignoring markets outside the US is also unwise. The main stocks indices in Germany and the UK have struck new record highs since Trump took office. There is life in the rest of the world after all. But any challenge to US Big Tech has the power to be seriously destabilising for all markets.

A stumbling dollar and unusually wobbly US stocks are an ugly blow for anyone who expected this to be an easy ride, and a painful reminder that when it comes to managing money in the era of Trump 2.0, no one really knows anything. Whether you are a hedge fund manager or a have-a-go amateur investor, in this environment, you stick to your convictions at your peril.

US Big Tech, a powerful dollar and US dominance over puny overseas stock markets were all a nice, neat, satisfying story to accompany the new Trump era, and investors of all stripes embraced it with great vigour. “Other than the almighty, who has achieved more in seven days than [president] Trump?” fawned investor Bill Ackman in an X post over the weekend.

Such cringe-inducing hyperbole is tough to stomach, but it is a timely prompt to consider what the chosen one will do in the next seven days, and the seven days after that, and whether your portfolio of “obvious” Trump trades can handle the pain.

katie.martin@ft.com



The EU and Nato have taken a vow of silence over Greenland after Denmark requested its allies refrain from reacting to Donald Trump’s threats to seize the Arctic island.

Copenhagen’s strategy of avoiding public confrontation with Trump, which four officials said was closely co-ordinated with Nato and the EU, underscores the scramble among US allies to work out how to handle the US president’s pugnacious diplomacy.

Trump had a fiery 45-minute phone call with Denmark’s Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen last week, putting Copenhagen into what officials described as “crisis mode”. Trump has threatened to target tariffs against Denmark and has refused to rule out taking the Arctic island by force.

Trump reiterated this weekend that he “will get” Greenland — an autonomous part of the kingdom of Denmark — while mocking Copenhagen’s “dog sleighs” defending the island, where the US has the biggest military presence.

The US, through Nato, is a military ally of Denmark with a mutual defence agreement. The EU’s governing treaty also contains a mutual defence clause.

Danish and European officials had initially hoped Trump’s comments about taking Greenland were a tactic to gain more influence over the territory, which has increased in importance as Russia and China seek more influence in the Arctic.

Officials in recent days realised the situation “should be taken far more seriously”, said one, given the global implications of Nato or the EU failing to condemn a violation of national sovereignty by one of their allies.

But Danish, EU and Nato officials have so far decided to minimise public discussion because of Copenhagen’s deep sensitivities and its conclusion that openly challenging Trump will only exacerbate the crisis.

“A low profile seems to be the safest bet with Trump. Hopefully he will be distracted by something else,” said one senior European official.

Another senior EU official said: “We believe a tit for tat approach is not useful. [But] we all stand by our basic principles, such as national sovereignty and territorial integrity, that must be respected. We are ready, and the Danes know that, to reaffirm that whenever needed.”

Frederiksen will on Tuesday visit German Chancellor Olaf Scholz in Berlin, French President Emmanuel Macron in Paris and Nato secretary-general Mark Rutte in Brussels in a whistle-stop diplomatic tour.

Frederiksen met her Norwegian and Swedish counterparts and Finland’s president in Copenhagen on Sunday night, where the issue of Greenland was raised in discussions.

No joint declaration was issued following the meeting. There have also been no efforts to co-ordinate Nato or EU statements in defence of Denmark or Greenland.

When asked about Trump’s Greenland comments, Rutte told the European parliament last week: “Trump has been right many times . . . we need to dialogue with him.”

“This is not about who rules or controls Greenland,” Rutte continued. “This is, of course, about making sure that the Arctic stays safe.” Neither the head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, nor European Council president António Costa have made public statements regarding Trump’s threats against Denmark.

“We are not negotiating Greenland. We are supporting our member state Denmark,” EU chief diplomat Kaja Kallas said on Monday after a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers. “We are looking at it from the side of Europe, not reacting to what the US is doing.”

Behind the scenes senior officials in Brussels, Copenhagen and Nuuk are discussing how the bloc could strengthen its partnership with Greenland on critical raw materials extraction and energy, according to two European officials briefed on the discussions.

“There’s a lot of discreet work going on right now to see how we can strengthen co-operation with Greenland,” said one of the officials. They added the EU wanted to avoid appearing like the EU was making an offer, after years of inaction, “because Trump has put it on the agenda”.

Frederiksen’s government is “doing the right thing in communicating to the Americans in a firm but polite way,” said Rasmus Jarlov, a former Danish minister and current MP from the opposition Conservative party.

“It’s a good idea not to engage in verbal exchanges with the Trump administration. It’s a good idea to talk to allies in [the] rest of Europe; Europe should stand together if the situation should escalate,” he added.

Some officials have raised concerns over whether Europe could offer any credible response to Trump acting on his threats regarding Greenland.

“I’m not saying there’s no plan,” said the second European official. “But we don’t really have an alternative approach.”



The most important trend in finance in the past 40 years is the emergence of winner-take-all industry structures in technology. We live in a world of network effects and increasing returns to scale. In industries from PC software (Microsoft), internet search (Alphabet), online retail (Amazon) and social media (Meta) to high-end consumer hardware (Apple), most of the profits and market share have gone to one company. It is only a moderate exaggeration to say all that has mattered for investors in the past few decades was being on the right side of one or more of these winner-take-all stories.

So it is natural that everyone either has assumed, desired or feared that the next great technology trend, artificial intelligence, would have roughly this economic structure. What happened in markets yesterday was not an out-of-nowhere surprise, nor a panic, nor a bubble popping. It was the pricing in of slightly higher odds that AI is not a winner-take-all game.

It was always conceivable that the AI revolution would be like the invention of the automobile or the aeroplane. Those revolutions did lead to the creation of huge, durably profitable companies, but also lots of competition, ensuring that much of the value created went to consumers rather than shareholders. Now that looks like a more significant possibility for AI.

Most readers will know the news by now. DeepSeek, a Chinese AI company, has released an AI model called R1, that is comparable in ability to the best models from companies such as OpenAI, Anthropic and Meta, but was trained at a radically lower cost and using less than state-of-the art GPU chips. DeepSeek also made enough of the details of the model public that others can run it on their own computers (but not necessarily enough that others could re-create it).

This puts three punctures in the winner-take-all theory of AI. It deflates the idea that the best AI results could only be achieved with Nvidia’s best chips and software; the idea that only the biggest tech companies could afford to build and run high-quality AI models; and the idea that only companies with their own AI models could offer great AI applications.

What kept Nvidia’s stock rocketing for the past two years was sheer computational superiority. Its chips were miles better for AI. DeepSeek built R1 with Nvidia’s older, slower chips, which US sanctions allow to be exported to China. This suggests the door is open to other competitors at the silicon level.

Next, cost. The biggest tech companies looked more or less insulated from competition on AI because, it was assumed, the only way to build a better AI model was to train it with more inputs using more computing power, at huge expense. The finished model would then be under the control of the big company that built it. The barrier to entry was money — that is why Big Tech has gone on a data centre spending spree. But R1 suggests that companies with less money can soon operate competitive models.

Finally, applications. “Inference” is where the user really meets AI: questions answered, tasks completed. It was assumed that any application would depend on the bigger companies’ models and servers for inference. But models like R1 might work well enough, and do inference efficiently enough, to run on the servers of all sorts of companies that will not need to “rent” from a company such as OpenAI.

All this has big implications. But other than Nvidia, the big fallers yesterday were not the Magnificent Seven Big Techs. Those companies’ AI halos remain squarely in place. The real damage was done to the stocks behind the emerging data centre economy. Constellation, the utility company that covers the mid-Atlantic data centre hub, Vistra, Washington state’s big power provider, and NRG, the Northeast’s and Texas’ main player, all fell hard:

GE Vernova, Eaton and Quanta Services build power systems for data centres. Oracle just announced a big data centre investment. Broadcom and Arista provide non-GPU technology to data centres. All were whacked:

Amazon, Alphabet, Meta and Microsoft have all invested very heavily in AI data centres. Perhaps they have wasted some of that money — but they could be free to spend less now. Apple and Microsoft, whose natural strength might have been in building applications for AI models rather than the models themselves, could even be in a better position.

Nvidia itself is hardly on its knees. Its proprietary coding language, Cuda, is still the industry standard. And just because the DeepSeek model is more efficient does not mean that leaner models will not benefit from the higher computational power offered by Nvidia’s best chips. While its shares dropped nearly 17 per cent yesterday, that only brings it back to the (very, very high) level of September:

We should not overstate the market’s reaction to R1. The Nasdaq fell 3 per cent. That was a bad day, not a panic. The winner-take-all view of AI is wounded, not dead. The AI bubble, if that’s what it is, may yet pop, but it didn’t pop yesterday. Not even close.

Misplaced hope.

robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.



Investor exuberance over artificial intelligence has fuelled a “bubble” in US stocks that resembles the build-up to the dotcom bust at the turn of the millennium, billionaire investor Ray Dalio has warned.

Dalio told the Financial Times that “pricing has got to levels which are high at the same time as there’s an interest rate risk, and that combination could prick the bubble”.

The warning from Dalio, the founder of hedge fund Bridgewater Associates and one of the highest-profile figures on Wall Street, comes as concerns swirl over whether the boom in US AI stocks has gone too far. Investors also remain concerned about elevated borrowing costs, worries that sharpened after Federal Reserve officials in December trimmed their expectations for rate cuts this year.

“Where we are in the cycle right now is very similar to where we were between 1998 or 1999,” Dalio said. “In other words, there’s a major new technology that certainly will change the world and be successful. But some people are confusing that with the investments being successful.”

The late 1990s saw a run-up in tech valuations, powered in part by low interest rates and growing adoption of the internet, followed by a brutal correction that came as Alan Greenspan’s Fed tightened monetary policy.

The tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 index doubled in 1999, only to fall about 80 per cent by October 2002. The index has doubled since the beginning of 2023 as stocks such as AI-focused chipmaker Nvidia have powered higher.

Wall Street stocks slumped on Monday after DeepSeek, a Chinese AI company linked to a little-known hedge fund, published a paper claiming its newest AI model rivals those of OpenAI and Meta Platforms in performance, yet at a lower cost and with less sophisticated hardware. Nvidia shed nearly $600bn in market value on Monday.

DeepSeek’s apparent success calls into question the potential returns on hundreds of billions of dollars invested by Silicon Valley companies in AI data centres, and whether China has managed to find a way to compete despite restrictions on its ability to import high-end chips from the US.

OpenAI, backed by Microsoft, last week announced a plan to invest up to $500bn in AI infrastructure. The company’s ChatGPT was the top-rated free app on the Apple app store until it was displaced on Monday by DeepSeek’s AI assistant.

Dalio, who retired as chair of Bridgewater in 2021 but remains on the board, has long advocated economic engagement with China. He wrote last year that “the key question isn’t whether or not I should invest in China so much as how much”. He warned, however, that the stakes in AI are unusually high.

“The tech war between China and the US is far more important than profitability, not only for economic superiority, but for military superiority,” he told the FT.

“Those who are going to pay attention to profitability with sharp pencils are not going to win that race,” Dalio added.

Reinforcing the elusiveness of AI profit, OpenAI founder Sam Altman wrote on X this month that the company was losing money on its $200-per-month ChatGPT Pro plan because of unexpectedly heavy usage.

As US technology groups invest lavishly, President Donald Trump has pledged to support American AI in his second term.

China has offered financial assistance for its AI industry, including the launch of funds set up to support its embattled semiconductor industry. Meanwhile, the US under former president Joe Biden extended billions of dollars of subsidies for groups to build chips on American soil.

Dalio conceded that state support for jockeying AI developers was inevitable given the importance of winning the global race, even it if came at the expense of profit.

“In our system, by and large, we are moving to a more industrial-complex- type of policy in which there is going to be government-mandated and government-influenced activity, because it is so important.

“Capitalism alone — the profit motive alone — cannot win this battle.”



A Chinese company’s claim of a $5.6mn artificial intelligence breakthrough wiped almost $600bn from Nvidia’s market value on Monday, shattering Wall Street’s confidence that tech companies’ AI spending spree will continue and dealing an apparent blow to US tech leadership.

Yet many in Silicon Valley believe the broad sell-off is an overreaction to DeepSeek’s latest model, which they argue could spur wider adoption and utility of AI by radically lowering the technology’s cost, sustaining demand for Nvidia’s chips.

Pat Gelsinger, recently forced out as chief executive of Intel, was among those buying his former rival Nvidia’s stock on Monday. “The market reaction is wrong: lowering the cost of AI will expand the market,” he said in a LinkedIn post. “DeepSeek is an incredible piece of engineering that will usher in greater adoption of AI.”

Nvidia became the world’s most valuable company last year as investors bet on Big Tech companies’ insatiable appetite for its powerful AI processors. The chipmaker’s chief executive Jensen Huang has predicted $1tn worth of AI data centres will be built in the next few years.

Underpinning that confidence was the concept of an AI “scaling law”, popularised by senior leaders at AI start-ups such as OpenAI and Anthropic, that suggested AI models got smarter as they were fed more data and computing resources.

DeepSeek’s release of its highly capable R1 model — and the research paper explaining openly how it was made — seemed to break the scaling law’s spell, as its chatbot leapt to the top of the iPhone’s US App Store chart over the weekend. The Philadelphia Semiconductor index shed 9.2 per cent, its worst daily drop since March 2020.

Chinese tech champion Huawei has emerged as Nvidia’s primary competitor in China for inference chips. The Financial Times has previously reported that it has been working with AI companies, including DeepSeek, to adapt models trained on Nvidia GPUs to run inference on its Ascend chips.

“Huawei is getting better. They have an opening as the government is telling the big tech companies that they need to buy their chips and use them for inference,” said one semiconductor investor in Beijing.

The announcement that triggered Monday’s stock market spasm over Nvidia came as the US moves to assert its leadership in AI over China, and as the biggest US tech companies prepare to report their latest earnings. US President Donald Trump said DeepSeek “should be a wake-up call for our industries that we need to be laser focused on competing to win”.

In December, DeepSeek released the V3 model, which it claimed was comparable to ones from OpenAI and Google, but trained it on a fraction of the budget with $5.6mn. The Chinese company said it used just 2,048 Nvidia chips, which could have been obtained without breaching US export controls that have throttled China’s access to US chipmakers’ latest products.

Then, last week, it unveiled its latest R1 model, a “reasoning model” that is comparable to OpenAI’s o1.

Further spooking investors, DeepSeek’s engineers were able to unlock greater performance by writing code without relying on Nvidia’s Cuda software platform, which is widely seen as crucial to the Silicon Valley chipmaker’s dominance of AI development.

“DeepSeek has levelled the playing field,” said Stephen Yiu, chief investment officer of Blue Whale Growth, the investment fund backed by billionaire Peter Hargreaves, which last month reduced its exposure to the Magnificent Seven group of big US tech companies on concerns over their huge expenditure on AI.

The biggest US tech companies “have had monopoly access to AI — the entry ticket price was in the billions of dollars, otherwise there was no chance you could challenge the status quo”, Yiu said. That made DeepSeek’s arrival a “very positive development for the adoption, development and penetration of AI”, he added.

Short sellers, who have placed a flurry of bets against Nvidia’s sky-high share price in recent weeks, were jubilant on Monday. Nvidia’s 17 per cent share price decline generated $6.75bn in profits for short sellers, according to calculations by data group S3 Partners.

“A Chinese entity put out open-sourced code right before earnings of all the big American tech companies,” said one short seller with interests in a number of large AI companies. “They’re telling you there’s no value [in those companies’ AI models], it’s commoditised.”

However, some analysts have challenged the idea that DeepSeek’s breakthrough AI was so cheap to build.

Dylan Patel of chip consultancy SemiAnalysis has estimated that DeepSeek and its sister company, the hedge fund High-Flyer, have access to tens of thousands of Nvidia GPUs, which were used to train R1’s predecessors.

“DeepSeek has spent well over $500mn on GPUs over the history of the company,” Patel said. “While their training run was very efficient, it required significant experimentation and testing to work.”

G Dan Hutcheson at TechInsights said the market reaction did not reflect who was most exposed to DeepSeek’s breakthrough. “I don’t see it as a big hit to Nvidia, I see it as a bigger problem for the companies like OpenAI that are trying to sell these services,” he said.

Nvidia argued on Monday that DeepSeek’s innovations would benefit, not blow up, its business.

“DeepSeek is an excellent AI advancement and a perfect example of Test Time Scaling,” Nvidia said, referring to AI systems that consume more computing resources after a user poses a question or sets a task by “reasoning” or taking multiple linked steps to respond. “Inference requires significant numbers of Nvidia GPUs and high-performance networking.”

The implication of Nvidia’s statement is that by pushing the boundaries of what is possible with “open-source” AI models, DeepSeek has in fact grown demand for the chips that are used to run them.

While Nvidia is best known for providing the chips that are used to “train” or build a new AI system, it has said that it now generates just as much revenue from chips for “inference” or processing user requests using a finished model.

Huang argued on a recent podcast that demand for inference “is about to go up by a billion times” due to new AI models that “reason” or take time to plan and deliver an answer to a complex query.

“There are two uses for Nvidia chips, training and inference, and we’re just at the beginning of the inference story,” said Jordan Jacobs, co-founder of AI investor Radical Ventures, who bought more Nvidia shares on Monday as the chipmaker’s stock slumped 17 per cent. “As we see the world shifting to AI it requires a huge upgrade in chips. The sell-off seems to be an overreaction and a lack of understanding.”

“The market is not properly realising this is great for Nvidia,” said Dmitry Shevelenko, chief business officer at Perplexity, the San Francisco-based AI search start-up that counts the chipmaker among its investors. “No matter what, Jensen wins.”

Additional reporting by Cristina Criddle in San Francisco and Eleanor Olcott in Beijing



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to New York

It’s Friday night in New York City’s East Village. In the 1970s, the neighbourhood was the epicentre of punk. Now, though, it’s known for its urban sangfroid and urbane sophistication. Everyone is cool; maybe too cool. But inside Paradise Lost, a waiter is lighting a cocktail on fire for a table of ogling carousers. The lights flicker purple and white. The music cuts out and is replaced by a soundtrack of wolves howling and chains jangling. The waiters howl. The patrons howl. Chill this is not.

Paradise Lost (see below) is the latest addition to New York’s new breed of tiki bars — and one of the best. As far as bar subcultures go, tiki has had a wild ride. The first tiki bar, Don the Beachcomber, was opened in 1933 in California by Ernest Gantt, a man who later renamed himself Donn Beach. He created the archetypal tiki bar: an archly kitsch pastiche of exotic influences where images of Polynesian gods and half-clad Hawaiian women in leis complemented fusion food and intricate, often rum-based cocktails, served with maximal garnish in mugs designed to look like Moai statues. The trend reached its peak in the postwar years, partially as an antidote to the uptight Eisenhower administration. But by the 1990s, the incipient awareness that tiki was, in fact, a species of cultural appropriation based on colonialism, racism and sexism, helped kill the vibe.

Recently, though, bars such as Paradise Lost have tried to redefine tiki, steering clear of its troubled past while preserving the fun. As it turns out, there are many ways to go over the top. Not all are queasily fetishising. And now, when the real world is so chaotic, there can be no better time to escape into a lush, rum-powered fantasy.

A flight above one of Brooklyn’s best steakhouses, Gage & Tollner, its co-owner St John Frizell has carved out a pirate ship’s cabin. A watery view is glimpsed from a portal; fish glisten, mid-swim, mounted on dark wood walls. Sunken Harbor is the tiki bar grown up. Sure, the lights are dim but the vibe skews heavily nautical. In fact, the space is built slightly askew to better mimic a keeling cabin.

The complex cocktails are inspired by mid-century food and drink writer Charles H Baker and are organised by strength, from In the Shadows (“easy-drinking cocktails for a pleasant moonlight swim”) to The Abyss (maniacally strong and includes the Shattered Skull, a combination of rums, pomegranate, vanilla and pineapple that serves two). For tiki enthusiasts there’s even a passport membership, with 36 pages of challenges.

“I wanted to preserve the idea that you are toying with mystical forces but without appropriating Polynesian gods,” says co-owner Kavé Pourzanjani of Paradise Lost, which opened in 2023. “I settled on demonology.” The effect is more Mondo Cane than Charles Manson. Pourzanjani combines elements of B-movie horror, Ed Roth’s Rat Fink cartoon culture of the 1980s and DC comics. The ceiling is a fish net cluttered with ocean detritus: licence plates and model aeroplanes.

The menu, meanwhile, is almost as long as a Milton poem, and littered with illustrations of zombies. The drinks are elaborate concoctions, rated by skulls (strength), such as the Tarman, which includes three rums, falernum, cinnamon and grenadine, and Witches’ Sabbath (rums, brandy, gins, tropical juices, citrus and falernum), the ordering of which triggers the flashing lights and lupine howls.

Deep in Bushwick, the 16,000-square-foot Xanadu is, as one might imagine, de trop. It’s a hipster pleasure dome with a roller-skating rink, tiered seats, a DJ, a state of the art sound system and a disco in the bathroom. The carpet alone, a fiesta of neon swoops, is visual overload. The endless circumambulations of the patrons are powered by tiki drinks from poet-bartender Keri Marinda Smith, whose most recent collection is called Dragging Anchor. Smith’s drinks recall tropical classics: the Ladybug daiquiri, Cherry Baby (amaretto, cognac, blackcurrant and cherry) and Skaterade, a tequila-forward riff on Gatorade with blue spirulina. But beware, skating patrons have a two-drink limit.

In 2008, when Roberta’s started, the now-iconic pizzeria was a punky DIY affair in an old warehouse in the then terra incognita of Bushwick. Its adjoining tiki bar was a step up from the Pabst Blue Ribbon lager and other watery domestic beers favoured by early-adopting hipsters. Now, Roberta’s is an empire, with locations in Manhattan, Los Angeles, Denver, Singapore and beyond. But that no-big-deal nonchalance lives on in the original location’s tiki bar. Design-wise, the tiki influence is light, though the drinks aren’t. Among the crop of brightly coloured tiki riffs are the Marg Boi, made with tequila, triple sec and lime; the Young Money Melonaire (rum, Ancho Reyes, spicy poblano, melon and Campari); and the A$AP Wa$$ail, a wintry concoction of habanero tequila and pineapple with cherry liqueur and spiced cider.

Perhaps the oldest of the city’s extant tiki bars, Otto’s Shrunken Head opened in a former pharmacy in 2002. Once the block was peppered with bars — Irish, dive, karaoke — but now it’s been given over to Target and other big box stores. Otto’s, though, has survived. The small bar is illuminated by holiday lights year round, the walls are covered in sisal and the drinks are classic tiki: Mai Tais, Singapore Slings and Zombies. Just a few booths and stools, a photo booth (out of order since forever) and a video game (Big Buck Hunter II: Sportsman’s Paradise) round out the feeling of a slightly dilapidated island outpost from another place and another time.

Have you tried NYC’s new wave of tiki bars? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



Donald Trump’s efforts to address the soaring cost of living look set to disappoint US voters, with economists warning that his new administration is prioritising “America first” over beating back inflation.

Economists have revised up their forecasts for price rises this year amid signs that the president’s protectionist and isolationist agenda will raise costs and leave the Federal Reserve struggling to cut interest rates.

“The policies he’s pursuing have a high risk of inflation,” said Adam Posen, director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics think-tank. “It seems that promoting manufacturing and beating up US trade partners are goals that, for Trump, are a higher priority than the purchasing power of the working class.”

Economists now, on average, predict inflation will be 2.6 per cent this year, up from 2.2 per cent before the election, according to forecast aggregator Consensus Economics, due to the risk that Trump’s biggest policy pledges on immigration, tariffs and tax cuts, and cutting red tape could raise the cost of living.

Consumers grappled with price increases of more than 20 per cent during Joe Biden’s four years in office, with the worst surge in inflation in a generation forcing interest rates up to a 23-year high and costing the Democrats dearly at the polls.

But Trump maintains the high cost of living is not his administration’s primary concern. “They all said inflation was the number one issue. I said, ‘I disagree,’” he told supporters on inauguration day, arguing that immigration was a more pressing issue.

“If you really thought this guy was going to do something about the price of eggs, then you are probably going to be brutally disappointed,” said Mark Blyth, a professor at Brown University and the author of Inflation: A Guide For Users And Losers. “[His stance is] ‘We can’t give you cheap groceries, but we can give you the Gulf of America’.”

The Fed also thinks inflation under Trump will be stronger than it previously anticipated. Its quarterly “dot-plot” forecasts for December show rate-setters expected prices to rise by 2.5 per cent over the course of 2025, against an estimate of 2.2 per cent in September, before Trump was elected.

The central bank is almost certain to maintain interest rates at the target range of 4.25 per cent to 4.5 per cent at its vote on Wednesday, and the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets US borrowing costs, is expected to make just two quarter-point rate cuts this year.

If borrowing costs do not fall fast, then fresh conflict between Fed chair Jay Powell and the president looks likely.

“Trump said in Davos that interest rates are going to be lower . . . he didn’t say Jerome Powell better lower them, but it wasn’t very disguised,” said Doug Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum and chief economic policy adviser to former Republican Senator John McCain. “And I think the Fed’s unlikely to do anything but keep interest rates on hold.”

Chief among economists’ concerns is that the effect of a post-pandemic immigration boom in helping reduce inflation will go into reverse under Trump’s immigration policies.

The president’s promises to tighten border restriction, and round up and deport millions of undocumented migrants, are expected to leave construction groups across the country, and agribusinesses in south-western states, struggling to find workers.

“Regardless of where you stand on US immigration policy, there are a fair amount of workers in the construction industry that are illegal immigrants,” said Sherwin Loudermilk, president of Loudermilk Homes, an Atlanta-based real estate developer. “If Trump has mass deportations, or people get scared, then there’s going to be a void.”

Worker shortages usually raise wages, feeding into broader price pressures — although they could also lead to more investment in labour-saving technology, potentially enhancing productivity.

“Two things could save us from inflation — one is we just get an AI productivity miracle sooner than we think, and that outweighs the other stuff,” said Posen. “The other is that we get extremely unprecedented benefits from a stronger dollar.”

While a stronger dollar lowers import prices, any benefit for US consumers could be offset by higher tariffs.

Divisions between moderates, such as Treasury secretary Scott Bessent, and hawks, such as senior economic adviser Peter Navarro, make it difficult to predict what the president will do.

On the campaign trail Trump threatened to impose blanket levies of 10-20 per cent on all US imports. While that would raise prices, the impact might be shortlived, as long as other jurisdictions did not respond in kind.

“Just to put the numbers into perspective, a broad 10 per cent tariff on all US imports would raise the price level by 1 per cent,” said Ernie Tedeschi, an economist at Yale and former adviser to Biden, who added that such a rise would be a one-off shock that the Fed “would probably look through”.

Others think aggressive action by Trump on trade could delay the reduction of interest rates.

“You can’t cut the rate while a tariff is going up,” said Vincent Reinhart, chief economist at BNY Investments, who expects the next Fed cut to come in June.

Should Trump press ahead with plans to impose a 25 per cent levy on his southern neighbour, US citrus and vegetable agribusinesses, many of which have interests in Mexico, would need to pass on costs to customers.

Trump’s plans to cut taxes have also led to concerns that he risks repeating Biden’s mistakes by contributing to the country’s yawning fiscal deficit and stoking inflation.

“There is one narrative that says US inflation was all down to the [2021] fiscal stimulus, that Biden was responsible because he spent too much on the Covid recovery,” said Nicolò Fraccaroli, a visiting scholar at Brown University, although he added that while the spending was not the only source of price pressures, it did contribute “a little bit”.

Trump’s big hope for lowering inflation lies in tearing up red tape. But economists and businesses believe there are limits to how much this can cut costs for households and businesses.

“There’s some recent evidence that deregulation boosts growth,” said Sanjay Patnaik, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution think-tank. “But with inflation, at least to my knowledge, there isn’t much research that paints a clear line.

“It really depends on the type of regulations you’re looking at,” he added.

Trump has directed his cabinet to “marshall all powers at their disposal” to ease rules that will help tackle the soaring cost of living — including the high cost of housing.

But while construction businesses and economists widely share the president’s view that America needs more affordable homes, they are not convinced his plans to loosen regulations to tackle supply shortages will solve the problem.

“Regulations and making it easier to get permits is important, but obviously the number one thing is interest rates,” said Loudermilk.

High borrowing costs have also meant Americans are reluctant to move, leading to further shortfalls in supply.

“People don’t want to refinance from a 3 per cent mortgage to 7 per cent,” said Mahmood Pradhan, economist at Amundi. “Those costs are going to be the prevailing factor that restrains the housing market, not regulation.”

Trump has claimed his biggest deregulatory push — declaring a national energy emergency to increase domestic oil and gas production — will lower the cost of all goods and services.

But weak global demand and market caution could deter investment in additional supply.

“The oil and gas industry is reluctant to produce more than global markets can absorb right now. Precisely because they know that will cause commodity prices to drop sharply,” said James Lucier, managing director at Capital Alpha Partners, adding that there was “quite a lot of market discipline” constraining fresh drilling.

Additional reporting by Valentina Romei in London



Donald Trump’s Treasury secretary Scott Bessent is pushing for new universal tariffs on US imports to start at 2.5 per cent and rise gradually, said four people familiar with the proposal.

The 2.5 per cent levy would move higher by the same amount each month, the people familiar with it said, giving businesses time to adjust and countries the chance to negotiate with the US president’s administration.

The levies could be pushed up to as high as 20 per cent — in line with Trump’s maximalist position on the campaign trail last year. But a gradual introduction would be more moderate than the immediate action some countries feared.

The proposal by Bessent comes as Trump’s team debates how to implement tariff plans, with the president escalating his tariff rhetoric on Monday in a speech in Florida, threatening more duties on semiconductors, metals and pharmaceutical goods.

“We have to bring production back to our country,” Trump said.

The president was speaking after a day of turmoil in US stock markets, triggered by a tech sell-off as China appeared to make a leap ahead of the US in the global artificial intelligence race.His threat to impose tariffs on semiconductors entering the US would be difficult to carry out given the impact on tech companies relying on chipmakers such as Taiwan’s TSMC. In contrast, Bessent’s plan would see just 2.5 per cent added to tariffs each month. Two people familiar with the discussions said it was unclear if the Treasury secretary had convinced other central stakeholders, including Howard Lutnick, Trump’s pick for commerce secretary, to adopt his proposal for a gradual introduction of tariffs.

A person familiar with Bessent’s thinking declined to comment on the record about the proposal, but said: “He is not drawing up any plans but if confirmed looks forward to being a part of the conversation.”

Bessent was comfortably confirmed as the next US Treasury secretary by a Senate vote of 68-29 on Monday evening. Just hours later, speaking to reporters on Air Force One, Trump said he wanted “much, much bigger” tariffs than 2.5 per cent.

Tariff policy is at the centre of fierce trade debates between hawks such as Peter Navarro and Jamieson Greer, and moderates such as Bessent.

Trump has threatened to force tariffs of up to 25 per cent on imports from Canada and Mexico as soon as this weekend, and in recent days threatened Colombia with 25 per cent tariffs in a dispute over deportees.

Another person familiar with Trump’s thinking said he was weighing different options. “There is not a single plan the president is ready to decide on yet.”

While Bessent and other proponents of the low initial tariff believe it would give countries and companies time to adjust and negotiate, critics counter that a higher initial rate would send a clearer message.

Trump made high tariffs a core of his “America First” campaign rhetoric last year, vowing in September to “tax” foreign nations “at levels that they’re not used to”.

But since his inauguration on January 20, the president’s main move has been to publish a memorandum outlining probes into US trade policy, the cause of the country’s trade deficits and whether competitors are manipulating currencies and unfairly taxing US businesses.

When asked by reporters last week whether he planned to introduce universal tariffs, Trump replied: “We may. But we’re not ready for that yet.”

Trade analysts and lawyers have said Trump could levy universal tariffs swiftly by using executive powers such as the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, which allows the president to respond to emergencies through economic means.

However, trade experts have also warned the use of IEEPA to issue broad tariffs would likely face legal challenges by business groups.

Trump, who has long railed against the US’s trade deficit, has suggested tariffs would be a way to raise revenue for the country.

“Instead of taxing our citizens to enrich other countries, we will tariff and tax foreign countries to enrich our citizens,” he said in his inaugural address.

In his US Senate confirmation hearings last week, Bessent said the Trump administration would use tariffs to tackle unfair trade practices, raise US government revenues, and strike deals with foreign countries.

The White House did not respond to a request for comment.

Additional reporting by Myles McCormick in Washington



Here’s a parable:

A powerful king decided he wanted to make a Machine God that would be omniscient and omnipotent. After lots of experimentation, the king started to make progress. Miracles started to occur. People feared that this Machine God would be unmerciful and make humanity irrelevant, or possibly end all life entirely.

The early successes only made the king more radical, however, and fuelled his obsession. Huge amounts of time, energy and ideas were sacrificed in hopes of the wealth and prosperity the Machine God could bring.

Another king nearby was working on a Machine God of his own. But he decided omniscience and omnipotence weren’t his goal. Instead he wanted to make a Lesser Deity that could perform miracles that would be similar to Machine God, but without its ravenous hunger for sacrifice.

Once the Lesser Deity was unveiled, the Machine God’s people were very displeased. Why, they wondered, did they sacrifice so much to try to create a potentially apocalyptic and cruel Machine God — who still doesn’t exist — when benefits could easily be reaped with less sacrifice?

At the very least, today’s sell-off in Big Tech could be described as a biblical reckoning. Beyond that, there’s a lesson about the type of market and economic environment that creates these types of God-sized ambitions.

Nvidia is on track to set a record for the biggest single-day market cap loss in US history:

For readers who haven’t guessed yet, the parable was meant to contrast the US’s efforts to develop artificial intelligence — and its discussion of “Artificial General Intelligence” at whatever cost — with those of Chinese start-up DeepSeek.

One could argue that all of this could’ve been avoided by simply not promoting the idea of a maximalist Machine God. But financial markets were yearning for salvation, and there were holes in the bullish narrative that could only be filled by Machine God itself.

Take commercial property markets. The slump in office occupancy freaked out investors in office properties (and even bank bonds) and decimated downtowns. But the data-centre boom was a bright spot in the broader market, as plenty of analysts pointed out at the time.

Corporate profits? Well, as our pals at Unhedged very sharply pointed out this month, the recipients of capex dollars get cash today, while the expenses are booked over time. That means that, in effect, a bunch of money is flying around today that doesn’t take a bite out of megacap profits until later.

And broadly, stocks have been pricey. Last Friday, before the DeepSeek market meltdown, the S&P 500 was trading at 28 times last year’s earnings, according to FactSet, well above the long-term average of 18. The market has largely been driven by the biggest companies in the US (the Magnificent 7, as they’ve been named). They are OpenAI sponsor Microsoft, chipmaker Nvidia, Meta, Amazon, Alphabet, Apple, and Tesla . . . all of which are major participants in the race to develop and monetise AI.

Many of these companies have otherwise been under pressure from the burdens of corporate maturity, whether from regulations, rising costs, or slowing growth and whatnot.

Americans love when the stock market’s line goes up, though. So to bastardise the famous Voltaire quote: Machine God didn’t exist, so we had to invent It. Or at least try.



Technology stocks tumbled on Monday after Chinese artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek stunned Silicon Valley with advances apparently achieved with far less computing power than US rivals.

Shares in California-based Nvidia, one of the biggest beneficiaries of spending on AI chips, plunged almost 17 per cent, wiping out almost $600bn of market value, a record loss for any company.

DeepSeek last week released its latest large language AI model, which achieved a comparable performance to that of US rival OpenAI, even though the company has previously claimed to use far fewer Nvidia chips.

Venture capital investor Marc Andreessen called the new Chinese model “AI’s Sputnik moment”, drawing a comparison with the way the Soviet Union shocked the US by putting the first satellite into orbit.

The results sent a shockwave through markets on Monday, as investors reassessed the likely future investment in AI hardware.

The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite index fell 3.1 per cent, while the S&P 500 index declined 1.5 per cent. Microsoft dropped 2.1 per cent. Trading activity was more than a third higher than usual for the stocks listed on the US S&P 1,500 Composite index, in a sign of how investors were rushing to interpret how DeepSeek will affect Silicon Valley tech groups.

The rout extended well beyond traditional tech names. Siemens Energy, which supplies electrical hardware for AI infrastructure, plunged 20 per cent. Schneider Electric, a French maker of electrical power products that has invested heavily in services for data centres, fell 9.5 per cent.

Traders sought shelter in perceived havens, with shares in consumer staples companies such as Johnson & Johnson, Coca-Cola, General Mills and Hershey posting solid gains on Monday.

Apple, which is viewed as less exposed to the AI race than many Big Tech rivals, gained 3.3 per cent.

To some, the sell-off in the companies making the “picks and shovels” of the AI revolution echoed the share-price crash of IT hardware company Cisco when the dotcom bubble burst.

Nvidia, Broadcom and other chipmakers have benefited from Silicon Valley’s race to build ever-larger clusters of chips, which the likes of xAI boss Elon Musk and OpenAI’s Sam Altman have argued are needed to keep advancing AI’s capabilities.

Nvidia’s chief executive Jensen Huang and Broadcom’s Hock Tan have argued in recent weeks that they expected the data centre building frenzy to continue until the end of the decade.

“It shows how vulnerable the AI trade still is, like every trade that is consensus and based on the assumption of an unassailable lead,” said Luca Paolini, chief strategist at Pictet Asset Management.

But some Wall Street analysts and AI researchers have questioned the hype surrounding DeepSeek’s achievement. “It seems categorically false that ‘China duplicated OpenAI for $5M’ and we don’t think it really bears further discussion,” wrote analysts at Bernstein in a note to clients.

Some researchers have even speculated that DeepSeek was able to take shortcuts in its own training costs by leveraging the latest models from OpenAI, suggesting that while it has been able to replicate the latest US developments very quickly, it will be harder for the Chinese company to pull ahead.

AI investment by large-cap US tech companies hit $224bn last year, according to UBS, which expects the total to reach $280bn in 2025. OpenAI and SoftBank announced last week a plan to invest $500bn over the next four years in AI infrastructure.

Even following DeepSeek’s latest release, Meta chief Mark Zuckerberg said on Friday that he planned to spend as much as $65bn on AI infrastructure this year.

Founded by hedge fund manager Liang Wenfeng, DeepSeek last week released a detailed paper explaining how to build a large language model that could automatically learn and improve itself.

“It seems as if there is a bit of reality dawning that China has not been sitting idle, even as these tariffs and investment restrictions on tech companies have been put in place,” said Mitul Kotecha, Asia head of emerging markets macro and foreign exchange strategy at Barclays.

The US imposed stringent restrictions on chip exports to China under former President Joe Biden, banning the sale of Nvidia’s most advanced models to the country.

Some analysts argued that DeepSeek’s advances would ultimately prove positive for AI chipmakers such as Nvidia.

Dylan Patel, chief analyst at chip consultancy SemiAnalysis, said cutting the costs of training and running AI models would over the longer term make it easier and cheaper for businesses and consumers to adopt AI applications.

“Advancements in training and inference efficiency enable further scaling and proliferation of AI,” said Patel. “This phenomenon has occurred in the semiconductor industry for decades, where Moore’s Law drove a halving of cost every two years while the industry kept growing and adding more capabilities to chips.”

Reporting by George Steer, Jennifer Hughes, Harriet Clarfelt and Will Schmitt in New York, Arjun Neil Alim in Hong Kong, Leo Lewis in Tokyo, Eleanor Olcott in Beijing and Tim Bradshaw and Ian Smith in London



Robert F Kennedy Jr’s allies fear he has failed to convince enough senators to confirm him as President Donald Trump’s top health official, said people familiar with the matter.

Kennedy, known as RFK Jr, was holding last-minute meetings with Democrats and Republicans ahead of two days of questioning by the Senate’s finance and health committees later this week, three people said. He has met more than 60 senators since his nomination.

“There’s more anxiety now than ever,” said a person close to Kennedy. “This is a big week: if the vote were today it would be iffy. We really need to solidify momentum this week to overcome all the negativity there’s been.”

Opposition to Kennedy’s nomination has emerged from influential conservative voices, including The Wall Street Journal’s editorial board and Americans Advancing Freedom, a group co-founded by former vice-president Mike Pence that has expressed concern about the former Democrat’s support for abortion rights.

“What’s weird with RFK is the sheer volume of maybes that we need to watch and see where they come down — he is undoubtedly one of the two most endangered nominees,” said Chris Meekins, a Washington policy analyst for investment bank Raymond James.

Republican senators Mitch McConnell, Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski are considered obvious candidates to oppose Kennedy’s nomination. All three voted against Trump’s defence secretary nominee Pete Hegseth last week when he secured Senate confirmation with just a single tiebreaking vote cast by vice-president JD Vance.

But Kennedy’s support for abortion rights and his push to shake up the food industry and biomedical research funding were also potential sources of Republican opposition, people in his camp acknowledged.

Anti-abortion senators, including James Lankford; Republican senators, such as Todd Young and Thom Tillis, who are historically close to the pharmaceutical industry; and those with a large agricultural industry in their states, such as John Hoeven, were risks for Kennedy, the people said.

A spokesperson for Young said the Indiana senator had a “very positive” meeting with Kennedy in December. Representatives for the others did not respond to requests for comment.

“These are the most consequential confirmation hearings for any [Health and Human Services] secretary we have probably seen in many decades,” said Meekins.

Kennedy, a vocal vaccine sceptic and critic of the pharmaceutical industry, would control a sprawling department with 13 divisions and agencies and a budget of $1.8tn if he was confirmed.

A representative for Kennedy said they had “full confidence” that he would win the Senate vote.

Prediction market Polymarket gives Kennedy an 80 per cent chance of being confirmed, compared with almost 100 per cent for nominees such as Scott Bessent, Trump’s pick for Treasury secretary. Tulsi Gabbard, his nominee as intelligence director, was on just 51 per cent.

Kennedy has stirred controversy for his previous opposition to some childhood vaccines, MMR shots and the Covid-19 jab, although he has softened those positions to curry favour with senators.

He also earned $11.6mn from vaccine lawsuits over the past two years and has said he would keep a 10 per cent stake in any windfall from litigation against Merck’s Gardasil vaccine. One of his closest advisers — lawyer Aaron Siri — also led a lawsuit trying to revoke the most widely used polio vaccine.

McConnell, a polio survivor, has taken issue with Kennedy’s antivax comments, warning in December that undermining confidence in “proven cures” was “dangerous”. Representatives for McConnell and fellow rebels on the Hegseth vote, Murkowski and Collins, did not respond to requests for comment.

Kennedy’s vow to ban high-fructose corn syrup had also worried senators with states in the agricultural heartlands, the people close to him said.

Democratic senators, such as Sheldon Whitehouse and John Fetterman, have flirted with supporting Kennedy’s nomination, potentially complicating the vote. Neither senator responded to requests for comment.

The weeklong delay to Kennedy’s Senate hearings also pointed to some concerns that he did not have enough support, Washington insiders noted.

“When it’s all kumbaya, it’s in your incentive to push ahead with the hearings. Delay is not your friend,” said David Bowen, the former health policy director of the Senate health committee. “At best, he will sneak through on a close vote.”



It’s been a week of Trump 2.0, but it feels like a month (or more). From the flurry of executive orders to the raft of state-led lawsuits challenging them, it’s predictably difficult to keep up with what the president is doing. But if you listen carefully, there is signal in the noise. Here are my three leading indicators about what to expect from Donald Trump’s second administration based on his first week in office.

CEOs are stepping over themselves to fall in line with Trump, not only because they like his tax cuts and deregulation agenda, but also because he’s making it clear that he’ll come after them personally if they don’t. Before inauguration, when asked whether he thought Mark Zuckerberg had ditched independent fact-checking at Meta because of Trump’s threats to put him in jail, he gloated, “Probably.” Let’s think about that for a minute. We now have an American president who openly admits that he’s using the power of his office to coerce business leaders. What’s the difference between this and what provincial Chinese governors do when they shake down rich entrepreneurs for more tax money?

Trump doubled down on the personal attacks in his remarks to the World Economic Forum in Davos last week when he told Bank of America chief executive Brian Moynihan onstage that he’d better start doing more lending to conservatives, or else. In response, Moynihan took the sycophantic approach and tried to joke with Trump about their mutual CEO friends attending the forum. I don’t know which is more horrible: the autocratic tendencies of this president, or the way in which the business community as a whole refuses to stand up to him. I can’t help but think of German and Italian business men in the run-up to the second world war. I don’t think history will remember any of these business leaders well.

The Davos speech was the usual mixture of bluster and policy points, but the president said almost nothing of substance about China. He was tough on Europe’s value added tax and cumbersome regulations, and told Canada that “we don’t need your lumber or your oil”, but when it came to China, he made no threats and had no real policy prescriptions. Indeed, the one point of substance he raised, regarding talks with Russia and China about reducing nuclear arsenals, has not a chance of succeeding. Neither nation has expressed any interest in reducing nukes — why would they? There was also no mention of tariffs against China and no discussion of Taiwan (Trump isn’t interested in a war in the South China Sea; indeed, he made it clear he wants to end the one in Ukraine ASAP). Couple all this with the capitulation on TikTok and signs that the US is open to trade talks with Beijing. Trump is showing us that all the tough talk about China was a PR show for his base. His main focus will be on building industrial capacity and keeping US stock markets high — not starting a trade war with Beijing.

Before the Trump administration, there was much fretting about the frothy tech market, which has been highly concentrated in a handful of Silicon Valley stocks. But tech bros are now running things in Washington; the picture of Zuck, Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and others sitting with Trump’s family at the inauguration is already iconic. In his Davos speech, Trump said he considered the EU’s antitrust cases against Apple and Google to be a “form of taxation . . . these are American companies and they shouldn’t be doing that”. Big Tech valuations are based in large part on monopoly power, and to the extent that the threat of any federal antitrust action or regulation of AI is now gone, I think these stocks are unlikely to correct anytime soon.

Peter, what are your takeaways from Trump week one?

Rana, that’s a pretty good list, though I think Trump could turn against both China and the tech industry very quickly. The president’s gentler-than-expected approach to Beijing, I think, is driven by the transactional nature of everything he does — he thinks he can get a deal done to land TikTok with an American owner, launch a Chinese crackdown on the export of fentanyl precursors to avoid tariffs and convince Xi Jinping to pressure the Kremlin to sue for peace in Ukraine.

The problem is, China has shown no inclination to do any of these things (though it may be softening on allowing the sale of TikTok), and there are plenty of hardcore China hawks within the most senior reaches of the president’s national security team, including Marco Rubio, the recently sworn-in secretary of state, and Michael Waltz, national security adviser. Rubio and Waltz (as well as Peter Navarro, who has joined the White House staff after a stint in prison for contempt of Congress) will be pressing Trump to reverse his dovish tone the minute any putative deal hits a roadblock.

Trump’s support for the tech industry is similarly fraught with conflicting factions. Right now, he’s doing the bidding of the biggest of Big Tech names, several of which have cases not only before the European Commission but also the US competition authorities at the Federal Trade Commission and the justice department. But as the recent White House rollout of the so-called Stargate AI infrastructure project has demonstrated, the politics of Big Tech are complicated — especially with Elon Musk setting up an office within the White House bureaucracy. Musk immediately criticised the Stargate deal, arguing the companies behind the initiative (including OpenAI, which is in the middle of a legal battle with Musk) didn’t have the promised funding on hand. I’d expect more of that infighting to come, with Trump forced to take sides.

The one business sector you didn’t mention is the oil and gas industry, which had some of the clearest wins in week one. Although Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris climate accord (again) got most of the attention, that was just one of about a half-dozen executive orders aimed at the energy sector. They opened new lands for fossil fuel exploration, cleared some hurdles for permitting and eased environmental regulations on oil and gas production.

Our friend and former colleague Ed Crooks, now a top energy analyst at Wood Mackenzie, is sceptical whether any of these measures will have a medium-term impact on oil and gas output — those are driven by market prices and investor sentiment more than federal government policy, he argues — but it ticks a lot of boxes from the industry’s wishlist. Perhaps that’s not surprising, given that Trump has tapped industry friends for the most important energy-related jobs in his cabinet: for energy secretary, it’s Chris Wright, who headed one of the US’s largest fracking companies, and at interior it’s billionaire Doug Burgum, the former governor of North Dakota, which along with Texas is the most fracking-friendly state in the US.

Week one was obviously not great for the entire energy sector, given there was a concomitant undermining of the renewables industry — in addition to withdrawing from Paris, there were restrictions on wind power development, unwinding incentives on electric vehicles and scrapping efficiency standards on household appliances. But if I were an executive at an oil and gas company right now, I’d be pretty happy with how the first week went.



The writer is an FT contributing editor

The current sell-off in the tech sector triggered by the progress of Chinese artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek is a reminder of the risks of a concentrated stock market. The largest 10 stocks account for almost two-fifths of the S&P 500. Such concentration is unprecedented in modern times. Increasingly, equally weighted index products, which invest the same amount of money in every stock in a benchmark, are being touted as a way to dodge the risks of an ever more concentrated portfolio. Should investors heed these calls?

More concentrated stock markets make for less diversified passive portfolios. But this need not be a problem for either returns or even risk-adjusted returns. Having a third of your portfolio in a handful of stocks that compound high double-digit returns has been fabulous for passive investors in recent years, if less so for those active managers that underweighted Big Tech.

And there are good reasons why the largest companies are so highly valued. Today’s superstar corporates capture global economies of scale. They manufacture and control valuable intellectual property and have demonstrated the ability to commercialise it. Their earnings have been fast growing and persistently so. Market prices tell us that investors believe this trend can be sustained.

But the most valuable companies of today are rarely the most valuable ones 10 years hence. Research by Bridgewater Associates last year examined the performance of the most prized US businesses going back to 1900. By assembling a new cohort at the start of each decade and tracking their relative performances, the authors found that a market-weighted basket of the largest 10 stocks underperformed the market by an average 22 per cent over the next decade. Run the clock three decades forward and this underperformance extended to 53 per cent.

Such dynamism is healthy. Superstar tech companies of yesteryear such as Eastman Kodak, Xerox and Lucent have been supplanted by today’s Apple, Amazon and Alphabet. Some combination of spirited competition on the part of the market and effective antitrust machinery is key to economic growth.

It is possible that today’s megacaps will be more successful than their forebears in either reinventing and disrupting themselves to stave off challengers, or in stifling competition and capturing government. But to believe so is to believe that this time will be different. And for long-term investors pondering equal-weighted index products, this is the big call. Reversion to a less concentrated market requires underperformance on the part of the largest companies. It is this that would be likely to propel outperformance by equally weighted index trackers.

No one can know whether the megacap tech titans of today will sustain, or perhaps even grow, their market presence. A year ago, the elastic band seemed stretched. Since then, the so-called Magnificent Seven have delivered an average return of more than 60 per cent in 2024. There is certainly no foolproof quantitative model that will foretell the future. And so, like much of investing, it comes down to a judgment call.

Goldman Sachs published its call in October. In its judgment, today’s index concentration will unwind, and the impact this has on the long-term return estimates is profound. The bank’s forecast team, led by David Kostin, estimates the S&P 500 will return only 3 per cent a year over the next 10 years. With no change in index concentration, their call would have been a return of 7 per cent a year. As such, their baseline expectation is for stocks to underperform US Treasuries — a historical rarity.

One of the attractions of passive investing on a market cap-weighted basis is that it offers a free ride on markets that have been made efficient through the analytical toils of active investors. Passive investors do not need to take a view on the prospects of any individual company. To invest in an equally weighted index fund, by contrast, is to implicitly reject the notion that the stock market is efficient.

Equal-weight index products are a way to take exposure to American stocks without betting that this time will be different. They offer investors diversification, but run the risk of missing out if the Magnificent Seven continue their upward march. As the late Charlie Munger once observed, “diversification is for the know-nothing investor”. His point was not that diversification was stupid, but rather that it diluted any insights that professional investors might have. Theory dictates that Munger’s know-nothing investor would be best served by market cap-weighted index investing. For those wishing to capitalise on a view that today’s extreme concentration will revert to mean, equally weighted index products may prove more attractive.



Well, that made no sense at all. Believe what narrative you want: following an exchange of heated rhetoric and mutual threats of trade sanctions on social media yesterday, either Colombian President Gustavo Petro backed down from his refusal to allow military deportation flights or Donald Trump blinked and allowed said removals to proceed in a more humane manner. Given the relative sizes of their economies (an instant analysis by the Kiel Institute of Trump’s threatened 25 per cent tariffs showed a distinctly non-negligible 0.4-0.6 per cent hit on annual Colombian GDP) it’s quite likely Petro didn’t think through the consequences of acting on his own. He might well have found the dollar-based financial system mightier than the pen of his anti-colonialist poetic defiance on, of all places, Elon Musk’s X social media platform. On the other hand, US stock futures fell after Trump made his threats, which might merit some reflection for all those people who’ve confidently been telling me that the president will never do anything to weaken share prices.

It’s also entirely possible that both think they got a result. Petro got the confrontation he wanted rather than just doing the theatre of taking handcuffs off deportees without actually refusing them, as Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva did in Brazil. Trump no doubt thinks his willingness to reach for the heavy ordnance in terms of tariffs and financial sanctions worked, and will do so again. Is this the end of this particular chapter of the saga? What will happen to the threatened tariffs on Mexico, Canada and China to be imposed on Friday? By now you know my habitual quotation from screenwriter William Goldman (of whom I’m genuinely thinking of carrying around a cardboard cut-out): nobody knows anything.

Despite said mantra I did ask you all to guess what Trump would do first on taking office, and I report back on that below. Today’s main piece is on how tax and trade wars combine to create a whole new conflict. Responding to reader demand, I also look at Trump’s plan for an External Revenue Service. Charted Waters is on Bitcoin. Any thoughts on anything: alan.beattie@ft.com.

It seems like we weren’t looking at a wide enough field of fire when trying to anticipate the opening salvos. The surprise on the first day of Trump’s presidency was the threat to impose punitive taxes on foreign corporations and nationals in the US in retaliation for what he describes as unfair taxes abroad, as well as the somewhat more predictable decision to pull out the OECD agreement on minimum corporate tax.

The mechanism Trump chose, a little-known 90-year-old provision of the tax code, was unexpected. But the US moaning about foreigners imposing unfair taxes on US companies abroad has a strong recent history. In the past it has spilled into trade disputes and may now do so again, depending on if and how Trump conducts his assault.

Given the number of tech bros swarming over his administration, it’s not surprising Trump is repeating his first-term offensive on the digital services taxes (DSTs) that several European countries have introduced. But since before his first election in 2016 he’s also been moaning about countries with a value added tax. Export rebates on VAT, so the argument goes, act like tariffs by charging US exporters entering a foreign market while foreign companies aren’t charged in the US, which doesn’t have VAT.

Few economists buy this argument, but Trump’s VAT obsession taps into a rich and venerable vein of grievance on the subject among certain Washington trade lawyers.

The US introduced a tax provision, the Foreign Sales Corporation, in the 1980s to correct for the alleged VAT disadvantage. The EU brought WTO cases against it and an associated measure starting in 1997. After nearly a decade of prolonged litigation and complaints about compliance, Brussels won.

There was lots of grumpiness on Capitol Hill about the US’s sovereign right to tax, similar to the interminable “zeroing” dispute over WTO rulings against US antidumping methodology. And thus was added another eye of newt to the simmering Washington cauldron of resentment about WTO dispute settlement that caused the US progressively to detach from it.

OK, so. What’s Trump going to do about it and what can the EU (the main likely target, certainly for digital taxes) do to defend or counterattack? If Trump uses trade or investment restrictions to punish the EU for its DSTs, the EU’s choice is clear and things could get spicy very quickly. As keen readers will know, the EU created an “anti-coercion instrument” (ACI) precisely because of Trump’s previous threats on DSTs. The ACI gives the EU wide leeway to retaliate against foreign governments that use trade tools to attempt to force the EU or its governments to change policy — in this case to kill the DSTs.

The ACI has now been on the books since 2023 and hasn’t been used. What better casus belli than the original provocation come back again? The only thing is making sure enough member states are on board, since they gave themselves a big say over deploying the ACI, and Trump will no doubt try to bully or bribe them out of it.

On the other hand, if Trump sticks to using purely tax tools to punish the EU for DSTs, they might find it harder to respond. Power over tax still mainly resides with EU member states, not centrally. The ACI is supposed to be used against trade and investment actions only. If Trump manages to discipline himself to meeting DSTs (and maybe VATs) with tax retribution, he might put the EU in a difficult spot, unable to retaliate collectively. Then again, precision and self-discipline, as Gustavo Petro could now tell you, aren’t exactly the traits for which Trump is famous.

Another weird out-of-the blue plan of Trump’s is to start collecting tariff revenue through a new External Revenue Service, part of his insistence that foreign exporters pay the taxes on imports to the US. At least one reader has asked me if this means anything, so as a service I had a think. More usefully, I also went to one of the world’s great repositories of customs-related knowledge, Anna Jerzewska, founder of the consultancy Trade and Borders.

The verdict: “no”. I’m sure many of you know this already, but companies sending goods across borders generally hire a registered customs broker to do all the formalities including paying duties. For smaller consignments this might be a carrier like FedEx, for larger ones more likely a specialist company or a service offered by the big cargo carriers such as Maersk. The importing company involved typically pays the broker who transfers the money to the customs authorities, in the US’s case Customs and Border Protection.

Unless Trump is going to try some impossible scheme such as charging a foreign exporter tax in its home country before the goods are shipped, the system can’t really be changed. Jerzewska says: “It’s very unclear what any External Revenue Service will do, but what it won’t do is collect tariffs in a radically different way. Tariffs are charged to importers, and that will continue.” And that, as far as I am concerned, is that.

Hopefully someone can make Trump happy with a plan to do something for show. He could carve out some part of CBP and called it the External Revenue Service if he wants, perhaps fitting its officers out in snazzy outfits featuring a silver belt buckle in the shape of a dollar sign. After all, the Italian Guardia di Finanza, a militarised tax police force who collect customs duties among their other tasks, wear intimidating grey uniforms complete with ceremonial swords and zip around in impressively heavy-duty patrol boats. Collecting taxes in Italy isn’t traditionally a task for the faint-hearted. Someone get Trump a brochure.

None of this posturing will make any difference, of course, to the question of who actually bears the cost of import taxes. A rise in tariffs could be absorbed by the foreign exporter who reduces their prices to keep the post-tax import price the same, or by a company inside the US economy taking the hit from the higher price of imported inputs on its margins. Or it could be passed along to the eventual end-user. The evidence from the first Trump administration is that it was some combination of the second and third. Relabelling existing collection mechanisms won’t change this.

I asked you a few weeks back what Trump’s first trade action would be as president. “Repeal the offshore drilling ban, even if he has to break the law” was spot on — Trump issued an executive order to that effect on the first day — assuming we count that as a trade action. “Declare a national economic emergency” was the most innovative suggestion. Not quite yet, but I guess if he follows through with tariffs on someone like Colombia using the International Economic Emergency Powers Act (IEEPA), that will be fulfilled. Obviously putting tariffs on Mexico and Canada was another popular guess. But in the latter case we’re going to have to wait until the February 1 deadline to see if that happens.

Having a cryptocurrency fan in the White House is, it seems, good for Bitcoin’s business.

The FT does a big overview on Trump’s waging of global economic warfare.

The EU is contemplating introducing “Buy Europe” domestic procurement rules. This would be a victory for France, which has pushed the idea for decades.

My FT colleague Martin Sandbu says the EU should grasp the trading and economic opportunities that Trump’s policies are opening up.

Sam Lowe of the Most-Favoured Nation newsletter heroically does his best to explain that the regional “PEM” convention on pan-Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin, which the UK may or may not take up the EU’s offer to join, isn’t a customs union. Also, for those keeping up with the twists and turns of UK policy, the government is apparently now not in favour of a full trade deal with the US after all.

If your idea of fun is a trivia competition with other economics and finance nerds — and let’s face it, if it isn’t I’m not sure what you’re doing here — then the FT’s Alphaville is holding the inaugural Washington leg of its legendary pub quiz on February 6. Details here.

Trade Secrets is edited by Jonathan Moules



Like a true “globalist”, I watched Donald Trump’s inaugural address on my phone, while stuck in a traffic jam in Davos. A European executive, sharing the World Economic Forum shuttle bus with me, buried her head in her hands and lamented: “I can’t believe this is happening.”

But the response of delegates from the Middle East, Asia and Africa was very different. Many people from the global south (to use the annoying shorthand) think Trump is good news for them. Recent polling shows that, in countries such as India, Indonesia, South Africa and Brazil, this pro-Trump attitude extends well beyond the Davos-going elites.

The US president is widely seen, outside the west, as transactional, pro-business and a peacemaker. What’s not to like?

Plenty, actually. Look beyond the hype and there are many reasons for the global south to be deeply concerned about Trump’s America.

The US president is essentially pushing for an abandonment of the “rules-based international order” that has provided the stability and open markets that allowed China, India and a large part of south-east Asia to become much richer over the last 30 years.

Ripping up those rules and moving to a completely transactional world may sound refreshingly straightforward. But a world without rules is one in which the strong prey upon the weak — without any framework of law or principle to constrain them. And most of the countries of the global south are more likely to end up as prey than predator.

Panama, Colombia and Mexico are among the first nations to discover how uncomfortable a Trumpian world can be. Some 80 per cent of Mexico’s exports go to the US. If Trump goes ahead with his threatened tariffs, he could push America’s southern neighbour into an economic depression.

Mexico, of course, is not alone. Trump has threatened most major trading nations in the world with tariffs. The notion that this does not really matter because the president is “transactional” — and that all his threats are simply preludes to a deal — ignores the way that business operates. International companies need stability and predictable legal regimes if they are to have the confidence to make long-term cross-border investments.

The evidence is that even when Trump makes a deal, there is no guarantee he will stick to it. During his first term, the US negotiated a new trade agreement with Canada and Mexico — known as the USMCA. But Trump is now demanding fresh concessions.

If all agreements can be ripped up, in response to some new grievance or to take advantage of a shift in the balance of power, then no trade deal is secure. As one former central banker put it to me in Davos: “The logic of that is that you end up only being safe trading inside your own borders.”

Westerners may be shocked to see a US president talk like a mafia boss who wants more protection money. But many in the global south have always believed that American leaders act like mobsters — even if they talk like missionaries. At least, they say, Trump has now dropped the infuriating moralising. The hope is that a less hypocritical US will be easier to deal with, because it will not make unrealistic demands based on irrelevant western values.

But we are beginning to see what a US that proudly proclaims it has no altruistic interest in the outside world looks like — and it is not pretty. Marco Rubio, the secretary of state, has announced a suspension of almost all US aid programmes. Only those that directly benefit Americans will be renewed. That could end programmes such as Pepfar, which provides drugs to combat HIV and Aids and has saved millions of lives around the world.

Trump, meanwhile, has casually appeared to endorse ethnic cleansing in Gaza. That could be terrible news for the Palestinians who would lose their homeland — and will also deeply alarm Jordan and Egypt, which are meant to take in the new refugees.

The US will certainly not be volunteering to resettle anybody. The poem carved on the Statue of Liberty proclaims: “Give me your tired, your poor . . . The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.” But, to put it mildly, that is not the mood of Trump’s America, where the president’s supporters wave banners demanding “mass deportation now”. Programmes to resettle refugees in the US have already been suspended.

Cutting down on legal immigration from places that Trump once described as “shithole countries” might also sound like good policy to many Americans. But it does not sound like good news for the middle classes of the global south, who may find that prized visas for skilled immigrants or students are much harder to come by.

Still, perhaps all the concerns about trade, aid and migration can be waved away if Trump makes good on his promise to end wars around the world. However, the president’s aspiration to be a global peacemaker is difficult to reconcile with his proclaimed ambition to expand US territory.

If there is one idea that the countries of the global south all claim to repudiate, it is imperialism. If Trump turns out to be both serious and literal about his plans to expand America’s borders, their applause for him may quickly fade away.

gideon.rachman@ft.com



The US’s economic partners are racing to sustain trade volumes in a Donald Trump era by closing new bilateral deals and rerouting supply chains to cope with increased US protectionism.

Policymakers and trade experts say countries are turning to a tactic deployed during the US president’s first term in office, when they signed more trade deals with one another as the world’s biggest consumer economy erected barriers.

Since Trump’s election in November, the EU has clinched a long-awaited trade deal with the Mercosur bloc of South American countries, updated a free trade agreement with Mexico, and reopened negotiations with Malaysia that were moribund for more than a decade.

Trump meanwhile in his first days in office threatened tariffs of up to 100 per cent on China, 25 per cent on Canada and Mexico, and said he was considering a blanket levy on all US imports. He also ordered US government agencies to probe trade issues including currency manipulation and counterfeit goods.

Tengku Zafrul Aziz, Malaysia’s trade minister, told the Financial Times the return of Trump “could indeed prompt countries to further diversify their trade portfolios”.

Aziz cited the example of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, which went ahead with 11 members in 2018 after Trump pulled the US out of talks. The deal “demonstrated the resilience of countries willing to co-operate even in the absence of traditional economic leaders like the US,” he said.

EU trade commissioner Maroš Šefčovič told the World Economic Forum in Davos that his diary was full of meetings with ministers from the Gulf countries and elsewhere. “There is huge interest” in doing deals with the EU, he said.

The entire team of commissioners will visit India to make progress on trade negotiations and technology partnerships in the next few months.

“The countries actively doing deals do so independently of the situation of the US,” said one European official, adding there was a “huge gap” between the rhetoric of what Washington would like to do and what really happens on the ground.

In Trump’s first term the EU signed deals with Japan — a staunch US ally that feared economic damage from his policies — Singapore and Vietnam and started talks with New Zealand and Chile, ultimately completing the agreements. One EU official joked the president was “the best EU trade commissioner ever”.

“There were a lot of deals,” said Cecilia Malmström, the EU trade commissioner when Trump was last in power who was instrumental in earlier negotiations in Mercosur. “We thought, it’s a rough world. We don’t believe in trade wars. We have an unpredictable president who throws tariffs around all over the place. Let’s see what we can do together.”

Malmström, now with the law firm Covington & Burling, expects a deal with Mexico and talks with Australia, Indonesia and possibly the Philippines and Thailand to be concluded during Trump’s four-year term.

Bernd Lange, who chairs the European parliament’s trade committee, said the EU’s response to Trump would couple retaliatory tariffs with deeper trade relationships elsewhere. “Apart from defending ourselves, we should further strengthen our partnership with third countries like the UK, Mexico, Japan or Canada, who might also be in the crossfire.

“This means ratifying trade agreements like EU-Mercosur, and concluding negotiations with partners like Australia and Indonesia.”

In 2020 Asean countries plus China, Japan, Korea, Australia and New Zealand formed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. RCEP mainly reduced non-tariff barriers to trade such as veterinary controls and customs procedures. RCEP covers 2.3bn people and 30 per cent of global GDP, compared with 25 per cent by the US.

The African Continental Free Trade Area, which will scrap 90 per cent of tariffs over time, started in 2021.

Goods and services trade has continued to grow in recent years despite the Covid-19 pandemic and rising protectionism.

Scott Lincicome at the Cato Institute, a Washington-based think-tank, said: “Regardless of what Donald Trump does over the next few years, everyone else appears unwilling to embrace costly economic isolationism and will instead just move on without us. There are about 370 trade deals in force as of mid-2024 with no sign of a forthcoming reversal.”

China, meanwhile, has recently clinched deals with Serbia, Cambodia, Nicaragua and Ecuador. Beijing, which Trump sees as the US’s greatest rival, accounts for about 30 per cent of global manufacturing.

One senior trade official, who declined to be named, said they were “more sceptical this time round” of a flurry of dealmaking because the agreements left to complete were tougher to negotiate.

“Trump’s return might promote new bilaterals, perhaps in Africa. But Asia is pretty much sewn up. I am buckling up.”

Additional reporting by Aime Williams in Washington

Data visualisation by Janina Conboye in London



European carmakers led by Volkswagen could be forced to pay hundreds of millions of euros to Chinese electric-vehicle rivals to buy carbon credits, as the auto sector tries to avoid potential fines for failing to meet 2025 pollution rules set by Brussels.

Under EU rules requiring carmakers to cut emissions, manufacturers lagging behind in the electric transition face the choice of paying billions of euros in fines, boosting EV sales by slashing prices or buying credits from less polluting competitors.

Europe is the fastest warming continent on earth, estimated at twice the global average since the 1980s, in large part because of its proximity to the melting Arctic where exposed dark ground amplifies the effect.

The European Commission plans to fine carmakers €95 per car for every gramme of CO₂ per km above a 93.6g limit, based on average emissions across a company’s vehicle sales in 2025.

Many carmakers in the EU are looking to use the “pooling” option, where manufacturers average out the greenhouse gas emissions of their fleets with other companies that sell in the bloc.

Analysts estimate that some European groups may be forced to buy hundreds of millions of euros worth of carbon credits from Chinese rivals such as BYD, which has one of the largest pools of credits to sell thanks to high EV sales in the EU.

According to recent EU filings, Tesla expects to pool credits with companies including Stellantis, Ford and Toyota. The US EV maker has already made more than $2bn in the first nine months of last year from selling credits into emission pooling systems globally. In another pool, Mercedes-Benz has teamed up with Polestar and Volvo — both owned by China’s Geely.

Geely’s founder Li Shufu holds about 10 per cent of Mercedes, while Beijing owned BAIC holds another 10 per cent.

Mercedes said it continued to “invest billions into electric vehicles”. “However, the pace of the transformation of our industry is determined by market conditions and our customers,” it added.

VW and Renault, which analysts say look likely to struggle to meet targets through their own sales, have few pooling alternatives other than Chinese manufacturers MG-SAIC and BYD. Renault could potentially also pool with strategic partners Nissan and Mitsubishi.

Pooling is controversial. Some executives warn that the arrangement will make the European industry less competitive by empowering rivals in China at a time when Brussels has imposed higher tariffs on Chinese EVs to protect the continent’s carmakers.

Jens Gieseke, a centre-right lawmaker in the European parliament, said the EU had made a “mistake” in allowing pooling with US and Chinese carmakers as this could benefit European carmakers’ rivals.

Industry players are reluctant to put numbers on expected payments publicly, as carmakers trade credits behind closed doors in groupings based on a web of alliances linked to their equity stakes and brand tie-ups.

The German state of Lower Saxony holds a 20 per cent stake in VW while Renault is 15 per cent government owned, making the groups’ pooling with Chinese carmakers a politically sensitive topic, according to UBS analyst Patrick Hummel.

He added that if VW chose to pool, it would probably need to do so with a number of Chinese companies, as BYD might not have enough EV sales in Europe to fill the German group’s gap alone.

The German group would need to almost double its EV sales in just one year if it were to meet EU targets itself, according to UBS. The company does not have a new mass-model EV launch planned in 2025. Renault is hoping to boost its EV sales with the launch of a €25,000 model.

VW said it would aim to avoid the penalties through “its own efforts”, pointing to a series of fully-electric models that were launched last year.

“Only in a second step would other measures such as pooling come into play, naturally weighing up costs and benefits,” the company said. “Every euro invested in possible penalties would be a poorly invested euro.”

Renault has said that it was too early to decide on pooling, but added the arrangements with Chinese manufacturers risked weakening the European car industry further.

Brussels is under pressure from the sector to make emissions rules more flexible as sales of electric vehicles in Germany and France fell last year after governments pulled back purchase subsidies for EVs.

The bloc’s climate commissioner Wopke Hoekstra met car industry representatives on Wednesday and a “strategic dialogue” between officials and the sector is due to start this month.

Additional reporting by Ian Johnston and Patricia Nilsson



Last spring, pupils at National Chia-Yi Girls’ Senior High School in southern Taiwan were set an unusual topic for their annual essay exam: “How to negotiate with a dictator”.

The students had to choose the best survival strategy for a small country facing a powerful neighbour — prevent war at all costs, or deter through strength? The exam paper mentioned Russia’s assault on Ukraine, but the unspoken parallels with China’s threat to their own country were obvious.

Teachers say they were stunned when they got the scripts back: nearly all the teenagers argued that Taiwan must do everything to avoid provoking China into attacking it. “Almost without exception, they wrote that, being small and weak, Taiwan must avoid appearing as a threat to China,” says Chu Yi-chun, who teaches Mandarin. “No matter how they harass us, we must tolerate it.”

Such submissive sentiments are in sharp contrast to those held in Taiwan’s society at large — and young people have traditionally been among the most passionately patriotic and pro-independence citizens in the country.

According to data published by the Taiwanese Public Opinion Foundation polling organisation last year, people between 20 and 24 are no longer the age group who feel their Taiwanese identity the strongest, bucking a long-established pattern. And there are indications that, among young people, Taiwan’s decades-old trend towards ever stronger support for independence might also be going into reverse.

There are many potential reasons for these changes. But for a number of Taiwanese social scientists and ruling party politicians, one of the main causes is TikTok, the controversial Chinese social media app that has amassed more than 1bn monthly active users worldwide.

The app “cannot necessarily make Taiwanese youth identify with the Chinese nation or agree to unification with China”, says Eric Hsu, a researcher at the Taiwanese think-tank Doublethink Lab who is working on the first systematic survey of TikTok’s impact on Taiwanese society. “But it can probably lower their apprehension towards China and their will to resist.”

In the US, TikTok is fighting for its survival after a law was passed last year requiring its parent company, Beijing-based ByteDance, either to sell its stake in the app or face a ban. The deadline is this coming Sunday.

Officials in Washington have said the platform poses a national security risk because China might coerce TikTok to manipulate information published every day to millions of people in the US through control of the platform’s algorithm. They have also argued that the app allows Beijing to “weaponise America’s data against us” — allegations that ByteDance has insistently and repeatedly denied.

Officials and researchers in other countries, especially western ones, have raised many concerns about the app, ranging from its addictive effects on children to the ways in which it could be used to sow disinformation.

But nowhere is the question of whether TikTok is a tool of Chinese political influence as vital as in Taiwan. Beijing claims the island, home to some 23mn people and the world’s largest producer of advanced semiconductors, as part of its territory and misses no opportunity to reiterate its determination to bring it under control — a scenario that the vast majority of Taiwanese people vigorously reject. Ever since the country democratised in the 1990s, its identity separate from China and the determination to preserve its independence has grown more deep-rooted.

Taiwanese educators and researchers fear that the ever greater numbers of children using the app risk being exposed to content that seems innocent, but causes them to look more favourably upon the People’s Republic and feel more negative towards their own nation — something they suspect is a deliberate strategy by Beijing.

“TikTok remains committed to complying with local laws and regulations,” a company spokesperson says in a statement.

The country’s high school and university students, the first generation of TikTok users, are less politically engaged than earlier generations, says Lin Thung-hong, a research fellow at the institute of sociology at Taiwan’s top research institution Academia Sinica. “Over the past few years, young adults are much less willing to vote,” he says. “We worry that they might turn cold on politics and retreat, and that would have an immense impact on Taiwan’s political future.”

“They are not prepared to fight against China,” says Chu, the teacher. “They don’t feel that we must protect this land.”

At first glance, TikTok seems an unlikely threat. According to the 2024 Taiwan Internet Report, an annual independent survey, just under 22 per cent of the population use the app, either in its international form, branded as TikTok, or the original version available in China, called Douyin.

That is the second-lowest proportion in Asia after Japan and little more than a quarter of the percentage in Malaysia, where TikTok has a dominant position. It is also markedly lower than in western countries like the US, Spain, France or the UK.

But, among young people, the picture changes radically. According to the government-backed Taiwan Communication Survey, 44 per cent of primary school pupils in Taiwan use TikTok, and among junior high school students (typically aged 13-15) usage is close to 60 per cent. The figure levels off only slightly among senior high school students.

While a majority of Taiwanese TikTok users are male, among schoolchildren girls are massively heavier users. For many of them, dance is the way in. Yi-an, a 14-year-old from Shih-ting near Taipei, started watching self-recorded dance videos on the platform about two years ago.

“My friends and I all really like these, and at some point I started making my own,” she says. Yi-an now posts short dance routines every few days and is building a following of her own.

“It becomes a key avenue through which they can express themselves and also the main channel through which they build their social lives,” says Chu.

Both TikTok and Douyin offer content in Mandarin, the national language of both Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China. TV dramas, songs, dance styles and celebrities from China, whose population dwarfs that of Taiwan, have a heavy presence.

“Even if they consume American, Japanese, Korean or whatever else on TikTok, they absorb Chinese content most easily,” says Chu. “They include Chinese cultural references and lingo from that content in their speech and writing.”

Initial work done by the Doublethink study suggests this seemingly innocuous content can act as a gateway to less anodyne material. Researchers who set up TikTok accounts imitating Taiwanese schoolgirls discovered that, after a few days of them being served dance video clips, the app’s algorithm started to suggest soft political content. Some were street interviews conducted in Taipei’s trendy Ximending district in which Taiwanese teenagers were prompted to compare Chinese “democracy” with the weaknesses of their own political system.

A study conducted by Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman in Malaysia spotted a similar pattern on RedNote, also known as Xiaohongshu, another rapidly spreading Chinese social media app, on which users test and recommend make-up, restaurants and travel destinations or teach cooking and other skills. Xiaohongshu did not respond to a request for comment.

The findings also echo international research on TikTok. A series of studies conducted last year and led by Lee Jussim, a social psychologist at Rutgers University in the US, found that, when compared to other platforms such as Instagram or YouTube, TikTok offered a “disproportionately high ratio” of content favourable to China’s Communist party. Their results indicated that people who used TikTok heavily viewed China’s human rights record in a significantly better light and felt more positive about visiting China.

As in many countries, observers worry that, because of the way the algorithm works, TikTok users increasingly inhabit echo chambers — but in Taiwan this has an added political charge. “Among our students, TikTok has the effect that everyone retreats into their bubble and is increasingly unable and unwilling to hear what others think,” says Chu.

It may influence teenage behaviour in other ways. Smaller-scale studies have found that many Chinese slang words have entered Taiwan’s youth lexicon in the past three years. The northern Chinese term “niu” (meaning “awesome”) was unheard of in Taiwan until recently, but now appears commonly on teenagers’ social media feeds and in real life. Other Chinese-influenced memes and games have become commonplace, teachers say.

Cashbox, one of Taiwan’s largest chains of Karaoke lounges, now offers a large and growing “TikTok songs” category. Kemusan, a twist-like dance set to an electronic version of a traditional Chinese tune that went viral on TikTok last year, triggered a huge craze in Taiwan.

All this seems a long way from politics, but seemingly harmless content can have political undertones, say researchers. “There are a lot of people selling agricultural products on Douyin who display their lifestyle of honest, hard work,” says Hsu, adding that young Taiwanese people “think when they see this that, while the Chinese government may not be good, the Chinese people are simple and kind, so I don’t need to feel animosity [towards Beijing].”

Teenagers the FT spoke to acknowledge that the app has an effect on them, but dismiss any suggestion that they are being influenced politically. Several admit that, after using TikTok, they had trouble concentrating and finishing longer assignments. “I know I spend too much time on there, it kind of sucks you in,” says Yi-an with a laugh.

But she and several friends said it was “nonsense” that they might become more China-friendly.

For Taiwan, building a sense of national pride took years after the end of one-party rule by the Kuomintang (KMT) in 1991, which had suppressed Taiwanese culture and study of the island’s distinct history.

But that identification eventually became strong, especially among young Taiwanese. According to the Taiwan Social Change Survey, a multiyear research project run by Academia Sinica, the youngest age cohort consistently had the highest percentage of people identifying as “Taiwanese only”, as opposed to Chinese or both Taiwanese and Chinese: over 80 per cent.

Until a few years ago, Taiwanese youth frequently described themselves as “naturally pro-independence”. In 2014, during the so-called Sunflower Movement, tens of thousands of students occupied parliament to protest against what they saw as the then-government’s cosy relationship with China. The pro-independence Democratic Progressive party came to power two years later.

But Taiwan’s political make-up has become more complex recently. Although last year’s elections kept the DPP in power, the opposition took control of parliament, creating political deadlock. Some worry that this makes Taiwan especially susceptible to political polarisation.

A 2022 survey conducted by Austin Wang at the University of Nevada suggested that TikTok had no marked influence on supporters of the DPP or the KMT opposition, which supports closer ties with China. But among people who supported the smaller Taiwan People’s party, which benefited from younger swing voters’ distaste for traditional partisan politics, “whether or not they use Douyin has a significant impact on political attitudes”, Wang wrote.

The research suggested that opposition to Taiwanese independence was sharply higher among TikTok-using TPP supporters and neutral voters compared with non-TikTok users of the same group.

Signs of growing Chinese influence are all the more noteworthy given that Taiwan’s real-world exchanges with China are shrinking as relations between the two countries have become increasingly hostile.

In contrast to the 1990s and 2000s, when Taiwanese companies set up tens of thousands of factories in China, investment has been falling for over a decade. Meanwhile, tourism and student exchanges have slowed to a trickle, and the number of Taiwanese people living and working in China has fallen from a peak of over 400,000 a decade ago to half that.

Lin of Academia Sinica believes that TikTok and other platforms have filled the information vacuum. “As so many ties are cut, China tries to reach our young people through social media. That leads our youngsters who have never been in China and know nothing about it [to] develop illusions about it, and then they project the dissatisfactions they have with Taiwan on to that illusionary China.”

The generational divide has been emphasised because many younger Taiwanese people feel at an economic and social disadvantage. During the 2010s, entry-level salaries were stagnant, while house prices have soared, partly as a result of Taiwan’s extended technology export boom. Meanwhile, the country has one of the world’s most rapidly ageing populations, threatening public healthcare and pensions. Younger people are also frustrated with what they see as unsustainable environmental and energy policies.

These misgivings have already led to disaffection with the two main parties, which they feel have failed to address their concerns, say pollsters.

Government officials and experts fret that TikTok is exploiting these cleavages. “We still know very little,” says Lin, “but what we can say for sure is that among Taiwanese users, TikTok heightens feelings of economic dissatisfaction, intensifies tendencies towards depression and undermines people’s confidence that they can participate and make a difference politically.”

Enoch Wu, an activist affiliated with the DPP, suggests a simple solution, popular in party circles, echoing the approach taken in the US: the Taiwanese government should ban the app as a national security threat.

Educators and parents interviewed for this story who are critical of the ruling party supported that view, but opposition politicians have argued that the government must not interfere with free speech.

In theory, Taiwan has a case. TikTok has not set up a subsidiary in the country but operates only through external marketing companies, an arrangement DPP officials say violates laws requiring media organisations to create a legal entity in Taiwan if they operate there.

According to lawyers, Taipei could demand internet service providers and other business counterparts stop working with it. “But it is just impossible politically,” says Puma Shen, a DPP lawmaker and expert in disinformation. “The very moment a DPP government [moved] on this, we’d have the opposition at our throat accusing us of restricting free speech.”

This debate matters, of course, far beyond Taiwan’s borders. Officials in Taipei question how Washington will actually enforce a ban on TikTok: even if it is blocked or taken off app stores, determined users could easily get access via a VPN. They point to India, where TikTok user numbers have actually increased after the government banned it in June 2020.

One of the few levers for governments could be barring server companies from working with TikTok, thus denying it the bandwidth needed for smooth livestreaming and video loading, says Shen.

How Taiwan tackles these dilemmas will be a valuable case study for many other countries. Above and beyond a single app, there are existential questions at stake, insists Hsu. “We need to find an effective way of communicating with our young people,” he says, arguing that banning TikTok would “only shatter their trust in our democracy.”

“Once our society is divided and our democratic system no longer trusted, Taiwan will lose its ability to resist China.”



Donald Trump’s pick for secretary of the interior has warned the US will lose the “AI arms race” to China unless it boosts electricity generation from fossil fuels and stabilises its power grid.

Doug Burgum, a billionaire businessman and former governor of North Dakota, told US senators on Thursday that the country had an “electricity crisis” due to weaknesses in the grid and “roadblocks” stopping companies from building fossil fuel plants that can supply round-the-clock power.

He added that the Trump administration would allocate more public land to drilling for oil and slash tax breaks favouring renewables companies that produce “intermittent and unreliable power”.

“The sun doesn’t always shine and the wind doesn’t always blow,” Burgum said in his senate confirmation hearing, adding that the balance was “out of whack”.

Demand for electricity is growing at unprecedented rates in the US, driven by soaring demand from data centres for artificial intelligence processing — which the Department of Energy predicts will triple in the next three years.

“Without baseload, we’re going to lose the AI arms race to China, and if we lose the AI arms race to China, then that’s got direct impacts on our national security,” Burgum said.

“Right now, we’ve stacked a deck, where we are creating roadblocks for people who want to do baseload [electricity], and we’ve got massive tax incentives for people who want to do intermittent and unreliable.”

Burgum, who endorsed Trump after ending his own 2024 presidential bid, is also tipped to lead the National Energy Council. If confirmed as Trump’s “energy tsar”, he will have sweeping powers to push through the president-elect’s vision to “drill, baby, drill”.

On Tuesday, President Joe Biden signed an executive order to open up federal land for AI infrastructure with the proviso that power would be drawn from clean electricity sources — part of the Democratic leader’s effort to curb emissions and counter climate change.

Burgum said new technologies such as carbon capture storage could eliminate the emissions produced by fossil fuels — although there are questions around the commercial and technical feasibility of the technology.

The former governor added that restricting US fossil fuel production would not produce any environmental benefit, as less scrupulous governments would fill the supply gap.

“America produces energy cleaner, smarter and safer than anywhere in the world,” he said. “When energy production is restricted in America, it doesn’t reduce demand, it just shifts production to countries like Russia, Venezuela and Iran — whose autocratic leaders don’t care about the environment.”

The US is already poised for a boom in natural gas-fired power plants to boost baseload power, with as many as 80 facilities expected to come online by 2030, according to Enverus.

Biden’s landmark climate law, the Inflation Reduction Act, tied offshore oil and gas lease sales to new offshore wind leases. When asked whether he would protect offshore wind projects in development, Burgum declined to comment.

Trump has vowed to end offshore wind projects on “day one”.



Washington has blacklisted Zhipu, China’s most prominent start-up developing large language models for artificial intelligence, as the Biden administration looks to consolidate its legacy of getting tough on Chinese tech.

The Beijing-based company was singled out among China’s leading LLM start-ups as it was added on Wednesday to the entity list, a compilation of companies deemed to be of national security concern and subject to trade restrictions.

Washington alleged that Zhipu was advancing Chinese military capabilities through the integration of AI research. The start-up said it “strongly disagreed” with the US move, which it said “lacked factual basis”.

Zhipu, founded by Tsinghua computer science professor Tang Jie, has developed LLMs similar to the ones that power OpenAI’s ChatGPT. It has been working with local governments to deploy services, including chatbots for residents to ask administrative questions about rubbish collection and parking times.

The start-up has also worked with Chinese and foreign companies with operations in China to deploy their LLMs for products such as tailored AI assistants.

The addition of Zhipu and several affiliated companies to the list in effect bars them from purchasing most US technology.

“These rules will further target and strengthen our controls to help ensure that [China] and others who seek to circumvent our laws and undermine US national security fail in their efforts,” said commerce secretary Gina Raimondo.

Beijing hit back on Thursday, with the commerce ministry opening an anti-dumping investigation into US semiconductors after local industry pointed out that the Biden administration had given the chip industry “huge subsidies”.

It also announced a preliminary finding that American clothing maker PVH had engaged in anti-Xinjiang region behaviour, demanding that its representatives come in for further questioning.

One Zhipu investor said the US move “should not impact Zhipu’s existing operations, and most of its core tech is in-house and has little business overseas”. The investor added that Zhipu being singled out by Washington could conversely “strengthen their positioning within China”, as the government would have a stronger incentive to support its growth.

Chinese state groups have stepped in with funding for companies under US sanctions, including AI start-up SenseTime and national champion Huawei.

Zhipu is already backed by the state-run National Social Security Fund, Tencent, Alibaba Cloud, the venture capital groups HongShan and Hillhouse and Saudi Arabian fund P7. It received $400mn during a funding round in December.

While many of China’s LLM start-ups want to expand overseas, the investor said Zhipu could consolidate its lead by focusing solely on the domestic market.

Washington’s latest action also broadened the range of advanced chips that require licences in order to be shipped to China and introduced export controls on some scientific instruments used by drug developers, such as spectral flow cytometers and some liquid chromatography mass spectrometers.

Chinese companies have already been banned from buying Nvidia’s highest-end AI chips critical for model training and deployment, and the US this week introduced new geographical restrictions on the processors in an attempt to stem the black market flow of Nvidia chips to China.

Also added to the entity list on Wednesday was Chinese chip designer Sophgo, under scrutiny last year for possibly supplying Huawei with processors made by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co, circumventing US sanctions.

Washington alleged the company was “acting at the behest of Beijing to further [China’s] goals of indigenous advanced chip production”.



The UK foreign secretary and home secretary have intervened on China’s planning application for an enormous new London embassy, signalling their support while outlining conditions for the proposed site.

In a joint letter to the Planning Inspectorate for England on Tuesday, David Lammy and Yvette Cooper stressed the “importance of countries having functioning diplomatic premises in each other’s capitals”.

The intervention came after Rachel Reeves visited Beijing and Shanghai last week to boost economic ties, the first such trip to the Chinese mainland by a British chancellor since 2017. Lammy visited China last year.

Lammy and Cooper revealed in the letter that the Metropolitan Police had “withdrawn their objection” to Beijing’s proposal to build the diplomatic complex at Royal Mint Court, near the edge of the City of London.

“On balance, the Metropolitan Police’s public order experts are content that there is sufficient space for future protests without significantly impacting the adjacent road network,” the two senior cabinet ministers said in the letter seen by the Financial Times.

But the ministers also demanded China agree to changing a “small element of the design” and to giving up diplomatic accreditation of seven other premises spread across London.

Housing secretary Angela Rayner, who will decide whether the embassy is approved, “should not make a decision on this application until a firm plan is agreed on the consolidation of the Chinese diplomatic premises”, they said.

The Chinese government has emphasised its desire for the new embassy, which would be China’s largest diplomatic mission in Europe, in discussions with London after its initial attempt to gain planning permission was blocked by a local council in 2022.

Chinese President Xi Jinping raised the matter directly with UK Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer, after Beijing launched a new application last summer. The Tower Hamlets local authority previously refused to approve the proposal on both security grounds and because of the impact on local residents.

The new complex would occupy more than 20,000 square metres of land and far outstrip the size of China’s current embassy in Marylebone, which is built on an 830 sq m plot.

Lammy and Cooper’s letter acknowledged that the Metropolitan Police “previously raised concerns regarding the ability of the site to accommodate protests” and that “there remain differences of opinion on where protests would most likely congregate”.

The letter demanded the removal of plans for “unregulated public access” to Cistercian ruins within the complex, arguing that the diplomatic status of the site could delay authorities responding to a security incident or health emergency, who would need permission to enter.

Instead, Lammy and Cooper said a hard perimeter to the area was needed, with “occasional controlled public access” negotiated between the Chinese embassy and relevant UK authorities.

The Financial Times revealed in October that Rayner had called in the decision, taking it out of the hands of Tower Hamlets council, and last month that Chinese state enterprises had entered submissions of support for the application to the government.

Rayner will decide whether to approve the embassy after receiving a recommendation from the planning inspector. The UK is also seeking to rebuild its embassy in China, which requires approval from Beijing.

Luke de Pulford, executive director of the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China (Ipac), a cross-party group of lawmakers concerned about Beijing, said: “The mask has slipped and it’s now painfully clear that the government is desperate to approve the Chinese application, under pressure from Beijing.

“The national security concerns alone ought to be enough to put a stop to this, but the unanimous will of the local council and residents also matter.”

The UK’s Labour administration has said it is pursuing a “three Cs” approach to Beijing, vowing to co-operate on global issues, such as climate and health, challenge on subjects like human rights, and compete where appropriate.

A UK government spokesperson said: “National security is the first duty of government. It has been our core priority throughout this process.

“That is why the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office and the Home Office submitted written representations to reflect these considerations and to note the importance of all states having functioning diplomatic premises in each other’s capitals.”

A spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in London said the resubmitted planning application had “taken into full consideration the UK’s planning policy and guidance as well as views of all relevant parties. It is a high-quality development scheme”.

The spokesperson added: “Host countries have the international obligation to support and facilitate the building of the premises of diplomatic missions.”

The Metropolitan Police declined to comment.



Local smartphone makers Vivo and Huawei leapfrogged Apple to become the top two sellers in the Chinese market last year, dealing a blow to the iPhone maker as it struggles to introduce AI features on the mainland and fight competition from domestic rivals.

Apple’s China smartphone shipments slipped to 42.9mn in 2024, 17 per cent lower than the year before, according to market research firm Canalys. That cut its market share by 4 percentage points to 15 per cent. Shipments in the final quarter dropped 25 per cent year on year.

Vivo and Huawei’s shipments increased 11 per cent and 37 per cent for market shares of 17 per cent and 16 per cent respectively. The overall smartphone market grew 4 per cent on 2023, with 285mn units shipped.

The figures come as the US technology company faces growing pressure from local premium smartphone brands, particularly Huawei, which have benefited from patriotic buying and the ability to roll out artificial intelligence-powered features to their devices. The Apple Intelligence service is not available on the Chinese mainland.

“Apple and its iPhone 16 series . . . faced growing competitive pressure from domestic flagship devices,” said Amber Liu, a research manager at Canalys, adding that Vivo had “shown strong momentum” by strengthening tie-ups with operators and employing effective marketing and product strategies “to solidify its position in entry-level to mid-to-high-end segments”.

Having developed its own chips in recent years, Huawei had resolved some of its earlier supply chain issues and in 2024 upgraded and refreshed its flagship phone series, adding the $2,800 trifold Mate XT, “bringing them traction and attention from high-end customers based in China”, she added.

Apple’s overall Greater China revenues fell nearly 8 per cent in its year ending in September. Chief executive Tim Cook visited China three times last year, with the company seeking to navigate the country’s complex regulatory regime and roll out the artificial intelligence features introduced with the iPhone 16.

Analysts expect a subsidy programme — unveiled this month by the National Development and Reform Commission, China’s state planner — to boost demand for smartphones. As part of the $11bn programme, China will grant subsidies of 15 per cent to people who trade-in old smartphones, tablets and other devices to buy consumer electronics worth less than Rmb6,000 ($818). The basic model iPhone 16 retails at Rmb5,999 in China, though the company has offered rare promotional discounts for its phones in recent months.

“Among the major [manufacturers], we think companies with exposure to Huawei, Honor, Oppo, Vivo and Xiaomi (by rank) are well-positioned to benefit,” HSBC analyst Frank He wrote in a note last week, adding that the structure of the subsidies meant that owners of phones worth between Rmb3,333 and Rmb6,000 stood to benefit the most. “We see a limited impact on Apple’s supply chain.”

Will Wong, an analyst at the IDC research firm, said Apple’s core challenges in 2024 were driven by its difficulties rolling out AI features, as well as weakened consumer sentiment in China, where buyers sought to save money by looking to brands offering phones for a wider range of prices.

“Consumers have changed after Covid, they are being more cautious,” he said. “The ‘fear of missing out’ sentiment is not that strong any more.”

Apple’s performance in 2025, he added, would depend on whether it could navigate China’s regulatory environment to roll out AI features with a “wow factor” and lure buyers away from innovative offerings from Chinese competitors.



China is expected to release economic data on Friday showing the world’s second-largest economy expanded at a brisk pace of about 5 per cent in 2024. Many Chinese are, to put it mildly, unconvinced.

“I don’t know where this growth is supposed to be coming from,” said Hao, owner of a printing and advertising company in Beijing, who asked to be identified only by his surname.

“The authorities can say whatever they want,” he said, suggesting the official data was “blind to reality”. “For me, 2024 has been the worst year in my 20-plus years of running this business.”

Economists, and even senior officials, have long questioned the accuracy of China’s GDP numbers, which are released by the National Bureau of Statistics and almost always hit annual government targets with uncanny accuracy.

While Beijing’s goal of expanding GDP by about 5 per cent year on year for the second year running was modest compared with past decades, such levels would thrill most large countries — particularly if, as in China, they were suffering a deep property sector crisis.

But for most Chinese people, their experience does not match the growth figures. Many who work in sectors from banking and local government to restaurants and ride-hailing say current conditions feel more like a recession.

“They said 5 per cent growth year after year, but do people feel this growth? For ordinary people, I’m telling you, it’s just about earning enough to get by and not starve,” said a driver for the ride-hailing company Didi in Beijing. “Forget about growth or development.”

An economist at a Beijing university said many scholars believed the official GDP growth data was often inaccurate by up to plus or minus two percentage points, but in the past two years, the distortion had grown.

He pointed to China’s consumer price inflation, which has been running at less than 1 per cent for months, and producer price growth, which has been negative for more than two years, as signalling weak demand.

“Middle-class people are losing their jobs for the first time,” said the economist, who declined to be named. “In 45 years, this never happened.”

Questioning official economic data and discussing negative economic trends has become increasingly sensitive in China. Gao Shanwen, chief economist at state-owned SDIC Securities, said last month that China’s economy might have grown at an average of only about 2 per cent in the past two to three years.

The Wall Street Journal reported last week that Gao had been banned from public speaking for the comments. People familiar with the matter said Chinese financial authorities had launched an audit of Gao following the remarks.

Many foreign economists also question the official figures. Analysts at US think-tank Rhodium Group said in a research note that growth last year was probably about half the official target, or 2.4-2.8 per cent.

The collapse of China’s property sector had “sidelined” local government investment and consumption — two important economic engines — in 2024, leading Beijing to announce a series of urgent stimulus measures, they said.

China’s official data probably exaggerated household and government consumption, as well as gross capital formation, or investment, which they estimated as negative last year compared with a year earlier, the analysts added. These areas have been hit by the property downturn.

The picture chimes with the experiences of people working in China.

A credit officer at a bank in central Anhui province said the value of the portfolio of outstanding loans he managed had fallen 20 per cent this year. On a recent trip to Hangzhou, capital of the wealthy neighbouring province Zhejiang, he found that a client’s factory, which a year earlier had employed 1,700 people, now had 1,100.

“More people are repaying their loans in advance,” said the credit officer, adding that they found it “more cost-effective” to reduce debt than to invest. He and his wife had also cut back on their own “unnecessary” spending, such as dining out.

Even state-owned companies are not immune. An employee at one state-owned group in southern Fujian province said authorities in Beijing had asked it to expand investment to support the economy in the fourth quarter. In response, the company brought forward spending on a 25-year project.

But at the same time, it cut salaries — by more than 20 per cent compared with three years ago. “I got promoted at the beginning of ‘24 and my monthly income was still Rmb1,000 ($136) less than in ‘23,” said the employee.

For many families, the lunar new year holiday this month might bring at least some short-term relief from the tough conditions, as relatives reunite in their hometowns, bringing gifts and red envelopes stuffed with money.

But not for Hao, whose printing and advertising company suffered a 40 per cent decline in revenues last year and saw profits fall even more. He plans to skip this year’s festivities in his hometown in eastern Shandong province.

“At my age, going back means giving red envelopes to the younger generation, and I simply don’t have the money to do that,” he said.



Amin Nasser, the head of Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, has always had one special customer: China.

In his 10 years in charge, Nasser has seen the value of Saudi oil exports to China more than triple, to a record $56bn in 2022, a year in which almost one in six barrels that Saudi Arabia pumped was shipped to Chinese refineries.

Foreign oil has underpinned China’s economic rise, as the country built the world’s largest car industry from scratch, new railways and air travel networks, and thousands of skyscrapers. In 2022, 72 per cent of its total crude oil supply was imported, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA).

“I have no doubt that elevating our relationship to undreamed-of heights would help turbo-charge China’s efforts to meet the hopes and dreams of its people,” said Nasser at last year’s China Development Forum in Beijing.

But there are now signs that China’s thirst for crude is reaching a peak sooner than expected, a development that has sent shockwaves through the oil market.

This week, China said its oil imports had fallen nearly 2 per cent, or 240,000 barrels a day, to just over 11mn b/d in 2024 compared with the year before, the first decline in two decades barring the disruption during the Covid pandemic.

China’s stuttering economy is partly to blame. The country’s ongoing property crisis led to a slowdown in construction, which hit demand for diesel to run heavy machinery, as well as for the petrochemicals used in paint, pipes and insulation.

But the decline stems from longer-term trends too. There was a boom in trucks switching from diesel to liquefied natural gas, and, most importantly, the rising number of electric vehicles helped to depress sales of petrol and diesel.

Sales of both road fuels peaked in 2023, according to China National Petroleum Corp, and will now fall by 25-40 per cent over the next decade.

In December, Sinopec, China’s biggest refiner, brought forward its forecast for crude oil consumption to reach a peak to 2027, compared with the range it previously gave of between 2026 and 2030.

The implications of China hitting peak oil are enormous. If Chinese demand is reaching a plateau that would fulfil projections by the IEA of global oil demand peaking before 2030. The forecast sustains hope for the world to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050.

The milestone would also shake the global economy. Over the past three decades, China has accounted for half of all growth in the world’s oil demand — some 600,000 b/d.

If that rate continues to level off, the $500bn that oil companies are spending every year on finding new sources of oil and gas may be far too high. “The jury is out on whether the demand will be there to absorb it or not,” says Martijn Rats, an analyst at Morgan Stanley. “The answer may be that it is not.”

In the markets, the anxiety over China’s weak oil demand last year kept crude prices within their narrowest trading range in over two decades in real terms.

Benchmark Brent crude ended the year at just over $74 a barrel, a few dollars down from the beginning of the year, despite crises in the Middle East, the ongoing war in Ukraine, a shutdown of oil production in Libya, and a more than 20 per cent drop in Middle Eastern crude shipments to Europe because of attacks on tankers in the Red Sea.

If Chinese oil imports continue to slow, it would fundamentally change the market, says Rats. “If you have slower growth for six months or a year, then you have softer oil prices and supply slows down a bit.

“But if you truly have very little oil demand growth then that is a different oil market in the future than it has been in the past.”

Many oil producers are loath to call this moment a turning point, sceptical that China is fading as an engine of growth.

“It is too early to claim peak oil,” says Meg O’Neill, the chief executive of Woodside, Australia’s largest oil and gas company. She points to the fact that China’s economy still has a long way to go to reach western levels of per capita wealth.

“If you go back over the last 20 years, there have been proclamations of peak oil at points of economic softness, and it’s proven to be incorrect,” she adds. “China still aspires to grow its economy and lift the standard of living and often that has a direct correlation to energy consumption.”

Opec, the oil cartel, has a bullish outlook for China despite last year’s decline in imports, forecasting that consumption will continue to grow, by 2.5mn b/d, from 2023 to 2050. Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern producers tend to rely on Opec’s data when making policy.

Saudi Aramco has also rejected the idea that China is slowing down. “When people talk about China, they are always trying to maximise the downside and ignore the upside,” said Nasser last October at the Future Investment Initiative conference in Riyadh. “In general, there is still growth in China.”

Nasser insisted there was stronger and more durable demand than official imports data implied, noting that the country’s surging solar and wind power industries still required large amounts of oil.

“For 5 megawatts of wind-generated power you need 50 tonnes of plastics. For every electric vehicle you need 200-230kg of plastic. Even in solar panels, 10 per cent comes from fibre and so on. So for the transition to happen you need more oil,” he said.

Saudi Aramco has said the public information on China’s oil consumption is unreliable. Since the country does not officially report oil consumption statistics, analysts estimate it from a range of sources, including import and export data, the changes in stockpiles and the outflow from refineries. There have been a wide range of estimates, with differences of up to 1mn b/d, even for historical data.

Ziad al-Murshed, the company’s chief financial officer, told analysts at the end of last year that significant upwards revisions to 2023’s oil data “makes 2024 growth look less than it actually is. That kind of distorts the picture.”

At the IEA, analysts acknowledge that assessing China’s oil consumption is “quite challenging”. “It has been a very noisy period for Chinese demand between lockdowns and the return from lockdowns and chasing high growth,” says Ciarán Healy, an oil market analyst.

Nevertheless, the IEA continues to forecast that China will hit peak oil by the end of the decade. This is based on two huge, and opposing, structural trends, Healy says.

The first is the strong rise in the amount of crude oil flowing into China’s rapidly growing petrochemical industry. The second is the more precipitous fall in the amount of oil needed for road transport.

“In the run-up to Covid, the growth [in oil use] was quite broad based; petrochemicals, road transport, jet fuel, everything grew,” says Healy. “Since 2019, petrochemical production has become a bigger factor. On a net basis, all of the growth in oil consumption globally between 2019 and 2023 is actually the growth of petrochemicals in China.”

China has been steadily building more petrochemical plants in order to become self-sufficient in the plastics, solvents and fibres that its factories depend on.

“Chinese imports of polymers are still really big, but were enormous,” says Healy, referring to the class of chemicals that includes nylon, polyester, polyethylene and Teflon, among others. “The statistic that blows my mind is that the [country’s] imports of polymers are something like 2 to 3 per cent of the world’s oil demand. That’s Germany’s [oil use] in demand terms.”

Echoing Nasser’s remarks, the IEA’s Healy says “probably about a quarter” of China’s increase in petrochemical demand over the past five years has come from wind turbines and solar panels, and says “essentially all” of the growth in China’s oil use going forward will be from the petrochemical sector.

But the IEA believes that the fall in oil use for road transport will be more significant. “By 2030, three-quarters of cars being sold will be electric, and while you have growth in petrochemical demand, that’s nowhere near strong enough to offset that decrease in road transport,” says Healy. “It will plateau for a while and then start to fall a bit more sharply.”

In its base case scenario, which extends all of the policies currently in place, Healy says the IEA believes China’s oil consumption will fall from 16mn to 17mn b/d at present to about 12mn b/d by 2050.

China’s electric vehicles boom, helped by government incentives to trade-in old cars for new, shows little sign of slowing down. The market for pure battery and plug-in hybrids is growing about 20 per cent year on year, compared with a similar contraction in petrol and diesel cars.

But some question whether the Chinese state will sit back and let peak oil happen. While the “revolution” in electric vehicles is both “profound” and “mind-boggling”, says Victor Gao, chair of the China Energy Security Institute, the government will be gauging the potential impact on its huge, state-owned, oil refining industry.

He suggests that the country’s state-owned refineries are unlikely to be suddenly deprived of business, but perhaps there would have to be a change in strategy.

“China’s refining capacity is huge. Until now, China has refined petroleum for its domestic use, it does not export refined products. But if China succeeds in this EV revolution, it may decide to refine crude oil into different products for export. That means China’s consumption of crude oil may not necessarily go down, it may hold steady,” he says.

It is also much easier now for China to line up crude oil supplies, Gao notes, pointing to its deepening energy ties with Russia, which has been a dependable source of cheaper oil and gas since western countries imposed sanctions relating to the Ukraine war.

“This is changing China’s mentality,” he says. “It may be much easier, if the geopolitical risks can be managed, to expand its co-operation with Russia.” In 2023, Russia overtook Saudi to become China’s top oil supplier.

If China’s oil demand is indeed passing its peak, the consensus is that India’s growth will become the main driver of growth in global oil consumption.

While India’s thirst for oil still lags far behind China, Opec believes that the country’s oil use will grow by 1.5mn b/d, roughly three-quarters of China’s additional demand, between 2023 and 2029, while the IEA forecasts Indian oil growth to be 1.2mn b/d by 2030.

Though India has far smaller manufacturing, construction and petrochemicals sectors than China, diesel and petrol car sales have yet to be significantly displaced by electric vehicles.

According to JMK Research, a renewables research agency, there were just under 100,000 electric cars sold in India last year, roughly 5 per cent of an electric vehicle market that is led by mopeds and e-bikes.

Yet analysts say that rising demand in emerging markets will not come close to matching that seen in China over the past decades. While there is likely to be material growth elsewhere in south-east Asia, the IEA said the performance of these economies would be affected if China’s economic slowdown continued.

Oil consumption is growing across Africa and the Middle East, but remains only a tiny fraction of China’s growth in absolute terms. Latin America’s oil use was essentially flat, said the IEA.

In short, an end to China’s oil boom would be a tectonic shift that is unlikely to be reversed, according to analysts.

“You can say other countries can pick up the slack, and India’s oil demand is still growing, but there was something quite oil intensive about the growth that China has pursued over the last 30 years,” says Rats of Morgan Stanley.

Some may disagree on the exact moment when China’s appetite for oil peaks, but the IEA’s Healy says long-term demand is only going in one direction — and producers and oil-exporting countries need to be prepared.

“It may still be profitable for them to extract oil and gas from the ground and sell it but it will be a huge reduction in their overall income,” he says. “Given how dependent those countries are on oil and gas exports, that would have massive implications.”



Rio Tinto, the Anglo-Australian miner, has pointed to “signs of stabilisation” in the Chinese property market after weak demand from the country’s construction sector hit the price of iron ore last year.

Demand from Chinese steel mills has driven growth for global miners over the past decade, but weakness in the housing market over the past year has triggered volatility in the iron ore price, which dropped 8 per cent during the fourth quarter, according to Rio.

Miners including Rio and BHP have said commodity demand in China has shifted towards manufacturing, renewable energy and electric vehicles.

Rio said in a production update on Thursday that the Chinese economy provided “mixed signals” during the period due partly to “headwinds” from the property market.

However, the report pointed to November data on home sales and prices as showing “signs of stabilisation” and said there were further improvements in demand from the manufacturing and consumer sectors following government stimulus programmes to boost consumption.

The company said China’s crude steel production recovered as exports partly offset weak domestic demand.

The outlook comes ahead of the release of Chinese economic data on Friday.

More broadly, Rio said the outlook for the US economy remained stable, in contrast to Europe, where the economic outlook continued to be uncertain due to uneven growth and subdued consumption.

“Persistent manufacturing weakness and cross-country divergence make a strong recovery unlikely,” said Rio.

Rio is the first of the large global miners to update the market in 2025. Jakob Stausholm, chief executive, said there had been strong progress in delivering organic growth from the company’s major projects, including its Mongolian copper mine Oyu Tolgoi, its Rincon lithium project in Argentina and the Simandou, an iron ore deposit in Guinea.

Rio’s iron ore production dropped 1 per cent year on year to 85.7mn tonnes in the fourth quarter. The company warned of higher costs across its Pilbara operations in Western Australia. Copper production grew 26 per cent on the back of its Mongolian project.

RBC Capital Markets said the fourth-quarter update provided a “solid” end to the year, with bauxite and aluminium production ahead of expectations.

Rio said in December its investments in new projects would drive compound annual growth of 3 per cent in the production of copper, iron ore and lithium over the next decade.

The world’s largest miners have been in a race to boost their exposure to metals and minerals needed for the energy transition, including copper and lithium.

Rio paid $6.7bn in cash to acquire lithium group Arcadium in October.

Meanwhile, BHP — which tried to buy Anglo American last year to boost its copper exposure — said on Thursday it had completed the acquisition of Filo Corp, a Canada-listed miner with copper projects in South America.

BHP, which paid $2bn for its share of Filo in a joint deal with Canada’s Lundin Mining, said it was “an exciting new copper growth opportunity”.



Waking from a nap at his desk, Xiao, a steel trader from Wuhan in central China, reflects on how, at the end of one of the greatest booms in recent economic history, he is a lucky survivor.

About half of his competitors in this gritty office park, built near the site of China’s first iron works, have gone bust during the country’s three-year-long property crisis. The park itself is overshadowed by the enormous concrete skeleton of an unfinished real estate project.

“The decline was quite severe in the first half of [last] year,” says Xiao, referring to the price of rebar, a steel product used in construction to reinforce concrete. A government pivot towards economic stimulus which began in the autumn has yet to reignite real estate construction, he says. “Demand is still poor.”

Wuhan is the birthplace of China’s steel industry, which rode the country’s meteoric development in recent decades to become the biggest in the world.

The scale of Chinese appetite for steel has been epic. As China built up its cities, according to government data, the country consumed twice as much of the metal in the two decades from 2000 to 2020 as the US did during the entire 20th century.

This massive industrialisation and urbanisation, at a pace the world had never seen before, drove a huge commodities supercycle. It sent prices of raw materials like iron ore and steelmaking coal skyrocketing, and profoundly reshaped the global mining and energy industries.

But that supercycle, which started to wane during the Covid-19 pandemic, has now finally come to an end. Last year China’s steel production fell to a four-year low, and is expected to shrink again this year. The country’s consumption of iron ore, a key ingredient for making steel and iron, declined last year after peaking in 2023, according to Macquarie. There are even some indications that Chinese demand for oil is starting to peak — well before most forecasts said it would.

Steele Li, vice-chair of mining company CMOC, says that the real estate boom that drove the Chinese economy has ended. “That engine is over, and I don’t think it will come back, ever. So China’s economy needs to find a new engine, with similar size,” says Li.

While Chinese demand has been limping along for several years, especially since the pandemic, some had hoped that the government stimulus measures would lead to a new spurt. But the resources industry has now given up hope of another construction boom, like the ones that accompanied earlier stimulus packages.

Experts quibble about the exact timing of the peak in Chinese demand. But as Tom Price, head of commodities strategy at Panmure Liberum, puts it: “The China commodities supercycle is definitely over.”

For the countries and companies that rode the wave of the Chinese supercycle for the past 20 years, it is a profound and at times painful shift.

“Is it the end of an era? It does seem like it,” reflects James Campbell, steel analyst at CRU, a commodity data firm. Even with the recent stimulus measures, he says, “there is not really a way to supercharge steel demand further”.

Within the industry, some executives are hopeful that the end of the China boom is coinciding with the start of a new cycle. Huge investments in clean energy, in China and around the world, have laid the foundation for another, very different kind of commodities boom.

This next phase will require lots of copper for building out electricity grids, data centres, and renewable power — as well as metals such as lithium, cobalt and nickel for electric vehicle batteries.

“We are between supercycles,” says Peter Toth, chief strategy officer at Newmont, a US-listed gold miner, who previously worked at BHP and Rio Tinto. “We are coming out of the China supercycle and we are still on the edge of the next supercycle, which will be driven by electrification, the energy transition and artificial intelligence.”

However, if there is a new boom in commodities, it will take place in a very different global economy — one that is being shaped by competition between Beijing and Washington.

The China cycle was in many ways the apogee of the era of globalisation: Beijing was able to access open markets to feed its economy with iron ore from Brazil, copper from DRC and oil from Saudi Arabia. The demand in the next cycle, however, is more spread out geographically, with dozens of countries vying for the raw materials to build out their own renewable energy and electricity infrastructure.

That dynamic means competition over scarce resources will play a much greater role. Already western countries are racing to build their own supply chains, outside of Chinese control, for critical materials such as cobalt, lithium and copper.

Under the Biden administration, the US government has started to intervene in certain mining deals in Africa, in an effort to steer control of crucial commodities towards US-allied companies. The political tensions around the new boom in commodities could become even sharper in Donald Trump’s new term.

“The biggest challenge in the future is the geopolitics,” says Li, of CMOC. “The world is becoming more divided . . . That’s the fundamental issue.”

Back when the last supercycle started, around 2000, the scale of the demand caught everyone by surprise. “China came along and completely changed everything,” recalls Toth, the mining executive, who joined BHP in 1994.

Mining giants BHP and Rio Tinto each reported more than $100bn in operating profits from iron ore during the 2000-20 period. Some in the mining industry joke that they were scooping money out of the ground.

But now the structural and demographic factors that underpinned that boom — China’s rapid urbanisation and industrialisation — have become much less powerful. On a per capita basis, China has already passed the level of annual steel consumption of the US and other developed countries. The vast migration to cities, in which half a billion people moved from rural to urban settings during the boom years, is starting to slow down.

“Peak steel in China has been reached: structurally there is no realistic growth [in steel demand],” says Marcus Garvey, head of commodities strategy at Macquarie Group. Going forward, he expects China’s steel production will “cycle around” current levels of 1bn tonnes annually, with exports helping to compensate for slack domestic demand.

China’s previous rounds of economic stimulus — including those in 2009, 2013 and 2016 — pumped money into heavy industry and construction, bolstering the steel industry again and again.

But this time is different. Starting in late September, Beijing announced a series of stimulus measures aimed at helping local governments reduce their debt, rescuing the property market, and loosening monetary policy. While some of these are directed at infrastructure or stimulating consumption to stave off an economic downturn, none of them will have the same big impact on steel. Indeed, most economists argue China needs to rebalance its economy towards household consumption and services. Another steel-heavy construction stimulus is the exact opposite of what is needed at this point in its development, they say.

“There have been a lot of stimulus packages over the years that have kept steel demand going,” says Campbell, the CRU analyst. “But what we see now is that they have reached that limit.”

Many Chinese steel mills have turned to exports to try to compensate for weaker demand at home. Last year China’s steel exports reached 111mn tonnes, a nine-year high. But mounting trade tensions, including with the US, mean there is little room to increase exports further.

Others have shifted to produce more flat steel products, which are used in the automotive and manufacturing sectors, and fewer of the long steel products used in construction. Manufacturing, including cars, has grown to account for nearly half of Chinese steel demand.

“This year, the manufacturing sector will remain the major driver to prop up China’s overall steel demand,” says Vivian Yang, head of editorial at MySteel, a Shanghai-based commodity data provider. “But still the property sector will be a major drag.” She forecasts China’s steel consumption will fall 2-3 per cent this year, after dropping 3 per cent last year.

Some steel mills have had to close their doors entirely — and about 50 per cent of Chinese steel mills are losing money, according to a MySteel survey this month.

In the town of Ezhou, near Wuhan, a large privately owned steelmaker, Hongtai Steel, stopped production last year. When the FT tried to visit the plant, a receptionist said “there are no plans to resume production”.

The company’s slogan, written in huge letters on top of its office block, still harks back to happier times — Gang De Shi Li, Tie De Xin Yu, meaning “Steel-like Strength, Iron-clad Integrity”.

For the global steel industry, the rest of the world is not able to pick up the slack left by the decline in China. Although demand is growing in India, the world’s second-largest steel producer, its annual domestic output is still just one-eighth of China’s.

“The world has got to get used to slower growth,” says Campbell, the analyst at CRU. He expects global steel demand growth to slow to 0.6 per cent per annum between now and 2050, compared with an average of 2 per cent annual growth over the past 20 years.

Iron ore prices, which have been trending down, are expected to keep falling. Macquarie’s Garvey expects iron ore to fall to an average of $80 per tonne next year, from around $140 per tonne at the start of 2024.

There is a future for iron ore, but it will look different: demand is expected to shift to the higher grades of iron ore used in steelmaking processes that have significantly lower carbon emissions. Within the Chinese steel industry, the downturn could finally provide the impetus to reduce the overcapacity that has plagued the industry for decades, and speed up the retirement of older, more polluting mills.

“Now there will be a process of supply and demand equilibrium, finding a new level,” says Toth, the mining executive at Newmont. “The low-grade seaborne [iron ore] will come out of the market, and you’ll be left with the high-grade.”

Even as steel mills struggle, there are signs of hope for those in the resources sector more generally — particularly when it comes to copper, the metal that is central to the energy transition.

Near Wuhan, in the town of Huangshi, which literally means “yellow stone”, producers of copper products are busier than ever.

Huangshi claims a long pedigree in copper production — with evidence of mining and smelting dating back to the Bronze Age — and is home to several major smelters today. On a recent visit, a warehouse belonging to Youhe Copper was busy with trucks loading huge coils of copper sheet, coming and going late into the evening. “Business is good this year,” says a staff member.

Outside China, the mining companies that made their fortunes selling materials into the Chinese real estate boom have rapidly been reorientating themselves towards what they hope to be a new copper boom. Last year BHP launched a £39bn bid for Anglo American, primarily to get access to its copper assets. And Rio Tinto splashed out nearly $7bn to scoop up a lithium company, Arcadium, to tap into demand for electric vehicle batteries.

As the energy transition requires more electrical cables, more electric vehicles, and more solar and wind farms, the resulting surge in demand will be huge. Copper demand is expected to increase 50 per cent by 2040, and lithium demand is expected to surge seven-fold by that time, according to the International Energy Agency Net Zero Scenario.

“The only reason these guys are coming up with these strategies is because they know China’s iron ore demand has peaked, and the sector that the iron and steel went into — property and real estate — has also peaked,” says Price of Panmure Liberum.

The new cycle does not revolve around China, but the country is still one of the driving forces. China remains the world’s largest buyer of many raw materials — and will be the world’s biggest steel producer for decades to come. Its dominance in battery materials is even greater: it controls two-thirds of global lithium and cobalt processing.

The critical minerals needed for the energy transition are often more niche than the commodities that drove the real estate boom, and lower value in terms of market size. And the trade war between the US and China is encompassing a widening circle of niche metals. After the US introduced export controls aimed at the Chinese semiconductor industry, China recently restricted its exports of gallium and germanium — which are used in certain semiconductor and defence applications.

Some executives fear that the competition over resources could escalate in a dangerous manner.

“I personally think the next war is going to be a war of metals,” says Hugo Schumann, a mining entrepreneur and chief executive of EverMetal, a Denver-based recycling investment firm. “China has so much power, because they have consolidated all the downstream production of these metals.”

Even if few would go that far, there is a growing recognition that competition over resources will shape the new era for commodities.

“There is this collision between the upcoming critical minerals boom and heightened geopolitical tension in almost every part of the world,” says Thijs Van de Graaf, energy fellow at the Brussels Institute for Geopolitics.

Van de Graaf adds that Trump’s recent comments on Greenland and Canada have big implications for critical minerals. “Under Trump, I expect critical raw materials to become part of a more transactional type of geopolitics.”

While mining companies see grounds for optimism, many executives are a touch nostalgic for the China boom years.

“At its height, the China supercycle in iron ore was something I’ve never seen,” says Toth. “And will never see again in my career.”

Data visualisation by Steven Bernard



Saudi Aramco is to expand its investments in lithium production, officials in Beijing are discussing using Elon Musk as a broker in a potential sale of TikTok’s US operations, and KPMG could soon begin offering legal services in the US. Plus, Syria has been flooded with imports in the aftermath of Bashar al-Assad’s ousting.

Mentioned in this podcast:

Saudi Aramco to expand investments in lithium as it diversifies from oil

China discussing using Elon Musk as broker in TikTok deal

KPMG readies challenge to US law firms

Syria flooded with Pepsi and Pringles as rulers open economy

The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian, Lulu Smyth, and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



Intel will spin off its venture capital unit as the troubled US chipmaker seeks to cut costs and faces more scrutiny over its investments in China.

Intel said on Tuesday it would separate Intel Capital, a prominent Silicon Valley investor that has ploughed more than $20bn into about 1,800 companies since it launched in 1990, into a new, standalone fund.

The move would bring Intel Capital’s corporate structure “into alignment with other leading venture firms”, the company said. Intel would remain an anchor investor in the new venture fund, which would begin operations under a new name in the second half of the year, it said.

The fund will now be able to raise capital from external sources for the first time. It had previously relied on a yearly budget allocation from Intel.

Intel’s interim co-chief executive, David Zinsner, said spinning off its venture arm was a “win-win scenario as it provides the fund with access to new sources of capital to expand its franchise while allowing both companies to continue benefiting from a productive long-term strategic partnership”.

The decision follows a series of cost-cutting measures at Intel after a nightmare year for the company in 2024. Intel shares are down about 60 per cent on a year ago as the company has fallen behind on manufacturing and designing leading-edge chips.

In December, Zinsner told a Barclays conference that Intel would be constantly “scrutinising where we are spending money and making sure we get the appropriate return”, as the company’s board pushed for “focus” on its core business.

Former chief executive Pat Gelsinger was ousted by the board in December as tensions rose over his five-year capital-intensive plan to turn the company into a manufacturing powerhouse to rival Taiwan’s TSMC. The multibillion-dollar plan came amid pressure on its core chip design business from competitors such as AMD and Nvidia.

Gelsinger was replaced by two interim co-CEOs: chief financial officer Zinsner and product chief Michelle Johnston Holthaus.

Intel Capital has faced scrutiny in Washington over its exposure to Chinese technology companies. The US has sought to restrict flows of capital to Chinese groups, including this month effectively banning investment in companies producing technology such as AI, quantum computing and semiconductors.

Sequoia Capital and GGV Capital, formerly two of the largest US venture investors in China, spun out their Chinese businesses in 2023 under mounting political pressure.

Intel Capital has continued to invest in China, owning stakes in 43 China-based technology start-ups as recently as last year, the Financial Times reported. Since the venture fund was launched in the 1990s, it has invested in more than 120 Chinese groups, according to data provider Crunchbase. Its investments have included chipmaker Horizon Robotics and Eeasy Tech, which designs AI chips for facial recognition.

Zinsner was the architect of a big cost-cutting initiative announced in September, which paused major manufacturing plans in Germany and Poland and aimed to drastically cut the company’s real estate footprint. It followed an earlier move in August to axe 15,000 jobs.

Gelsinger’s departure came just days after the Biden administration threw its weight behind Intel by finalising a nearly $8bn direct subsidy for its manufacturing in the US under the 2022 Chips Act.

Intel is still seeking a permanent chief executive, who will have to confront difficult questions about how turn around the company, including pressure to spin off its manufacturing business.



The EU has threatened to restrict access to Chinese medical devices after finding Beijing has been discriminating against the bloc’s manufacturers in bids for public contracts in the same field.

The findings, which say Chinese policies force hospitals to choose domestic suppliers, follow a months-long investigation under new EU legislation seeking to prise open overseas procurement markets.

Maroš Šefčovič, EU trade commissioner, said he was seeking talks with Beijing over the issue. But a failure to resolve the issue could lead to Brussels restricting access to EU contracts for Chinese companies for five years.

“While we continue to prioritise dialogue as a first step to finding solutions, we stand ready to take decisive action to defend the level playing field, and support fair competition,” he said.

The report risks increasing trade tensions between Brussels and Beijing, In October, the EU levied tariffs of up to 45 per cent on Chinese electric vehicles and opened several anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations. China responded with anti-dumping tariffs on brandy and investigations into pork and dairy products.

While EU imports of Chinese-made devices doubled between 2015-23, the commission said Chinese policies forced hospitals to choose domestic suppliers.

For the first time Brussels used its International Procurement Instrument, a legislative measure adopted in 2022, in pursuing the probe. If talks proposed by Šefčovič fail to reach an agreement it could reduce or deny access to its own market.

“Any measure adopted under the IPI has to be specific and based on the principles of proportionality and efficiency, while considering any possible supply issues,” a commission statement said.

Its report said high-performance medical devices were one of the 10 core industries identified in Beijing’s “Made in China 2025” strategy.

There are specific targets for the share of domestically produced high-end medical devices procured by Chinese hospitals, of 50 per cent by 2020, 70 per cent by 2025 and 95 per cent by 2030, the report found.

It also cited a lack of transparency, with less than a tenth of 380,000 procurement tenders on medical devices between January 2017 and May 31 2024 giving eligibility criteria in accessible form.

Of those, 87 per cent contained “direct and indirect discrimination” including prohibiting imported medical devices.

After consultations with Beijing, the commission said it had to act. But Šefčovič added that it “strongly wishes to maintain open, fair and mutually beneficial trade relations with China, including on public procurement”.

Commission officials said China had offered to negotiate a bilateral procurement agreement giving mutual access, but it was not a solution to the problem being investigated.

In an effort to improve bilateral ties, António Costa, president of the European Council, spoke to Chinese President Xi Jinping on Tuesday.

“While agreeing that co-operation is preferable to competition, Costa stressed the need to ensure a level playing field and to rebalance the existing trade and economic imbalances,” an EU official said about the leaders’ telephone call.

According to Chinese state news agency Xinhua, Xi said “both sides serve as defenders of the multilateral trading system”.

“The two sides should expand mutual openness [and] consolidate existing co-operation mechanisms,” he added.



Mexico’s government on Monday launched a plan to shrink its yawning trade deficit with China and attract investment, in an olive branch to Donald Trump’s incoming US administration.

Leftwing President Claudia Sheinbaum outlined “Plan Mexico” to try to boost national production in sectors from textiles to cars and reduce its trade deficit with China, which grew to $105bn in 2023.

The plan comes as Mexico tries to push back against claims by some American politicians that it is allowing Chinese goods to pass through the country into the US, as Sheinbaum tries to ease trade tensions with the president-elect as he prepares to return to the White House next week.

Trump last year threatened Mexico and Canada with tariffs of 25 per cent on their exports, accusing them of permitting illegal migration and drug trafficking across their borders.

The two countries have also been moving to align their trade rules with the US to try to limit Chinese imports and investment, as they try to preserve the three-nation USMCA agreement.

“It’s been demonstrated to be one of the best trade deals in history, it benefited the three countries,” Sheinbaum told business leaders at an event in the National Anthropology Museum. “It’s the only way that we can compete with Asian countries, in particular with China.”

Members of Trump’s team have expressed concern about China’s growing role in Mexico’s economy. Just in the past few weeks, Sheinbaum’s government has imposed new tariffs on imports of clothing and other textiles as well as couriered packages from China.

Monday’s plan includes specific targets such as substituting 15 per cent of sewing thread imports with domestic supplies and promises a development programme for Mexican companies making polymers and wire harnesses for autos and aerospace sectors.

The USMCA, which was negotiated in Trump’s first term, underpins much of Mexico‘s $36bn annual foreign investment and is up for a scheduled review in 2026. China’s role in the region is among fundamental issues expected to be up for discussion.

Asked about the Mexico plan, China’s foreign affairs ministry responded that it advocated “inclusive economic globalisation” and “win-win results” in trade. It said it was ready to “work with all parties to safeguard” global trade.

Canada has also moved to tighten China’s role in its economy in recent years, including tariffs on the country’s electric vehicles, steel and aluminium that aligned with the steep levies imposed by the US.

Mexico had little public debate about China’s role in its economy until recently, with investment and trade growing faster since the Covid-19 pandemic. Its trade deficit with Beijing has also widened to 38 per cent from 2018 to 2023, with large imports in the electronic equipment, vehicle and machinery sectors.

To counter this, Sheinbaum will need to attract investment by overcoming uncertainty created both by Trump and by her government’s domestic agenda to overhaul the country’s institutions.

On Monday, she committed to resolving two big question marks in February by publishing the rules for energy investment and for public-private investment in infrastructure.

Although she had raised the prospect last year of retaliatory tariffs in response to Trump’s threats, in recent days she has tried to stress that Mexico will have a “good” relationship with the next US president.

“Facing any uncertainty in the near future, Mexico has a plan,” she said.

Additional reporting by Joe Leahy in Beijing

This story was updated on January 14 to correct a detail concerning Mexico’s trade deficit with Beijing



The UK and China will study the feasibility of establishing exchange traded fund and wealth management connect schemes to link the capital markets of the two countries.

The announcement by the UK government follows UK Chancellor Rachel Reeves’ visit to Beijing last week.

As part of efforts to improve economic ties with China, the UK government said that both sides had “committed to further their financial services relationship” and would “deepen co-operation” in wealth management by studying the feasibility of establishing a UK-China Wealth Connect.

It added that the governments would also assess the feasibility of setting up an UK-China ETF Connect scheme to improve capital market co-operation, and welcomed the increased number of UK subsidiaries of Chinese asset managers listing ETFs in London, including those dominated in renminbi.

The UK government said it welcomed recent licences and quota allocations China had granted to UK companies, including HSBC, Schroders, Abrdn and Aspect Capital.

Aspect Capital secured a private fund management licence in December, while Schroders won the final go-ahead to commence its wholly owned fund management business in China in 2023.

The UK delegation to Beijing included representatives from Abrdn, Fidelity, HSBC, London Stock Exchange Group, Prudential, Schroders, and Standard Chartered, a source familiar with matter told Ignites Asia.

The announcement also outlined plans to further enhance the UK-China Stock Connect and for the launch of a UK-China over-the-counter bond business.

A Shanghai-London Stock Connect scheme was launched in 2019, allowing investors to conduct trades in different time zones across the two bourses but has not garnered the size of cross-border flows that many might have hoped.

Speaking at a joint press conference with China’s vice-premier He Lifeng on January 11, Reeves said the two countries had signed agreements worth £600mn that represented “pragmatic co-operation” on financial services, trade, investment and the climate.

Reeves added that London was a “natural home” for China’s financial services companies to raise capital, and as a “launch pad” for Chinese companies to build a global footprint.

“Across capital markets, we have opportunities to deepen connections between the UK and China,” Reeves said. “However, as we continue to strengthen our financial relationship, it is crucial that we work together even closer on regulatory co-operation,” she added.

Vice-premier He told reporters during the press conference that China would issue an inaugural renminbi-denominated sovereign green bond in 2025.

He added that China welcomed more qualified UK banks to join the renminbi cross-border payment system and invited qualified UK institutions to apply for licences and businesses in areas such as Treasury bond and futures asset management, over-the-counter derivatives, and pension and wealth management.

The UK government announced that a joint task force would be established to support the advancement of China’s capital market reforms and opening up, and enhance market attractiveness to international investors.

The task force will consist of FTSE Russell, the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, with support from the China Securities Regulatory Commission.

In a Treasury policy document on the 2025 UK-China Economic and Financial Dialogue that Reeves introduced in Beijing, the UK government highlighted the “essential role” that asset management had to play in “promoting the efficient allocation of capital and supporting growth”.

In the document, the UK government highlighted a reform from 2020, saying that in recognition of the diversification and risk management private fund managers offered to investors, China had allowed foreign institutional investors to invest in private funds through the qualified foreign institutional investor scheme.

The policy document also said the two governments would conduct consultations on eligible UK fund service institutions providing services to private fund managers registered with the Asset Management Association of China.

The consultations will also cover the possible use of a master-feeder fund structure, which will be in line with domestic asset management regulations.

The UK Treasury said that both parties had agreed that portfolio delegation was an “integral norm” of a financial ecosystem that enabled asset managers to promote efficiency and economies of scale.

“To that end, both sides support deepening co-operation between their respective mutual fund industries and welcome their respective fund management companies to entrust the other party’s financial institutions to manage their overseas investment portfolios or use their services in accordance with regulations,” it read.

China has been quickly expanding its ETF connect link-ups with other markets over the past few years.

Aside from existing agreements with Hong Kong and Singapore, China is also reportedly looking at talks with Saudi Arabia to establish an ETF cross-listing scheme.

Three large Chinese asset managers have paired up with Brazilian counterparts to plan cross-listing ETFs in each other’s market, sources told Ignites Asia last year.

The Shenzhen Stock Exchange and Dubai Financial Market stock exchange last year signed a memorandum of understanding to promote cross-border investing in China and the United Arab Emirates.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



Social media start-up Xiaohongshu has seen its Chinese app go to the top of the iPhone’s US download charts, in an unexpected reaction to short-form video app TikTok facing a ban at the end of this week.

Xiaohongshu, which translates as “Little Red Book” but is widely known in the US as RedNote, topped Apple’s free-app downloads this week as so-called TikTok refugees flocked to its platform.

One employee at the Shanghai-based company described the sudden download surge as a “surprise”, as it has no plans for growth through targeting American users and the start-up is focused on consolidating its popularity in China.

Most of its content is in Mandarin, and the app does not have a translation feature to enable new US users to understand posts. The app does not have an official English name.

They added that the company was trying to capitalise on the sudden jump in traffic and may have to change content review mechanisms if American influencers start uploading posts.

“Xiaohongshu now faces the unique challenge of managing a single platform with both Chinese and western users who have vastly different expectations around content moderation and free speech, while also maintaining compliance with Chinese internet regulations,” said Olivia Plotnick, founder of the social media agency Wai Social.“Rapidly adapting the platform to accommodate this influx of non-Mandarin-speaking users would require significant investment and infrastructure changes that may not align with Xiaohongshu’s current focus.”

New US users were initially focused on introducing themselves to a Chinese audience, identifying themselves as “TikTok refugees” or “TikTok nomads”. One user named Trini was posting her book recommendations, echoing the “BookTok” community within TikTok, while another user known as “SoCal Masker” wrote in English and Chinese that he was looking “forward to this new opportunity to share my content”.

The sudden influx of users is largely a symbolic shift led by influencers protesting against the US move to ban TikTok, with several viral posts joking that they were simply switching to another Chinese platform. It “points to rising dissatisfaction with Meta’s platforms, which people presumed would be the beneficiary of a TikTok ban”, said Plotnick.

TikTok’s parent ByteDance is bracing for a potential ban if the US Supreme Court does not overturn a law to block the app unless a non-Chinese buyer is found before the January 19 deadline. The court indicated on Friday that it would uphold the ban because ByteDance has close ties to the Chinese government.For TikTok’s 170mn users in the US, this would not mean the platform immediately disappears, but ByteDance would be unable to update the app and performance would decline.

Xiaohongshu is an Instagram-like app hugely popular with young Chinese women, who use the platform for travel, dining and beauty tips. It is an important platform for fashion and beauty brands to reach affluent consumers in cities through promotions in posts or by paying influencers. It has also been steadily growing its male user base.

The company is profitable and has been one of the few success stories in a Chinese internet sector hit by bankruptcies and falling valuations. Xiaohongshu has been investing in its ecommerce business in China, trying to turn its traffic into new revenue streams. So far, it has struggled to make much of a dent in ecommerce, a heavily saturated market dominated by Alibaba’s Taobao and ByteDance’s Douyin, the Chinese sister version of TikTok.

Xiaohongshu did not respond to a request for comment.

In the summer, Xiaohongshu was valued at $17bn in a secondary share sale in which venture capital firm DST Global bought shares from existing investors. At the peak of Chinese internet start-up valuations in 2021, the company was valued at $20bn in a funding round that included Singaporean state-backed investor Temasek.

Xiaohongshu is targeting an initial public offering in Hong Kong, but is waiting for Beijing to clarify its stance towards the overseas listing of large tech companies, the FT previously reported.

The start-up’s IPO plans are complicated by the wealth of information it holds about Chinese consumers, which could put it in the crosshairs of Beijing’s restrictions on cross-border data sharing.

Additional reporting by Hannah Murphy in San Francisco and Gavin Huang in Hong Kong



Hiding under a parasol from the pouring rain, smoking a cheap cigarette outside the hair salon where he works in Guangzhou, Xu is a typical Chinese smoker: he is male, started young and does not think he can quit.

The 16-year-old began smoking in his first year of middle school and now gets through more than a pack a day. “At the time, I thought it was fun, really fun,” he said. “Now I’m addicted and there’s nothing to be done.”

Unlike in much of the world, where strict tobacco controls have led to a sharp decline in smoking, research suggests cigarette sales in China have risen in recent years, with analysts pointing to patchy, loosely enforced regulations and authorities’ reluctance to clamp down on a crucial source of central government revenue.

Despite a high-profile push nearly 10 years ago to reduce smoking rates from Xi Jinping, China’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong, that problem has become more acute as China’s economic growth has slowed, they added.

“The first thing is: it’s a big revenue [generator]. So that’s why all the tobacco control measures are not very highly effective,” said Zhengming Chen, professor of epidemiology at the Nuffield Department of Population Health at the University of Oxford, adding that Chinese men were some of the heaviest smokers globally.

China produced 2.4tn cigarettes in 2023, with the number having risen in each of the previous five years and gained more than 35 per cent compared with 2003, according to figures from the National Bureau of Statistics.

Figures from Euromonitor show that the country’s share of global sales rose to about 47 per cent last year from less than 38 per cent in 2009, echoing the findings of other studies tracking tobacco in China. The World Health Organization estimates the proportion of the population aged over 15 that use tobacco products excluding e-cigarettes falling by about four percentage points between 2000 and 2025, much slower than the global average.

The figures come as China’s economy grapples with a slowdown in growth following a years-long property sector crisis and persistent concerns about weak consumer demand and deflation.

“When China’s economy is in decline, the best thing is to increase the tobacco tax very substantially,” said Chen, arguing that evidence from European markets showed that tripling the price of cigarettes could halve consumption and double revenues. “[But] with the economic downturn, tobacco is always considered as a necessary commodity.”

Despite signing the WHO’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2003, China has largely left local governments to issue and enforce smoking restrictions independently, leading to a piecemeal framework that is patchily enforced, said analysts.

They also point to China National Tobacco Corporation, which holds the country’s tobacco monopoly. In 2023, it generated Rmb1.5tn ($206bn) in tax revenue, according to official figures. That corresponds to about 7 per cent of central government revenue, analysts said.

Together with its regulatory arm, the State Tobacco Monopoly Administration, it employs more than half a million people, according to figures from 2016.

In 2015, around the time Chinese media began reporting that Xi himself had quit smoking, Beijing enacted a citywide indoor smoking ban. Similar measures followed in Shanghai and Shenzhen in 2017.

Despite a flurry of activity and a brief dip in cigarette sales at the time, a push for nationwide legislation has yet to bear fruit, partly due to pressure from the tobacco industry, said Judith Mackay, director of the Asian Consultancy on Tobacco Control and an adviser to the WHO.

“A bunch of things have happened, but I have to say the tobacco industry was too strong for them,” she said. “It’s just massively powerful.”

The cost of a pack of cigarettes in China starts from well under Rmb10 and can rise to more than Rmb100. The country does not have laws on plain packaging and only relatively weak stipulations on health warnings. Smokers have a range of ornately packaged brands to choose from, including cigarettes associated with their hometowns or with famous national landmarks.

CNTC’s contribution to government revenue, said Mackay, made it difficult for China to kick its cigarette habit. “It’s a massive amount of money,” she said.

In 2019, CNTC listed shares of its international affiliate in Hong Kong, using the funds to fuel its global expansion, she added. Those shares are up more than 230 per cent since the listing and about 140 per cent last year alone.

China’s National Health Commission said the government was promoting tobacco control, noting that 24 provinces and 254 cities had issued their own regulations to control smoking. The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology did not respond to a request for comment. CNTC was not reachable for comment.

For Fanny Huang, a finance worker in her 40s from Guangzhou who enjoys flavoured, slim cigarettes for Rmb15 a pack, the lack of public smoking bans means there are few incentives to stop smoking.

“I know that overseas there are very few places where you can smoke. In China, there’s no such thing,” said Huang, who began smoking aged 14 and now gets through about half a pack a day. “I smoke whenever I have free time.”

Additional reporting by Wenjie Ding



The writer is head of emerging markets cross-asset strategy at UBS

American exceptionalism dominates markets, with equities outperforming the rest of the world by 20 per cent last year alone. Yet one indicator, close to Donald Trump’s heart, remains exceptionally weak: the trade balance. We expect this to motivate new, China-centric tariffs. But rather than in China itself, we see larger market moves playing out in the rest of the emerging world for five reasons.

First, China is exporting its strongest disinflationary impulse in at least 30 years: its export prices are down 18 per cent from their post-Covid peak compared with a 5 per cent decline globally, according to our analysis of CPB World Trade Monitor data. This de facto real renminbi depreciation is helping exports dominate to a degree unseen since the early days of WTO accession. Chinese export volumes have risen 38 per cent over the past five years relative to a 3 per cent rise globally. This export surge is primarily being channelled into other emerging markets.

This goes beyond a simple rerouting of Chinese products destined for the US. That wouldn’t explain Chinese export dominance over the rest of the emerging markets world. Instead, it reflects a continued march up the manufacturing value chain and the export of excess capacity. New tariffs would deepen the latter, with consequences for production and capex across emerging markets. Tariffs may be inflationary for the US, but the opposite will be true for those economies.

Second, tariffs may accelerate a slowdown in Chinese imports that was already coming. Commodity imports have, thus far, decoupled from China’s slowdown amid robust infrastructure and manufacturing investment. New tariffs would exacerbate fiscal pressure and weaken profitability, challenging this resilience. As such, while manufacturing competitors to China have borne the brunt of its slowdown thus far, the next phase of growth deceleration will probably hit commodity exporters, too. Fiscal stimulus won’t compensate. That is tilting towards consumption — positive for the consumer and internet companies that dominate Chinese stocks — but with little spillover to broader emerging markets.

Third, with growth now slowing in large parts of developing economies, markets are in a weak position to navigate a potential Trade War 2.0. Outside China, where we see tariffs driving GDP growth to 3 per cent next year, emerging markets investment is stuck at 2008 levels as a share of GDP. Exports also have flattened out and foreign direct investment is failing to accelerate despite hopes of “friendshoring”. Stronger support in the form of monetary policy easing is needed but persistently elevated US rates limit the ability of emerging markets to provide this without disturbing currencies and, in several cases, credit spreads.

Fourth, tariff-sensitive industries such as autos, steel, transport infrastructure and electrical equipment constitute a higher share of emerging markets equities, particularly outside China, than in developed economies. This vulnerability is arguably reflected in Chinese equity valuations, which haven’t recovered from Trade War 1.0 but not in the rest of emerging markets where valuations are 30 per cent higher despite flat return on equity.

Finally, emerging markets outside China also face more challenging trade negotiations with Trump than ever before. US trade deficit composition has shifted dramatically such that China now accounts for “only” 27 per cent while the rest of the emerging markets world constitutes 55 per cent. Deficits with Mexico, Vietnam, Taiwan, Korea and Thailand have risen particularly quickly, bringing greater uncertainty.

Some investors believe that valuations already price in such risks after recent underperformance. We disagree.

The UBS Emerging Markets Risk Appetite Index stands roughly halfway between risk neutrality and risk euphoria — atypically strong relative to the state of global growth. Analysts expect 14 per cent earnings growth in emerging markets in 2025-26 compared with 4 per cent realised during the 2018-19 trade spat. The cost of purchasing protection against even half the renminbi depreciation seen in 2018-19 is in the bottom quartile of a 10-year range. Emerging market credit spreads across all ratings buckets have now compressed to the 18th percentile or lower of their distribution after the financial crisis.The biggest draw for emerging markets is high real rates and disinflation. This provides opportunities in fixed income, particularly currency-hedged local debt. But growth-sensitive assets — equities and especially currency — look vulnerable.



The US is imposing expansive export controls on chips used for artificial intelligence in an effort to make it harder for China and other adversaries to get access to advanced technology with military applications.

Joe Biden’s administration on Monday unveiled an export control regime that gives 20 close allies and partners uninhibited access to AI-related chips while placing licensing requirements on most other countries. The move faced immediate pushback from the US semiconductor industry.

The policy aims to make it harder for China to use other countries to circumvent existing US restrictions and get technology that can be used for everything from nuclear weapons modelling to hypersonic missiles.

US national security adviser Jake Sullivan said: “The rule both provides greater clarity to our international partners and to industry and counters the serious circumvention and related national security risks posed by countries of concern and malicious actors who may seek to use the advanced American technologies against us.”

The regime creates a three-tier licensing system for chips used to power data centres that process AI computations. The top tier, which includes G7 members in addition to countries such as Australia, New Zealand, South Korea, Taiwan, the Netherlands and Ireland, will face no restrictions.

The third tier includes nations such as China, Iran, Russia and North Korea to which US groups can, in effect, not export. The middle tier of more than 100 countries will face caps and licences for export volumes over those limits.

A person familiar with the plans said sales of Nvidia’s H20 series of chips for China — a less-powerful version of the company’s most advanced chips, modified to meet US export controls for Chinese customers — would not be affected by the new controls.

Commerce secretary Gina Raimondo said the policy ensured the new controls did not “stifle innovation or US technological leadership”. But it has provoked a furious backlash from the US semiconductor industry, and the EU has also decried the new rules.

In a joint statement, European Commission executive vice-president Henna Virkkunen and commissioner Maroš Šefčovič said they were “concerned about the US measures adopted today restricting access to advanced AI chip exports for selected EU Member states and their companies”.

They added the EU represented “an economic opportunity for the US, not a security risk”, and they would engage “constructively” with the next US administration.

John Neuffer, president of the Semiconductor Industry Association, said: “We’re deeply disappointed that a policy shift of this magnitude and impact is being rushed out the door days before a presidential transition and without any meaningful input from industry.”

“The new rule risks causing unintended and lasting damage to America’s economy and global competitiveness in semiconductors and AI by ceding strategic markets to our competitors,” Neuffer added.

Industry sources who spoke on the condition of anonymity criticised the move, calling it an unprecedented step that showed Washington was trying to micromanage the global chip supply chain to the detriment of its allies and its own companies such as Nvidia, AMD, Dell and Supermicro.

Nvidia said in a blog post: “While cloaked in the guise of an ‘anti-China’ measure, these rules would do nothing to enhance US security. The new rules would control technology worldwide, including technology that is already widely available in mainstream gaming PCs and consumer hardware.

“The new Biden rules would only weaken America’s global competitiveness, undermining the innovation that has kept the US ahead.”

But Jimmy Goodrich, a senior adviser to the Rand Corporation, said the rules were an “important framework” that enhanced national security and did not give Chinese AI companies a competitive advantage over US groups.

“Unchecked offshoring of massive AI data centres to countries with questionable ties to foreign adversaries presents clear national and economic security risks,” Goodrich said. “The framework still allows for millions of chips to continue flowing around the world, and concerns about Chinese competition in AI chips are presently overhyped.”

The industry sources questioned whether the US would be equipped to monitor such an extensive company-specific regime and expressed hope Donald Trump’s administration would roll back the controls.

One US official declined to comment on what the president-elect might do but stressed “time is really of the essence”.

“We’re in a critical window right now, particularly vis-à-vis China. If you think about where our models are today relative to People’s Republic of China models, the estimates range from being six to 18 months ahead right now, and so every minute counts,” the official said.

One person familiar with the new regime said it was “nothing if not America First”, in a reference to the mantra frequently used by Trump. “The question is whether the new administration can stick to that, or falls victim to a policy of Petro-autocracies First.”

Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican and incoming chair of the Senate commerce committee, last week said the rules would “crush American semiconductor leadership”. He said he was prepared to trigger the Congressional Review Act, which could be used to overturn federal agency actions.

Cruz said they had been “drafted in secrecy without input from Congress or American companies”. But Raimondo said the administration had “taken pains and consulted with industry and civil society and experts on Capitol Hill”.



China’s trade surplus with the rest of the world reached a record of almost $1tn in 2024, official data showed on Monday, just a week before Donald Trump is set to take office with a vow to impose punitive tariffs on the US’s biggest economic rival.

The $992bn Chinese trade surplus, more than a third of which was with the US, is expected to fuel further tensions with Washington and other trade partners, which have pushed back on a surge of Chinese exports this year.

Economists said the figures benefited from “front-loading” of exports, as producers tried to ship goods ahead of an expected trade war with the incoming Trump administration.

“Given the threatened tariffs, we expect export growth to remain robust in the near term because of front-loading,” said Nomura economists in a research note.

Trump, who will be sworn in for a second term as US president on January 20, was re-elected after pledging to apply tariffs of up to 60 per cent on Chinese goods and a blanket 20 per cent tariff on all US trading partners.

Chinese producers, meanwhile, have stepped up exports to offset sluggish domestic demand, with households still recovering from a three-year property crash in the world’s second-largest economy.

China’s imports have also slowed as its exports have expanded, prompting accusations from trading partners that the country’s surpluses were unsustainable and threatened to deindustrialise the rest of the world. The country’s trade surplus in December was $104.8bn, a record for a single month and up from $97.4bn in November.

Exports rose 10.7 per cent last month on a year earlier in dollar terms, the customs figures showed, while imports climbed 1 per cent, beating average analyst forecasts from Reuters of a 7.3 per cent rise and 1.5 per cent decline, respectively.

In November, exports rose 6.7 per cent year on year, while imports shrank 3.9 per cent.

Thanks to a big policy push from President Xi Jinping — who has vowed to invest in “new productive forces”, or cutting-edge industries — China has also been a leading producer of green-energy products such as solar panels and batteries for electric vehicles.

It has also grown within a few years to become a global automotive powerhouse, surpassing Japan as the world’s biggest car exporter.

The country’s trade surplus with the US increased 6.9 per cent in 2024 compared with a year earlier, to $361.03bn, Chinese customs figures showed.

Nomura analysts noted, however, that the share of US exports in China’s shipments was gradually declining, to 14.7 per cent in 2024 from 14.8 per cent a year earlier, boosted by the front-loading.

Many manufacturers have also been diversifying production from China to friendly regional countries to avoid trade tariffs and other restrictions. The share of Chinese exports to south-east Asian countries rose 16.4 per cent in 2024, from 15.5 per cent a year earlier.

“The decline in the share of exports to the US and significantly increased share to Asean could provide some buffers to China’s exports against the likely upcoming trade tension,” Nomura said. But it added that if the US targeted rerouting of exports to south-east Asia from China, the region’s share could also be hit.

HSBC economists said the export boost could fade as tariffs set in, posing a challenge for Chinese policymakers wrestling with lagging domestic demand.

“With global trade uncertainties likely to pick up, the front-loading boost may fade and more policy support will be needed to boost domestic demand,” they wrote in a note.

Additional reporting by Haohsiang Ko in Hong Kong



China is building a new class of mobile piers, satellite images reveal, which could bolster its ability to land an invading force in Taiwan, a major step in its preparations for a potential future attack.

Satellite images captured on Friday and reviewed by the Financial Times show six barge-like vessels equipped with extendable ramps under construction at China’s state-owned Guangzhou Shipyard. The vessels could help the People’s Liberation Army transport heavy military equipment such as tanks and artillery across mudflats or seawalls on to firm ground.

The construction of the vessels, first reported by defence website Naval News, comes as the PLA is trying to close large gaps in the capabilities needed to launch an attack on Taiwan, which Beijing claims as part of its territory and has threatened to annex by force if Taipei resists unification indefinitely.

Last month, China unveiled a new hybrid amphibious assault vessel, the largest of its kind in the world, which military commentators likened to a “light aircraft carrier”.

Calls seeking comment from China’s defence ministry went unanswered on Monday.

According to Chinese military academic papers, the PLA would target ports and airports in the event of an invasion of Taiwan to allow it to bring in troops and materiel. Amphibious beach landings would be necessary if that approach failed or fell short, as hundreds of thousands of soldiers would be needed to conquer and control the island.

In amphibious landing exercises since at least 2020, China’s military has experimented with floating docks and causeways for unloading armoured vehicles and other gear from ferries and other ships.

But the barges under construction in Guangzhou have several pairs of pylons resembling the legs of offshore oil rigs, suggesting they can be anchored in the coastal silt.

“The PLA has probably come to the realisation that those floating systems are too vulnerable to attack because they take too long to assemble, and also just can’t handle heavy wind and waves as they have no stabilisation,” said Michael Dahm, senior resident fellow for aerospace and China studies at the Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies in Washington and a former naval intelligence officer.

Chinese military researchers have repeatedly highlighted the importance of stabilised landing gear and the weaknesses of floating systems in papers published in military logistics journals in recent years.

“Such concerns were reinforced by the challenges the US had with its floating pier in Gaza,” Dahm said. The US plan to deliver humanitarian aid to the Palestinian territory via a floating pier last summer collapsed after just 20 days, after waves damaged and then broke the specially built, $230mn structure.

Analysts believe that an amphibious invasion of Taiwan would be one of the most difficult operations in military history. Long stretches of the coast comprise cliffs, reefs and rocks, while the flatter western seaboard is lined with mudflats in which heavy equipment could easily become stuck.

Most of the coastline is also separated from inland areas by concrete seawalls or wave-breaking concrete blocks.

Shore-based lifting equipment such as the new barges could help an invasion force overcome such obstacles, analysts said. The satellite images showed mobile piers of three different sizes. The largest, with eight pylons, was 183 metres long and had a ramp extending another 128 metres.

But military experts said a Chinese invasion force would still struggle to advance through Taiwan’s western plains, which are densely packed with paddy fields, fish ponds and urban sprawl, with wide roads often hard to reach from shore.

Taiwanese observers said the PLA’s new capability reinforced the need for Taipei to target Chinese forces before they reached shore.

“It is their large amphibious assault ships, their helicopters and airborne forces that we must be able to target,” said Lin Ying-yu, an assistant professor at the Graduate Institute for International Affairs and Strategic Studies at Taiwan’s Tamkang University.

“It is like in baseball,” Lin added. “They may have chosen a very good closer, but if we fight well in the first wave, that skill will not come to bear.”



Porsche has revealed a drop of more than a quarter in its deliveries to Chinese customers, as a “challenging economic situation” in the country continues to bite.

The German sports-car maker said on Monday it had delivered 56,887 vehicles to China last year, down 28 per cent on 2023 and offsetting growth in all other regions, pushing Porsche’s total deliveries down 3 per cent to 310,718.

Sliding sales in the world’s largest car market come at a bad time for Porsche’s parent company Volkswagen, which is grappling with declining demand in Europe and lower than expected sales of its electric vehicles, which are facing growing competition from cheaper Chinese rivals.

VW’s management last month backed down from plans to close several German factories following intense pushback from its powerful labour representatives.

Sales in China — long VW’s most profitable market — have continued to drop. VW’s eponymous flagship brand, which accounts for nearly half the group’s car sales, said last week that deliveries in China had fallen 8.3 per cent last year amid “intense competition”.

The poor performance in China came as the Chinese automotive market last year grew 5.5 per cent to almost 23mn new vehicles, according to the China Passenger Car Association.

VW losing its claim to its position as a market leader in China, where consumers are increasingly buying EVs and hybrids from domestic brands such as BYD, Xpeng and Geely, is of growing concern to the company’s shareholders.

The holding company of VW’s majority owners, the Porsche-Piëch family, warned in December that it expected to write down its stake in Europe’s largest carmaker by up to €20bn — equivalent to 40 per cent — owing to the absence of a financial plan amid negotiations over cost cuts.

Porsche’s lacklustre performance has prompted alarm at the carmaker’s Stuttgart headquarters, with growing concern over chief executive Oliver Blume’s dual role as the head of the sports car brand and VW.

Porsche management has also faced questions from the family over the decision to launch an all-electric version of its Macan SUV, according to one person briefed on the conversations. Sales of the model slid 5 per cent in 2024 as the combustion engine version was gradually discontinued in some markets.

Rising competition in China has forced many foreign carmakers to engage in a price war — something Porsche has ruled out.

The brand reiterated on Monday that it valued profit margins over sales numbers and said it would stick to its “value-based sales approach”.

Additional reporting by Gloria Li in Hong Kong



Chinese corporate profits are set to show a third consecutive year of declines in 2024, with the trend expected to continue into this year as deflationary pressures weigh on the world’s second-largest economy.

Corporate profits in China for companies with more than Rmb20mn ($2.7mn) in revenue fell by an average of 4.7 per cent year on year between January and November, according to the latest data from the National Bureau of Statistics. This is greater than the 4 per cent drop seen during the whole of 2022 when the country was under pandemic lockdowns.

Revenue grew just 1.8 per cent year on year between January and November 2024 on the same period in 2023. This compares with 5.9 per cent growth in 2022 on the previous year.

In addition, 25 per cent of companies in China with revenue of more than Rmb20mn made outright losses between January and November 2024, compared with 16 per cent in the full year of 2019 before the pandemic, NBS data showed. The agency’s data covers 500,000 companies.

“The biggest reason behind that slowdown, I would say, is deflation,” said Laura Wang, chief China equity strategist at Morgan Stanley.

Fourth-quarter GDP numbers on Friday will show whether the country reached an official economic growth target of about 5 per cent in 2024 amid concerns over a stagnant economy and low consumer confidence.

China is grappling with a two-speed economy, with strong exports offsetting weak domestic demand as households cope with a deep property slump.

Exports in December rose 10.7 per cent year on year in dollar terms, official data showed on Monday, beating average analyst forecasts from Reuters of a 7.3 per cent rise.

But China’s growing trade surplus — which expanded to nearly $1tn globally last year — has not been enough to offset oversupply among manufacturers, leading to intense competition that is undermining prices for their goods and hitting profits.

The NBS has reported 28 months of producer price deflation — the price at which factories sell their goods — with economists predicting the trend to continue this year.

“Corporate profitability is wearing thin amid prolonged PPI deflation,” Citi analysts said in a note. “Sluggish end-demand and over-competition could only send profitability lower, weighing on private investment decisions.”

China’s giant state-owned enterprises were the worst performers in the NBS corporate profits data, despite being heavily promoted by the government of President Xi Jinping.

Their profits fell 8.4 per cent year on year between January and November, compared with 1 per cent or less for private or foreign companies, the best performers in the group.

The weakening performance of state-owned enterprises — which are often dragooned by the government into performing various social or geopolitical roles, from buying stocks to supporting Xi’s Belt and Road Initiative international infrastructure programme — was a burden on fiscal resources, analysts said.

“At the current rate of decline, I don’t think they can sustain for many [more] years this kind of policy,” said Lixin Colin Xu, former lead economist in the World Bank’s Development Research Group and an expert on Chinese companies.

China Association for Public Companies data shows that of 5,368 listed companies in mainland China, 23 per cent reported a net loss year on year in the first nine months of 2024, while 40 per cent reported declining profits and 45 per cent had falling revenue.

Morgan Stanley’s Wang said she expected 5 per cent profit growth year on year in 2025 from companies in the MSCI China index, the benchmark followed by international investors, compared with 7 per cent a year earlier.

In a deflationary environment in which revenue growth was harder to achieve, companies would need to pay more attention to investor returns through mechanisms such as share buybacks and dividends, she said.

Previously, companies had focused more on reinvesting to capture growth opportunities. “For so many of the past 20 to 30 years, they’ve all been growing and operating under that mindset,” Wang said. “Now they need to change that.”

Additional reporting by Arjun Neil Alim in Shanghai



The writer is a former US Treasury official and US chair of Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum

The tensions between US and China are palpable. Washington is filled with China hawks and talons will sharpen with the Trump 2.0 administration. Likewise, Beijing is hardening its posture against the US. Yet the economic and financial fates of the two nations, accounting for over 40 per cent of global GDP, are intertwined. Decoupling is nary impossible.

Currency feuds have long been a staple of US and China relations. They reached a feverish pitch in the US before the 2008-09 global financial crisis, when China was running a 10 per cent of GDP current account surplus and reserves soared on the back of heavy intervention and a persistently undervalued currency.

Following the financial crisis, when its current account surplus came sharply down, Beijing still continued to amass reserves, reaching $4tn. After a period of economic weakness and growth scares in 2015-16 led China to make $1tn in dollar sales from reserves to prop up the renminbi, tensions temporarily quieted. But under Donald Trump in his first term as president, the US Treasury in 2019 designated China a currency manipulator after renminbi depreciation.

The dollar is now strong across the board. It’s largely a Made in the USA story, reflecting the firm US economy, relatively shallower prospective pace of interest rate cuts, tariff threats and probable fiscal action that will extend the already huge US deficit and supply of Treasuries coming on to the market, pushing up longer-term rates.

Team Trump believes the dollar is overvalued, as shown in its ham-fisted backing for “devaluation”. The reality is that their aspiration flies in the face of Trump 2.0’s likely macroeconomic and trade policies.

China also frets about a further weakening of the renminbi against the dollar. Such depreciation could threaten to trigger sharp capital account pressures, reminding authorities of those in 2015-16, an experience they do not wish to see replicated. A weakening renminbi could limit the ability of the central bank to further ease monetary policy in the face of China’s current deflationary pressures and deep-seated economic malaise. Meanwhile, the authorities recognise that Chinese exports hardly need to gain further competitiveness — the real trade-weighted renminbi fell nearly 15 per cent over the past three years. Export volumes are up strongly.

On balance, I believe China and the US want to see a stronger renminbi against the dollar. Accordingly, China and the US could undertake a joint operation on the currency. They could issue a statement, announcing the operation. At that moment, China’s central bank, which has eschewed direct intervention for years, would visibly enter the Asian markets on its own account with dollar sales/renminbi purchases. While Beijing would undertake the bulk of the intervention, Washington could carry on the operation in London and New York.

Would such a project work? It would surely not tackle the underlying macroeconomic policy drivers and differing cyclical positions in the US and China. Foreign exchange market intervention in major floating currencies is largely ineffective, unless perhaps massive and repeated and/or signalling a change in underlying policies.

But the Chinese authorities retain significant control of the renminbi on foreign exchange markets. That reality and the effect of an announcement could have a potent impact on the exchange rate and market psychology. One might question whether the impact would endure, but that would need to be seen.

Renminbi depreciation would offset the impact of any large US tariffs on Chinese goods. In contrast, appreciation should limit the need for tariffs. Interestingly, the US would acquire renminbi and might then need to hold reserves in the currency.

Such an operation is a far cry from fanciful discussions about a Mar-a-Lago Accord, modelled on the Plaza Accord which was premised on macroeconomic policy co-ordination and intervention. That might work in a financial crisis, but not when cyclical conditions vary. For example, Trump is hardly going to forgo extending his 2017 tax cuts to reduce US fiscal deficits and China isn’t going to hike interest rates to prop up the renminbi.

But despite bilateral tensions, Washington and Beijing have common economic and financial interests. Thinking about the idea could help promote a sliver of co-operation between Team Trump and the Chinese leadership and serve their mutual interests.



Banks in Singapore are stepping up scrutiny of customers from a range of countries including China and intensifying efforts to identify the sources of wealth as the city-state reels from a ballooning S$2.4bn (US$1.8bn) money-laundering scandal.

Financial institutions have warned customers and their advisers that the waiting period to open a private banking account has increased from less than one month to three to four, according to wealth advisers, asset managers and private bankers. Some existing accounts are being closed, the people added.

The longer processing times are not an official rule change, the people said, but a reflection of authorities tightening due diligence across the financial sector after a transnational money laundering syndicate was exposed in August.

The institutions are focusing on customers from countries including China, Vanuatu, Turkey, St Kitts and Nevis, Dominica and Cyprus.

“If you have a People’s Republic of China passport, or possess a passport from any of the countries the suspects involved in the probe had, such as Cyprus, Vanuatu or Cambodia, you are getting red-flagged,” said one adviser in private banking.

Singapore police last month arrested and charged 10 people and have seized more than S$2.4bn in assets including luxury properties, gold bars, designer handbags, cash, crypto assets and cars in one of the city-state’s largest-ever money-laundering probes.

The suspects, who have been denied bail, all had Chinese passports. Many were also in possession of additional passports. The probe has widened to include banks, precious metals dealers, real estate agents and golf clubs.

The government has also faced scrutiny about the case and how such lapses happened despite strict anti-money laundering regulations.

Singapore’s appeal as a stable and neutral wealth hub rose during the coronavirus pandemic, with asset managers attracting S$448bn in net new inflows of funds in 2021, up 16 per cent from the previous year. The number of family offices has jumped from a handful in 2018 to 1,100 at the end of 2022, according to the government.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore, the central bank, sent a note last month to all financial institutions, including asset managers, instructing them to scrutinise dealings with the suspects as well as individuals and companies linked to them, according to two banking executives who saw the notice.

Several banks, including Malaysia’s CIMB and Citigroup’s local subsidiary, have already been asked to provide documents to the investigation. Police have also taken control of millions of dollars held in accounts with Credit Suisse and Bank Julius Baer by one of the suspects.

“MAS takes this case seriously and supervisory engagements with these financial institutions are ongoing,” MAS said in a statement. “Given the attributes and size of their transactions, high net worth individuals are often subjected to more stringent checks by financial institutions.”

The central bank added that it “regularly reaches out” to regulated entities to mitigate risks but does not share those dealings as they are confidential.

“Part of the reason onboarding new customers from certain places is taking longer is because banks are painstakingly going through their records to make sure they have no business with the people or entities on the MAS’s list,” said a director at one wealth manager.

“We have also seen some closing accounts of individuals from some of those jurisdictions,” the person added.

A managing director at another international firm whose clients include family offices from multiple Asian countries said they had been informed that processing times for new accounts could take months as know your customer and other anti-money laundering steps were tightened.

“Most clients are actually fairly happy about this — it provides a sense of security . . . that Singapore is cracking down on any illicit activity,” the person said. “It is a sign of the maturation of Singapore as a financial hub.”



The Cayman Islands will open an office in Singapore by the end of the year, as the Caribbean offshore financial services centre seeks to capture more business from Asia’s hedge funds and wealthy families.

An office in Singapore would allow the Caribbean territory to “better capitalise on the many new business opportunities . . . that the Asian region has to offer”, said André Ebanks, Cayman Islands financial services minister, on Friday.

The city-state’s connectivity and “relatively neutral position in the region” made it the right choice for the country’s first Asian base, Ebanks added. The Cayman Islands had also considered Hong Kong, which he said remained an “important locale”.

The opening of the office also represented a pushback against Singapore and Hong Kong, which have stepped up efforts in recent years to compete with traditional tax havens to serve Asia’s growing population of wealthy investors.

The Asia-Pacific region accounts for about 42 per cent of global wealth, or $218tn, according to a McKinsey report last year, up fourfold since 2000. In 2021, the wealth of households with investable assets of $100,000-$1mn in Asia totalled $2.7tn, according to the consultancy, a sum projected to climb to $4.7tn by 2026 as incomes continue to rise across the region.

With the move to Singapore, “the Caymans aren’t just rolling out the red carpet for Asia’s wealthy; they’re laying down a runway for private jets”, said Kher Sheng Lee, co-head of the Alternative Investment Management Association for Asia.

Singapore and Hong Kong have launched fund structures in recent years to lure business from low-tax havens such as the Cayman Islands, Mauritius and the British Virgin Islands. The schemes allow investors to hold money in lightly taxed vehicles with generous government subsidies.

Singapore, which has long prospered as a stable and predictable environment for business, has had more success than Hong Kong in attracting managers and wealthy family offices to establish funds.

Singapore’s new “variable capital companies” have exploded in popularity since their introduction in 2020, with 937 set up as of August. The uptake of Hong Kong’s “open-ended fund companies” has been slower, with 112 registered with the city’s Securities and Futures Commission as of the end of last year, according to law firm Deacons. Hong Kong’s OFC regime was launched in 2018.

The vehicles are popular with family offices, hedge funds and other private equity firms managing money.

“There has been very rapid growth in family offices in Singapore in the past few years and this is the Cayman Islands keeping themselves on their radar,” said Joel Seow, a private investment funds lawyer at Linklaters. “This is recognition that there is a growing and maturing market in Asia in terms of size, depth and sophistication . . . they want options.”

The number of family offices in Singapore has soared from just a handful in 2018 to well over 1,000.

“Investors have compelling reasons to consider the Cayman Islands, given their tried-and-true fund structures. While Singapore’s VCCs and Hong Kong’s OFCs offer new avenues, the Caymans bring a legacy of reliability,” said Lee.

He said the new Caymans office would target a broad spectrum of opportunities in Asia, extending beyond finance to maritime and other strategic sectors.

The Cayman Islands’ push may also benefit from a crackdown in Singapore, where a series of arrests last month in a money laundering investigation has unnerved some Chinese nationals, according to two people familiar with the situation, including an adviser for a wealth management firm catering to Chinese family offices.

“I have spoken to a number of PRC [People’s Republic of China] nationals staying here who are looking at shifting their money somewhere else because they are worried about asset seizures,” the adviser said.

Additional reporting by William Langley in Hong Kong

This article has been updated to correct the names of the Securities and Futures Commission and the Alternative Investment Management Association



On a hot day in August, Singaporean police arrived at one of the city’s swankiest addresses, made their way past a miniature golf course in the courtyard, and charged inside. At homes across the city — always in the wealthiest neighbourhoods — similar scenes were repeating as police rounded up people suspected of belonging to a billion-dollar money-laundering ring.

Once upstairs, the officers banged on the bedroom door. When they entered, Su Haijin, a 40-year-old man of Chinese, Cambodian and Cypriot nationality, was gone. But not very far. On hearing the police, Su had hurled himself off the second-floor balcony, fracturing his hands and legs. Police found him hiding in a nearby drain.

The case, in which Su and nine others have been charged so far, has captivated a public wholly unused to seeing the insalubrious side of their country laid bare. It is not just the trappings of the S$1.8bn ($1.3bn) bust — gold bars, designer handbags, luxury cars, lavish property and digital fortunes — that have fascinated. Global banks, precious metal dealers, property agents and one of the country’s most famous golf clubs have also been sucked into the scandal.

Singapore has for decades prospered in no small measure due to its reputation as the “Switzerland of the east” — a safe and neutral haven for business in an at-times intractable part of the world.

The investigation has captured global attention, “not just due to its size and links to Chinese money”, says Chong Ja Ian, associate professor of political science at the National University of Singapore, “but also because it underscores the risks as Singapore tries to reshape itself in a more competitive and fragmented world”.

Singapore, he adds, wants to be “a premium place for premium business, not just a Cayman Islands or a Mauritius, a place where global capital can come in and be reinvested elsewhere. But a raid of this scale shows the model has serious drawbacks.”

While Singapore’s open, trade-reliant economy has proved resilient to external shocks such as rising global protectionism and supply chain fragmentation, the raid comes at a sensitive and destabilising time.

The city-state is wrestling with rising inequality — linked to unrestrained capital inflows from the US, Europe and especially China — as it prepares for its first change of leader in almost 20 years. Some are questioning whether an economic model so reliant on foreign capital is benefiting citizens in the way it once did.

There is also the delicate matter of deteriorating Sino-US relations. As more mainland Chinese cash and influence seeps out of China and into Singapore, the country’s high-wire balancing act between Beijing and Washington becomes even more precarious. All 10 accused in the money-laundering sting share one thing in common: possession of a passport believed to be issued in China.

The test for Singapore’s ruling People’s Action party, analysts say, will be its ability to keep citizens convinced of the merits of remaining pro-globalisation and welcoming of foreign capital. Navigating the US-China split will depend on it.

“All foreign policy is domestic policy,” says Donald Low, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and a former civil servant in Singapore. “What will shape how Singapore manages its international agenda is how they can manage these domestic tensions.”

Under the iron leadership of Lee Kuan Yew, the founder of modern Singapore who died in 2015, the city-state was propelled after independence from Malaysia in 1965 from a south-east Asian backwater into one of the world’s most successful economies.

Lee understood that encouraging foreign investment, the immigration of skilled workers and swift adoption of new technology was part of nation-building. At a time when many countries were suspicious of global multinational corporations, Lee welcomed them with low taxes and subsidies, marrying capitalism with a welfare state that protected citizens and provided housing, medical care and education.

Singapore benefited from a period of rapid industrialisation and globalisation worldwide, its strategic location making it an ideal hub for trade and commerce. In 1965, per capita gross domestic product was a mere $516 compared with $91,000 today — higher than the US, Australia, France and the UK, and not far behind Switzerland.

The economic boom continued under Lee’s successors, first Goh Chok Tong and then Lee’s son, Lee Hsien Loong, who came to power in 2004.

Even the US-China decoupling and other global shocks, such as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, have not derailed its progress. Stable Singapore has even benefited from the external disorder.

“There is a paradox that smaller open economies benefit from worsening bilateral relations,” says David Bach, a professor at the International Institute for Management Development in Switzerland. “As a result of recent dynamics Singapore has become a lot safer for investors and multinationals to conduct business.”

Singapore’s “safe hub” reputation — coupled with its low taxes — has helped the city-state to compete with the massive industry subsidies on offer across large developed economies in the US and Europe, such as the US’s Inflation Reduction Act or the EU’s Green Deal.

Singapore receives a bigger percentage of US foreign direct investment into Asia-Pacific than China and Hong Kong combined. Overall foreign direct investment inflows surged to S$195bn last year, its highest level ever and a 10 per cent increase from S$176bn in 2021. Singapore attracted a record S$22.5bn in fixed asset investments in 2022 despite the global headwinds.

Many think the money-laundering scandal will have little long-lasting impact on Singapore’s reputation overseas.

“The money is pouring in,” says Parag Khanna, founder and managing partner of FutureMap, a global strategic advisory firm. Investors want somewhere “genuinely open, home to everyone and that isn’t dominated by one power. Hong Kong has long since ceased to be that pan-Asian hub.”

Among the multinationals that call Singapore home is German conglomerate Siemens. Roland Busch, chief executive, said in June that the company chose Singapore over places with cheaper labour and property costs such as India and Indonesia to build a new high-tech factory. Globally connected Singapore, Busch said, was a “lighthouse of stability”.

Even with slowing global growth and weak local demand, Singapore has avoided a recession. Core inflation slowed for a third straight month in July to a year-on-year rate of 3.8 per cent. Unemployment was 1.9 per cent in the second quarter of this year. By comparison, in the same quarter Hong Kong recorded a rate of 2.9 per cent, London was at 5.1 per cent and, in June, New York’s rate was 5.4 per cent.

Yet while it thrives as a global power, Singapore has domestic concerns. The long-ruling People’s Action party is grappling with only its third change in leadership since independence, with finance minister and deputy prime minister Lawrence Wong — the so-called 4G or fourth generation leader — likely to take the reins.

Wong will take over at a time when the PAP’s share of the popular vote is at historic lows. The timing of the handover remains unknown and whether Lee or Wong will lead the PAP through the next general election — due to be held by November 23, 2025 — is unclear. While the PAP’s grasp on power in the quasi-authoritarian democracy remains firm, the opposition Workers’ party won a record 10 out of 93 contested seats in the 2020 general election for Singapore’s parliament.

For Singaporeans preparing for this next era, the opacity of the succession plan adds to an underlying sense of unease about the city-state’s identity. “Philosophically and emotionally, it’s the sense that the ‘Switzerland of the east’ is actually designed more for global plutocrats than ordinary Singaporeans,” says Sudhir Vadaketh, editor of Jom, a Singaporean weekly magazine.

Some see Singapore as a way station, others a nation home, others a bit of both, Vadaketh adds. “There’s an inherent existential tension between the two that expresses itself in different ways, and requires perpetual management from politicians and bureaucrats. [August’s] money-laundering case, for many people, reminds us that we may be leaning too much towards ‘global city’.”

Singapore, whose own population is ageing, has become a favoured home for Asia’s millionaires, prompting local pushback to foreign workers and immigration. House prices and rents have skyrocketed, with the median price of a private home hitting $1.2mn in 2022, the highest among cities in the Asia-Pacific, according to data from the Urban Land Institute Asia Pacific Centre for Housing. Rents for private homes outpaced even New York City at the end of last year.

Many Singaporeans are somewhat shielded thanks to a government housing scheme. Close to 80 per cent live in state flats and the majority own their home via long-term leases from the government. But even here higher costs are trickling through.

“I am moving back in with my parents because the landlord at the Housing Development Board flat I was renting with a friend lifted the rent from $3,000 per month to $5,000. That is crazy for a two-bedroom apartment,” says Nicole, a Singaporean living in Tiong Bahru who did not want to give her full name.

Fuelling a large part of this spike in housing costs, especially since the Covid-19 pandemic, has been the movement of rich Chinese, not just tycoons but also talented citizens with specific skills. Many are fleeing a “common prosperity” campaign — aimed at redistributing more of China’s wealth — and a crackdown on multiple industries including property, healthcare, technology and education.

“Singapore-washing”, where mainland Chinese companies redomicile and rebrand as Singapore-based international businesses as a hedge against geopolitical risk, has increased. Of 63,801 new corporate entities formed in Singapore last year, 29 per cent had majority foreign ownership, according to analytics group Handshakes. Of those 7,312 were from China, up from 4,951 in 2021. Even HongShan, formerly known as Sequoia China, a mainland investment juggernaut which has long focused its financial firepower on Chinese technology start-ups, opened a Singapore office this year.

“It used to be they all fled to Hong Kong but now Singapore has unintentionally become a favoured destination for rich Chinese but also Chinese professionals,” says Low, the former civil servant. “Of course there is a reaction to that [in Singapore]. They raise prices all around and fuel the politics of envy.”

The city-state drew in more money than ever before in 2021, with S$448bn in new funds, according to the most recent data available from its central bank, a number expected to be even higher for 2022.

But the S$1.8bn money-laundering scandal will reinforce some critics’ view that Singapore acts as a bolt-hole for less-than-respectable money or flight capital. Since the pandemic, Singapore has seen an explosion of activity in its decentralised financial market: family offices, private banking and new discreet, lightly taxed funds. These are harder to regulate and to justify as benefiting the mainstream Singaporean economy, for instance there has not been a parallel jump in stock market listings.

“I think the money-laundering probe barely scratches the surface of the illicit activity that has gone on here for years,” says the Singaporean head of a large international investment bank in the city, referring to wealthy Indonesians and other rich south-east Asian individuals who have used the city-state to keep their wealth. “It is something the government must manage better or risk the rise of populism and xenophobia that has swept through so many other countries.”

The flow of money into Singapore is not only from China, nor is it the only country affected by the way elite Chinese people are shifting money overseas. But it does provide a colourful, timely example of how Singapore’s neutrality could eventually be affected.

Kenneth Jeyaretnam, the secretary-general of the opposition Reform party, on his Facebook page noted the money-laundering raids took place days after a visit by China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, and suggested there was “foreign pressure”.

The PAP has rejected this assertion and issued Jeyaretnam with a correction order under its online falsehoods or so-called fake news law. The financial regulator said that suspicious fund flows and other inconsistencies with documentation prompted banks in the city state to file reports to the authorities.

One Washington-based policymaker tells the Financial Times that the Biden administration is “watching more closely than ever before” the Chinese companies and people moving to Singapore. “The more the volumes of money and people that come in, the more Beijing might start to feel it can intervene in Singaporean affairs,” they say.

The Chinese Communist party is often accused of using its soft power machine to influence Singaporeans — the majority of whom are ethnic Chinese — and the mainland Chinese who have emigrated there.

A recent Washington Post report suggested Beijing was using the Singaporean Chinese Lianhe Zaobao newspaper to sway opinions in the city-state. When asked about the report, Singapore’s ambassador-at-large Chan Heng Chee in August said the government was “well aware of these activities” and was “vigilant against agents of influence of all countries”.

The Singapore newspaper said in a statement that the Washington Post’s article “made biased comments and unfair statements about Lianhe Zaobao”. The media organisation added it “takes its mission of delivering information seriously and remains committed to neutrality”.

The PAP formally upgraded its relationship with Beijing this year in areas including technology as well as supply chains. The two launched a new bilateral defence hotline in June and restarted military drills after a pandemic-related pause. Singapore has at the same time maintained its close relations with the US military.

But the party admits Singapore’s position is tricky. Wong, the prime minister-in-waiting, this year said the rift between Beijing and Washington “appears insurmountable”.

Singapore has “one foot firmly in each canoe, gaining benefits from both [the US and China],” says Drew Thomson, a visiting senior research fellow at National University of Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy. “But those canoes are drifting apart, can you really play both sides forever?”

Data visualisation by Andy Lin and Keith Fray



Singapore authorities have requested documents from at least 10 banks as they extend a S$1bn (US$737mn) money laundering investigation.

Public prosecutors told a court on Wednesday that they were seeking documents from financial institutions used by 10 people who were arrested last week and charged in one of the city-state’s biggest-ever money laundering and fraud cases.

Prosecutors asked the court to extend the remand for those arrested for a further eight days.

The suspects were detained in an operation that spanned the city-state and led to the seizure of luxury homes, cars, designer handbags and wads of cash and gold bars.

The names of two banks — Citigroup’s Singapore subsidiary and Malaysia’s CIMB — emerged when charges against those arrested were published last week. Other banks have not been named and none of the financial institutions have been charged.

Citigroup said in a statement it was “committed to the fight against money laundering and ensuring the highest standard of governance controls”. CIMB did not respond to a request for comment. Singapore police declined to comment on the ongoing investigation.

The investigation of the alleged money laundering ring, which authorities said was still at an early stage, has cast uncomfortable scrutiny on the Asian business hub’s embrace of foreign wealth and put pressure on Singapore’s clean reputation.

The 10 individuals, who were detained in simultaneous raids involving 400 officers, are suspected of laundering the proceeds of overseas criminal activities, including scams and online gambling, as well as forging documents.

Authorities descended on apartments and mansions and seized assets including wine, jewellery and Bentley and Rolls-Royce cars that were collectively valued at S$1bn.

The group, which included nationals from China, Cyprus, Turkey and Vanuatu, were all in possession of China-issued passports, according to police.

Singapore’s political opposition has seized on the probe to accuse the government of being too open to foreign money and overseas entities.

“If we provide a warm welcome to very dirty businesses . . . then we can’t expect to escape without a stain on our ‘squeaky clean’ reputation,” said Kenneth Jeyaretnam, secretary-general of the opposition Reform party.

He added that money laundering activity “pushes up asset prices and makes property unaffordable for Singaporeans”, and accused the ruling People’s Action party government of undertaking the probe only foreign pressure, noting that the raid followed a visit by China’s foreign minister Wang Yi days earlier.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore said that suspicious fund flows and other inconsistencies with documentation had prompted banks to alert authorities, which led to the investigation.

“MAS takes this case seriously and has been in touch with the financial institutions where the potentially tainted funds have been identified. Supervisory engagements with these financial institutions are ongoing,” the authority said in a statement last week.

Singapore has welcomed a rapid influx of money and wealthy individuals from China, many of them fleeing President Xi Jinping’s strict coronavirus regime and crackdown on multiple sectors of the economy including real estate and technology.



Singapore has long prided itself on its government’s stability and predictability. But that reputation has been shaken by a series of recent scandals that have put the ruling party on the back foot.

A senior minister has been ensnared in a corruption probe alongside a billionaire property tycoon. The speaker of the house was caught swearing on a hot mic, an incident that undermined his impartiality — and was closely followed by the public disclosure of his extramarital affair with another ruling party lawmaker, leading both to resign.

Two other MPs were questioned in parliament after online criticism prompted a corruption investigation into their renting of state-owned mansions. Both were exonerated.

By the standards of most democracies, these might seem minor breaches that would not jeopardise public confidence in the government. But in Singapore, where the government has justified its decades-long rule — and tight social controls — by maintaining an image of competence and reliability, they represented a threatening rupture for the city-state of five million people.

Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong last week stepped in to reassure citizens that his People’s Action party, which was founded by his father Lee Kuan Yew and has governed uninterrupted since before Singapore became a republic in 1965, was as strong and reliable as ever.

Visibly frustrated with criticism of the country’s anti-graft body, which reports to the prime minister, Lee declared the organisation “has to answer to somebody. It cannot answer to God.”

While Lee promised to “protect the integrity” of the government in a National Day address on Wednesday, last month’s events underscored the perceived opacity in the decision-making of the long-ruling party, just as it is preparing for its first leadership change in nearly two decades.

“There are a lot of conspiracy theories because nobody can really tell what is going on within the PAP and with the internal workings or decision-making,” said Chong Ja Ian, associate professor of political science at the National University of Singapore. “The accumulation of these events does create a sense of bewilderment and unease on the direction of travel and as Singapore faces new leadership in a more contentious world.”

For critics, the turmoil last month also called into question the PAP’s ability to effectively manage domestic politics at a crucial juncture for the city-state. Singapore is juggling growing challenges at home including a backlash against foreign workers, rising costs and inequality, tensions between the US and China and a shift away from the globalising forces that boosted its open, trade-reliant economy and made it a global financial centre.

One of the main issues undercutting public confidence has been the lack of visibility of the next generation of leadership, critics said. The PAP last year picked Lawrence Wong to succeed Lee, who has led Singapore since 2004.

Critics say the 4G leaders, so called because Wong would be only the fourth prime minister in Singapore’s history, have not offered a vision for the city-state’s future at a time when the drivers of its past growth are expected to face mounting headwinds. The timing of Lee’s handover also remains unclear.

“Where are the 4G leaders? By rights, Wong should be prime minister by now but I think Lee will now hold on until the next election,” which must be held by 2025, said Michael Barr, associate professor of international relations at Flinders University in Adelaide and author of The Ruling Elite of Singapore.

Lee postponed a plan to step aside before he turned 70 in 2022 so he could hand over Singapore “intact” after the pandemic. In the 2020 election, the PAP earned one of the lowest shares of the popular vote in the country’s history.

Adding to the intrigue around inner party workings, many regard the PAP as becoming more, not less, sensitive to criticism. Politicians have wielded the country’s fake news law to silence online criticism, experts said.

In July, authorities invoked the Protection Against Online Falsehoods Act against the prime minister’s estranged younger brother Lee Hsien Yang, who resides overseas, over a Facebook post criticising the government’s handling of the spate of recent scandals.

“This does not help the PAP in navigating a complex and turbulent global environment. The last thing Singapore needs are these sorts of issues which erode trust in government and fuel the impression that the rich and powerful look after themselves,” said Donald Low, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and a former civil servant in Singapore.

“When people can’t criticise, they channel that unhappiness and resentment into the kind of areas that have driven Brexit and the rise of Trump,” he added.

The events have raised the stakes for the presidential elections in September. The role is largely ceremonial, but experts said the poll would provide a gauge of public sentiment. While the PAP’s grasp on power in the quasi-authoritarian democracy remains firm, the opposition Workers’ party won a record 10 out of 93 contested seats in the 2020 general election for Singapore’s parliament.

“None of these scandals, even in aggregate, are a body blow for the party,” said one Singapore official with knowledge of PAP thinking. “But I would say September is definitely being closely watched as a dry run for the general election” in 2025.

The PAP has put forward one of its most prominent figures, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, a statesman and former deputy leader whose popularity outstrips that of Lee.

“The PAP will not want to obviously draw a link between the scandals and the election,” said Flinders University’s Barr, suggesting that “anything less than 65 per cent of the vote” would be a disappointment given Tharman’s qualifications and popularity.

“They will pay a lot of attention to the results.”

​Letter in response to this article:

Transparency is ‘hallmark’ of Singapore’s government / From TK Lim, Singapore High Commissioner, London SW1, UK



Singapore’s prime minister has defended its reputation for clean governance after a corruption investigation and an “inappropriate” parliamentary relationship tarnished the city-state’s image just as it prepares for a leadership transition.

Lee Hsien Loong addressed Singapore’s episodes of rare political drama in parliament on Wednesday after they made international headlines.

In the most serious case, transport minister S Iswaran was arrested last month as part of a high-profile corruption investigation that also ensnared billionaire Ong Beng Seng. Both men, who were important figures in Singapore’s successful pitch to be part of the Formula One circuit, have been released on bail.

Neither Ong nor Iswaran have commented publicly on their arrests. Hotel Properties Limited, of which Ong is managing director, said in July he had not been charged with any offence and was providing information to the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau about his dealings with the minister.

In another high-profile case, the Speaker of Singapore’s parliament and a fellow member of the ruling People’s Action party quit as lawmakers last month after revelations that they had an affair.

“With the investigation into minister Iswaran and the resignations of the house Speaker and an MP, the PAP has taken a hit,” Lee said.

Asked about the independence of the anti-corruption bureau, which sought the prime minister’s permission before launching its probe into Iswaran, Lee said the body had to report to somebody. “It can’t report to God,” he said.

The prime minister separately in May asked the bureau to conduct a review after questions were asked in parliament and on social media about the government’s renting of colonial-era homes to two of his cabinet ministers.

For Singapore, which has traded on its reputation as a clean, stable place to do business throughout its rise to becoming a global finance centre, the episodes are unusually public examples of alleged corruption and unsavoury behaviour within the PAP. The ruling party has governed uninterrupted since independence in 1965 and Singapore’s politicians are among the most highly paid in the world to discourage graft.

The scandals also come as Lee, son of the founder of modern Singapore Lee Kuan Yew, prepares to hand over power to his deputy Lawrence Wong in what will be only the fourth change of leadership in its history.

Lee, who has not said when he will step down, defended the integrity of Singapore’s governance.

“The way we have handled these incidents shows how seriously the PAP takes our responsibility of governing Singapore, and being accountable to parliament and to Singaporeans.”

He added that he had asked Iswaran to take a leave of absence and cut the minister’s pay, insisting that corruption cases had occurred in the past and had been dealt with thoroughly and transparently.

“That is still how the PAP government deals with such cases. It has not changed under my charge; and it won’t under my successor either,” the prime minister said.

But Lee, who said he first knew of what he has called the “inappropriate” affair between parliamentary Speaker Tan Chuan-Jin and MP Cheng Li Hui in 2020, admitted he should have asked them to step down earlier.

Tan was asked to resign over the affair after a recording in which he referred in parliament to an opposition politician as a “fucking populist” circulated online. The Speaker’s role is meant to be impartial.

“I should have forced the issue sooner,” Lee said of the affair, saying the Speaker’s role meant it raised questions of propriety, but that he had been concerned about the families of the two MPs.

Opposition leader Pritam Singh of the Workers’ party said in response that the PAP had been less than upfront with “potentially embarrassing issues” and suggested it hire an ethics adviser.

Singapore will next month hold an election for the largely ceremonial role of president, a vote that is being closely watched as a dry run for the general election that must be called by 2025.

“I think the PAP is definitely watching public reactions and sentiment around the presidential race,” said one Singapore-based public policy expert, who asked to remain anonymous. “But are these scandals going to somehow sink the party at the next election? I really doubt it.”



Singapore’s GIC, one of the world’s largest institutional investors, has warned that the golden age for private equity firms has “come to an end”.

The sovereign wealth fund, which has estimated assets of more than $700bn and is one of the largest backers of buyout funds, said a new era of higher interest rates and volatility had created challenges.

“Many of the things that were tailwinds for the private equity industry have come to an end . . . and I don’t think they are coming back any time soon,” said chief investment officer Jeffrey Jaensubhakij, citing the lucrative mix of high valuations, lower leverage costs and low interest rates of the past few years.

“Today, unfortunately, there’s both a supply and demand problem,” he added, referring to the number of assets available at a reasonable price and the number of investors wanting to put money into the asset class.

Speaking ahead of its annual results on Wednesday, GIC told the Financial Times that opportunities were available in the private market and it was allocating money towards logistics, infrastructure and other inflation-insulated assets.

Wednesday’s annual report showed GIC delivered an average annual return above inflation over the past 20 years — its main performance metric — of 4.6 per cent for 2023, up from 4.2 per cent a year earlier and is its highest level since 2015.

Chaired by Singapore’s prime minister Lee Hsien Loong, GIC does not publish its assets under management but has increased its allocation to private equity to 17 per cent of its portfolio from 9 per cent in 2017, becoming a global investment force in everything from start-ups to toll roads.

Market volatility, higher interest rates and falling valuations have left the private equity industry struggling to raise money this year. Fundraising across private markets is on track this year to fall almost 30 per cent compared with 2022, according to a report released this month by Bain & Co.

GIC said it could increase its private market exposure over the year ahead should the right investments emerge. “The private market does play to the advantage of a long-term investor like ourselves,” said chief executive Lim Chow Kiat. “If the market offers more opportunities, certainly we will direct our capital accordingly.”

GIC said the fundraising drought in private markets was an area of opportunity. Many global private equity firms are facing pressure from their investors — who cannot allocate to new funds until they get some cash back — to sell parts of their portfolio “at reasonable prices”, Jaensubhakij said.

Some investors have also “overcommitted” to private markets and are trying to offload stakes with up to 20 per cent discounts, he added. “We’ve had a couple of transactions recently of a reasonably large size.”

GIC said the overall outlook over the next 12 months continued to be challenging, with global interest rates remaining elevated, the chances of a recession relatively high, and “chronic geopolitical risks”.

Over the past year the Singapore state fund’s allocation to the US and Europe increased 1 percentage point each to 38 per cent and 9 per cent respectively, while decreasing to 23 per cent from 25 per cent in Asia excluding Japan. GIC has also pulled back on its investments in China in recent years as the mainland economy ground to a halt during the pandemic and was hit by property market turmoil and regulatory crackdowns.

GIC said China’s economy was unlikely to receive the level of stimulus seen in previous downturns. “Even post-Covid deal flow has been extremely low. We would expect to participate when it normalises . . . we have to wait,” said Lim.

The state fund said it saw opportunities in other parts of Asia as multinational companies diversified their supply chains to cut their reliance on China. “India is a great example where we think more modern logistics will have to be built,” said Jaensubhakij, adding that “south-east Asia should also be a beneficiary of some of these supply-chain moves”.

This article has been republished to correct the Singapore state fund’s allocation to the US and Europe



Two topics prompt impassioned discussion over inflation at expat dinner parties in Singapore at the moment: how much your rent has increased and Taylor Swift.

The first is met with a round of commiseration or begrudging congratulations, depending on whether you are closer to 100 per cent (most people) or a mere 20 per cent (a lucky few). The second sets off fierce debate on a favourite subject: the merits of Singapore versus Hong Kong.

Swift, like Harry Styles and Coldplay, is performing in Singapore but skipping Hong Kong for next year’s international tour. The American pop star — who performed in the Chinese special administrative region on a 2011 tour — is holding six concerts in Singapore, a city-state of over 5mn people. This is more than for Sydney, Tokyo or Mexico City.

The reasons for Hong Kong’s snub are unclear. Social media is blaming everything from the national security law to the lack of suitable venues. Whatever the reason, these musical choices and rising rents are both indicative of the diverging fortunes of the two cities — at least in the short term.

Hong Kong and Singapore have for years competed for leading financial hub status. But strict pandemic lockdowns, draconian national security legalisation and worsening US-China relations have dulled Hong Kong’s appeal, while Singapore’s low taxes, stable rule of law, and neutrality has made it more enticing for businesses and tourists. Singapore’s total employment numbers now outstrip those in Hong Kong, despite the latter’s larger population.

But Singapore is dealing with the flip side of that boon: spiralling costs and a limited ability to manage them. “If two Beyoncé concerts apparently caused high inflation in Sweden, what will six Taylor Swift concerts do to Singapore?” grumbled one investment banker based in the city-state to me this week. He has two daughters desperate for VIP tickets.

Even before tickets went on sale, prices for hotels and flights to Singapore were already soaring for March 2 to March 9 2024, when Swift is due to perform. Some three- and four-star hotels are 20 per cent more expensive compared with the week before, while flights from other cities in south-east Asia to Singapore are almost triple the normal price range.

Facing demands for ad hoc school holidays while Swift is in town, Singapore’s education minister, Chan Chun Sing, said on Facebook that granting time off “may further fuel inflation”.

While Hong Kong outpaced Singapore on inflation for most of the 1980s and 1990s, the roles have been reversed. Over the past two years, Singapore’s inflation has been consistently higher than that of its rival. An influx of new residents coupled with delays on new building during the pandemic have pushed rents to record levels. Singapore usurped New York as the city with the highest rental growth at the end of last year, according to Knight Frank, a real estate group.

Tiny Singapore can’t compete with other parts of south-east Asia for natural tourist attractions such as beaches or mountains, so it relies heavily on its appeal as a gastronomic hub. But even its lively restaurant scene is grappling with high commercial property rents that are defying a slowdown in other capitals. The manager of my favourite local Italian restaurant is moving to a different, more distant neighbourhood after the landlord doubled his rent.

Whatever the downsides for residents, the healthy rivalry with Hong Kong is a good thing. Competition keeps both cities innovating, launching new financial products and tax incentives to lure business and capital. Hong Kong, determined to recover some of what it has lost, is already attempting to coax back companies, professionals and family offices.

Some friends who moved over from Hong Kong during the pandemic are moving back, though Taylor Swift may make them regret that decision. One, a lawyer with two kids, said she made the decision after her rent was raised by 120 per cent. But she left last week with one request: “I might need a place to stay if I get Taylor Swift tickets. The hotels are too expensive.”

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com



Singapore’s corruption watchdog said it had arrested one of the city-state’s most high-profile property tycoons, expanding a rare operation that has embroiled a minister and dented its reputation as a clean place to do business.

The Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau confirmed on Friday that both hotelier Ong Beng Seng and transport minister S Iswaran had been arrested on Wednesday before being released on bail. Both had their passports impounded as a condition of their release, though the CPIB has allowed Ong to travel overseas and surrender his passport on his return.

Hotel Properties Limited, of which Ong is managing director, earlier said he was providing information to the CPIB about his interactions with Iswaran. No charges had been filed against Ong, whose bail was set at S$100,000 ($75,500), the company added.

The CPIB on Wednesday said Iswaran was assisting its investigation into a case, without giving further details. The probe is Singapore’s most serious involving a cabinet minister in more than three decades.

Singapore’s officials are some of the best paid in the world and the government touts its reputation for a zero-tolerance approach to graft. The country is ranked the fifth-least corrupt country in Transparency International’s latest Corruption Perception index.

“The ruling PAP [People’s Action party], which has governed Singapore since 1959 have always prided themselves on good governance and incorruptibility, among other virtues,” said Eugene Tan, associate professor of law and political commentator at Singapore Management University.

“Domestically [the probe] has certainly got many tongues wagging.”

Ong, who founded Hotel Properties in 1980, is known for his role in helping to strike a deal with Formula One mogul Bernie Ecclestone to bring a grand prix to the country in 2007. The tycoon and his wife Christina’s net worth was valued at $1.75bn last year, according to Forbes.

Shares in Hotel Properties, which has interests in hotels and properties in 15 countries under brands including the Four Seasons and Intercontinental, shed as much as 7 per cent on Friday morning, hitting their lowest level in about a month before closing 2.6 per cent lower.

Singaporean prime minister Lee Hsien Loong said on Wednesday that he had asked transport minister Iswaran to take a leave of absence until the investigation was concluded. Lawrence Wong, deputy prime minister, added on Thursday that Singapore had “always upheld a clean and incorrupt system of government”.

The investigation comes ahead of an expected handover of power between Lee and Wong and elections that must be held no later than November 2025.

An email sent to Iswaran’s government account returned with a message that he was on leave. The transport ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Hotel Properties said Ong was “co-operating fully with CPIB and has provided the information requested”. It added that the company’s nominating committee had assessed that Ong could continue in his role as managing director while the investigation was under way, but would “continue to reassess [his] suitability”.

A spokesperson for Ong declined to provide further information.



Singaporean state-owned investor Temasek Holdings has reported its worst returns since 2016 and warned it has slowed investment amid recession risks, higher interest rates and geopolitical tensions.

Temasek, one of the biggest and most active investors globally, said the net value of its portfolio had shrunk to S$382bn (US$285bn) in the financial year to March, as public and private equity capital markets fell and the technology sector was hit particularly hard. That compared with it being worth a record S$403bn in 2022. A S$7bn loss was driven by mark-to-market accounting.

The Asian investor, which has two-thirds of its portfolio in the region and has backed some of the world’s biggest start-ups from Jack Ma’s Ant Group in China to San Francisco and Dublin-based payments processing group Stripe, reported a 5.07 per cent drop in total shareholder returns. This compared with a 5.8 per cent increase the previous year and was far below the 24.5 per cent increase in 2021. The group slowed its investment pace for the period, calling it “the most challenging year for markets over the last decade”.

The results underline the struggle of global investors to adapt to a new era of higher interest rates. Temasek’s cost of capital rose from 7 per cent to 9 per cent. Its total returns over a 10-year and 20-year period were 6 per cent and 9 per cent respectively.

The drop in returns was the poorest annual performance since 2016. Investment returns from Temasek and sovereign wealth fund GIC, as well as the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the central bank, are the biggest contributors to Singapore’s budget.

“The global economy is still quite fragile. Geopolitical tensions are high, showing no signs of easing. Inflation is elevated in most developed markets . . . we do believe that to get inflation under control, we probably will need to see a recession,” said chief investment officer Rohit Sipahimalani.

Temasek, whose unlisted holdings have grown substantially over the past decade to more than 50 per cent of its portfolio, had some high-profile setbacks over the year. It was forced to write down its $275mn investment in the collapsed crypto exchange FTX. Chief executive Dilhan Pillay acknowledged the high reputational damage the investment had caused but described it as an “aberration”.

Sipahimalani said Temasek was moderating the pace of its investments and applying a “geopolitical lens” to its deals. “We won’t invest in areas that are in the crosshairs of US-China tensions. We’ll prefer to invest in companies that have access to large domestic markets.”

Management said it still saw opportunities in China over the long term in sectors linked to domestic consumption and electric vehicles, but its growth outlook was uncertain. “We expect that [government] stimulus will be much lower and much more modest than what we’ve historically seen,” Sipahimalani said.

The proportion of Temasek’s portfolio allocated to China has remained flat over the past decade. It made up 23 per cent of the portfolio in 2013 compared to 22 per cent in 2023, whereas the Americas has gone from 10 per cent to 21 per cent. Its largest exposure, at 28 per cent, is to Singapore.

Temasek said it would look to boost investments in India and south-east Asia. It sees opportunities there owing to supply chain diversification away from China — dubbed China+1 — and the digital economy.



Sequoia Capital’s China unit is drawing up plans to expand into Singapore, putting it in competition with another arm of the venture capital group as the firm divides into three amid rising geopolitical tensions.

HongShan, the Chinese arm of the Silicon Valley group, has set up an office in the city-state and is working on plans to use it as a base for investing in south-east Asia, multiple people with knowledge of the situation said.

That would pit the Chinese investment juggernaut, which manages $56bn in assets, against Peak XV Partners, Sequoia’s India and south-east Asia business, which already has an office in Singapore.

Both units, along with Sequoia’s US-based business, will split into separate companies by 2024, the group said last month.

HongShan is “meeting lots of private capital investors and talking about doing deals and other opportunities here”, said a director at a rival venture capital fund in Singapore. “[They] have asked to keep [it] quiet for now . . . There are sensitivities involved with Peak XV.”

Sequoia denied last month that concerns about the rising tensions between the US and China were behind the firm’s uncoupling. It said its shared brand was creating “growing market confusion” and “portfolio conflicts”. The split means the US, China and India units will no longer use joint branding and back-office services and will stop sharing profits.

While they are not barred from competing after the break-up, HongShan’s under-the-radar expansion in Singapore is an early sign of how the former colleagues are now entering each other’s turf as rivals. Peak XV is also planning to open a US office, the company said.

A number of executives from HongShan have travelled to Singapore in the past six months, the rival fund director added. The new office will accommodate at least two members of its investment team.

The China unit, which is managed by renowned investor Neil Shen, who led early investments in Alibaba and TikTok owner ByteDance, has told people in Singapore meetings that it would initially look to support its existing Chinese founders who had international businesses in the city-state. However, it also expressed interest in investing in start-ups.

One person who had spoken to HongShan executives in Singapore said it could tap into growing demand from Chinese founders to set up operations there and rebrand themselves as Singapore-based, a move that has been dubbed “Singapore-washing”. The city-state’s neutrality is appealing as the US steps up its scrutiny of outbound capital to China.

HongShan’s interest in south-east Asia comes at a time when some of Peak XV’s portfolio companies are facing difficulties.

The ecommerce group Zilingo went into liquidation in January after complaints of financial irregularities and the high-profile firing of its co-founder and chief executive.

Educational technology provider Byju’s, once India’s most valuable start-up, lost that position after investors wrote down the value of their stakes. Last month, its auditor resigned over a lack of information provided for its accounts, and the company suffered a series of high-profile board departures, including Peak XV’s representative.

HongShan told the Financial Times it had a “strong foundation of trust” with PeakXV and there would be opportunities for both teams to collaborate. “HongShan’s focus continues to be partnering with Chinese founders and supporting them on their globalisation journeys,” it said.

Peak XV said: “The opportunities for collaboration [with HongShan] are far greater than the scope for competition.”



Something big just happened in the world of Twitter advertising.

For quite some time, the internet’s town square has been clogged with adverts for pet products, household doodahs, gadgets and garden ornaments, as if the Betterware Catalogue had been reinvented by Wish. The ads all use the same template: a promoted tweet from a blue-tick account, a speeded-up video, and a link to an identikit shopfront badged something like Zotu, Dulo or Loza.

The frequency with which these ads appeared has caused Twitter users quite a lot of irritation . . .

. . . with the community’s “added context” feature being used to raise concerns about the quality and legal status of some products:

As it happens, Alphaville was tracking several dozen of these ad accounts. And in the past few hours, every single one was suspended.

To be clear, there are a lot of dropshipper ads on social media. The specific accounts we’re referring to were promoting a fleet of commerce sites — Tace, Vore, Toba — that are aesthetically and functionally identical. They all use the same build of WordPress and they all rely on Woocommerce, an open-source plugin for small merchants.

Another repeated theme among these ecommerce sites is unlikely-sounding operating addresses. The head office of Sene, for example, is the site of what was once The Square restaurant in Mayfair:

. . . and Kena appears to operate out of some super-prime real estate:

Having a bogus business address on an ecommerce website is not allowed, at least in the UK. The Advertising Standards Authority requires ads targeting UK consumers to be accurate and not contain any misleading information, including about where the operator is based. For example, in 2019 the ASA banned an ad for Wandsworth Plumbers after finding no evidence that it had a permanent base in Wandsworth.

An ASA spokesman said that without an investigation he couldn’t say whether any of the Twitter ads would be subject to its regulation.

So who’s really behind the sites? Our test orders through different shopfronts all resolved to the same company, a Singapore-registered dropshipping agent called Poxdo.

Much of the text on Poxdo’s website is identical to other, seemingly unrelated websites so it’s tricky to know what to trust. The contact page lists an address in downtown Singapore, within the Bugis Cube shopping centre, and mentions a warehouse in Yiwu, in the Zhejiang province of China.

Yiwu, “the world’s largest wholesale market for small manufactured goods”, was recently profiled by our colleagues on MainFT:

Public documents filed at Singapore’s corporate registry show Poxdo PTE Ltd was established in May 2020 and name two directors: Lee Ming Chung, a citizen of Singapore, and Nguyen Dac Manh of Ha Noi, Vietnam.

Our efforts over several weeks to contact either director proved unsuccessful. Emails direct to Poxdo also went unanswered. Company secretary Thung Sai Fun of Ace Global Accountants and Auditors, when contacted on LinkedIn, did not respond to our requests for information about Poxdo and has since switched her profile to private.

Under Singapore law, a company must have at least one resident director on its board at all times. Foreigners setting up Singapore companies often recruit a local resident to be a passive, nominee director. Lee Ming Sung is a director of more than 60 disparate Singapore-incorporated companies and a shareholder of none, his registry record shows. (We’re including the original documents here because while all filings are public, the Singapore government’s BizFile service charges up to $50 per download request.)

The given address on the registration form for Nguyen Dac Manh, Poxdo’s other director and 100 per cent shareholder, is for an area of Hanoi rather than a residence or a specific street. Over the past two weeks we have reached out to numerous people with that name — there’s a Nguyen Dac Manh who promotes Vietnam real estate, for example, and a Nguyen Dac Manh who appears in promotional videos for Lazada, the Singapore-based ecommerce group. So far, none has responded.

An odd, possibly irrelevant tangent can be found buried on Poxdo’s website. As well as the visible pages detailing the company’s operations, there’s the unused framework of a WordPress- and WooCommerce-based storefront lying dormant in the background. Among its public but unlisted sections are template “author” and “blog” pages with holder posts credited to “Maximus Brainsby”. (The same framework appears elsewhere on the ecommerce web, such as for the Beeco storefront.)

Maximus Brainsby Ltd was the name of a company incorporated in the UK in 2019 by a Vietnamese resident, Tuan Hoang Anh, and struck off in 2021. The name also appears on a messageboard for users of Shopify, in a thread complaining about traffic received from a product research tool called Pexgle. One poster quotes an email they say was signed “Maximus Brainsby, Co-Founder, Pexgle.”

Vietnam-based Pexgle advertises itself as an “all-in-one hunt winning products and ads toolkit for dropshippers and ecommerce entrepreneurs”. We’ve asked Pexgle and everyone we could find named Tuan Hoang Anh about dropshipping and Twitter ads; none has yet responded. If anyone ever wants to speak to us about anything, we’ll update this post accordingly.

Asked to comment on the account suspensions, Twitter’s press office gave its standard automated response:



Singapore’s financial watchdog has fined financial institutions including DBS and Citigroup over breaches related to the Wirecard scandal, one of Europe’s biggest accounting frauds.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore said on Wednesday that DBS, OCBC, Citibank Singapore and Swiss Life Singapore had been fined a total of S$3.8mn ($2.8mn).

The regulator said the four financial institutions had “inadequate anti-money laundering and counter financing of terrorism controls in place when they dealt with persons who were involved in transactions with, or had links to, Wirecard AG or its related parties”. However, it said it had not found evidence of wilful misconduct in its investigation.

Once the darling of Germany’s fintech sector, Wirecard collapsed in 2020 after admitting that about €1.9bn in cash was missing from its accounts.

Three of Wirecard’s most senior former executives have been on trial in Munich since December on charges of fraud, embezzlement and accounting and market manipulation. They include ex-chief executive Markus Braun, who denies wrongdoing.

Singapore was central to the fraud, with many central figures in the scandal based in the Asian financial hub. On Tuesday, a state court handed down prison sentences to two former senior Wirecard finance executives, the first criminal convictions related to the collapse of the German payments group.

DBS, Singapore’s biggest bank, received the largest fine on Wednesday of S$2.6mn (US$1.9mn). The company said it accepted the MAS decision on lapses.

“While we detected and acted upon some of [the] activities through transaction monitoring and customer due diligence — and ultimately exited all relevant entities — we were unable to unravel the scheme in its entirety,” it said in a statement. “We acknowledge that we could have done better.”

Citi, which was handed a S$400,000 penalty, said: “The case dates back to before June 2020 and since then we have taken steps to strengthen our know your customer process.”

Swiss Life, which was given a S$200,000 fine, said it had co-operated with authorities and that it had since implemented additional measures to “detect client misconduct more effectively”.

OCBC, which received a fine of S$600,000, said one of its business banking customers was implicated in the Wirecard case. The bank had “enhanced” its transaction monitoring, due diligence and know-your-customer processes in the past few years, it added.

The fines come ahead of the Singapore trial scheduled to start next month of James Henry O’Sullivan, another figure alleged to have played a central role in the Wirecard scandal. While O’Sullivan has not been charged in Germany, prosecutors in the Munich trial claim that companies the Englishman controlled extracted hundreds of millions of euros from the payments company before it crashed into insolvency.

In Singapore, O’Sullivan faces charges of abetting the falsification of documents, including papers that helped persuade Wirecard’s auditors at EY that the company had extensive cash reserves until it was forced to announce that €1.9bn recorded in its accounts did not exist. If convicted, he faces up to a decade in prison.

Additional reporting by Donato Mancini in London



Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund GIC has accelerated dealmaking in the US, investing in venture capital funds and technology companies as it searches for growth beyond China.

GIC, whose assets are estimated by analysts to exceed $700bn, has told private equity and venture capital executives this year that it wants to increase exposure to US-focused funds, said three people familiar with the investor’s thinking.

“We cannot suggest opportunities fast enough,” said a partner at one global venture fund with a San Francisco office. “They are eager for what we have from San Francisco to Orlando.”

The focus on the US by one of Asia’s biggest sovereign wealth funds reflects optimism in the resilience of the country’s top technology companies despite last year’s heavy sell-off. The US is also prime hunting ground for artificial intelligence companies as the industry rapidly expands.

It also comes despite a collapse in funding for venture capital groups in the US and falling valuations for private companies. That slowdown could impact GIC’s investment levels over 2023, though interest in the US has remained high this year, the partner said.

But the US remains one of the biggest destinations for capital, especially in tech, as global investors rethink their strategy in China over concerns including geopolitical tensions with the US, an economic slowdown and a crackdown on business.

GIC struck 63 deals involving US-based private companies including in technology, healthcare and property in 2022 and 2021, compared with 39 in 2019 and 2018, according to data by Refinitiv.

By comparison, ITjuzi, a data provider that monitors inflows to China, recorded two direct investments in Chinese companies by GIC last year, down from 16 in 2021.

GIC declined to comment but has previously said it maintains significant exposure to large markets including China.

A venture capitalist with offices in Silicon Valley said the company had held talks with GIC about raising its commitments to US funds, including in the secondary market. The latter is where private stakes in start-ups and VC funds change hands.

GIC “indicated they were looking to ramp up hiring of investment specialists”, the person added. GIC is advertising 18 jobs in the US, according to LinkedIn. One post is for a specialist in the private equity secondary market as well as other senior roles in equities, fixed-income and portfolio management.

Global investors who have relied on growth in China face a challenge finding alternatives. India and other emerging markets including Indonesia have not been able to match the mainland market in size and sophistication, even though their economic growth is higher than in developed markets including the US.

“But there are only so many bets you can make in places like India and Indonesia. The US has much to offer across biotech, utilities, consumer companies and real estate,” said one Asia-based asset manager and adviser who spoke to GIC about its strategy. “However, there has been some question over tech valuations more recently which could affect the strategy.”

The US is GIC’s biggest market, making up 37 per cent of its portfolio according to its 2022 report, compared with 34 per cent in 2021. It does not break down its Asian portfolio, which represented 25 per cent of its holdings in 2022, excluding Japan. Its private market exposure has grown to 17 per cent from 12 per cent between 2022 and 2019.

GIC, which has offices in San Francisco and New York, in April increased its stake in Nasdaq-listed US-Israeli fintech Pagaya, which uses AI to manage assets for financial institutions.

GIC and Singapore’s other state investor Temasek became investors in Stripe, the San Francisco- and Dublin-based payments processing group, in March. Other recent deals include buying out software company Zendesk, an investment in blockchain data platform Chainalysis and joining a consortium to take cyber security platform McAfee private.

Additional reporting by George Hammond in San Francisco



Singaporean and other foreign investors are stepping up purchases of foreclosed properties in China, as Beijing’s crackdown on speculation and a slowing economy lead to a wave of defaults by developers.

Sales of Chinese distressed properties, including office buildings and factories, hit a quarterly record of $1.93bn in the last three months of 2022, according to MSCI, up 14 per cent from the same period a year earlier and 73 per cent higher than in 2019, the first year it tracked such data.

Benjamin Chow, head of Asia real assets research at MSCI, said foreign buying had been more pronounced during this property downturn than in past ones in China. He linked the wave of developer defaults to a series of policies begun in 2021 to bring down leverage in the financial system.

Singapore government-backed CapitaLand Investment highlighted the foreign interest in distressed Chinese properties in February when it raised a 1.1bn Singapore dollar ($820mn) fund to hunt for bargains in the Chinese commercial property sector.

“The uncertainties in the market in the last two years have brought forth many opportunities, particularly in the special situations space, as developers continue to face [a] credit crunch,” Simon Treacy, chief executive of private equity real estate at CapitaLand, told Nikkei Asia in May.

One of the biggest distressed deals on the mainland came in October when CapitaLand agreed to pay Rmb2.04bn ($290mn) for a Beijing office building sold at auction after a default by Te Er Te, a property management company owned by Dalian-based developer Yongjia Group, court records show. The price represented a 30 per cent discount from its 2021 valuation.

In January, a Singapore-headquartered private equity manager with about $7bn of assets under management signed a deal with a Taiwanese manufacturer to buy a bankrupt logistics facility in China, said an executive with the buyer who asked not be named because he is not authorised to speak with the media.

“We go after these manufacturers who have been hurting,” the executive said. “So if we look at where most of the pain is, we will continue to see select opportunities to refurbish [and] take over . . . underutilised or even bankrupt manufacturers.”

Some western investors, including Brookfield Asset Management and Pictet Wealth Management, have also shown interest in such deals. Alexandre Tavazzi, Pictet’s managing director, said in Hong Kong last month that distressed properties in China have “become quite attractive”.

“I do think there should be good opportunities to buy assets at good valuations over the next five years,” said Ronald Thompson, Hong Kong-based managing director of Alvarez & Marsal, which specialises in restructuring.

However, MSCI’s Chow said other global investors have been more reluctant to invest in Chinese properties because of “concerns about long-term returns, particularly with China’s lower trajectory as it moves away from a reliance on the real estate sector to bolster GDP growth”.

Additional reporting by Pak Yiu.

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on June 13, 2023. ©2023 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Singapore has handed down prison sentences to two former senior Wirecard finance executives, the first criminal convictions related to the collapse of the once high-flying German payments group.

James Wardhana was sentenced to 21 months and Chai Ai Lim to 10 months by Singapore’s state court on Tuesday with immediate effect for conspiring to misappropriate funds. Both pleaded guilty after being charged in 2022 alongside two other people in connection with the case.

The rulings mark the first convictions for one of Europe’s biggest accounting frauds.

Wirecard, once worth €24bn and hailed as one of Europe’s most successful tech start-ups, collapsed in June 2020 after disclosing that half of its €2bn in annual revenue did not exist. The company’s implosion sent shockwaves through Germany’s financial and political establishment, and its Singaporean unit stopped payment activities in 2020.

Wardhana, a 40-year-old Indonesian citizen and permanent resident of Singapore, was the international finance process manager of Wirecard Asia. Chai, a 44-year-old Singaporean citizen, was the head of finance at Wirecard Asia. Both admitted to conspiring with their superior to embezzle funds from Wirecard Asia’s bank account. The prosecution noted that the two were active participants in the conspiracy.

Their superior, Edo Kurniawan, is still at large, with a warrant for his arrest and an Interpol red notice issued against him. Wirecard “lost contact” with Kurniawan, who led the group’s accounting in the Asia-Pacific region, 10 days after the Financial Times published its first report on suspected accounting irregularities at Wirecard and Kurniawan’s alleged central role in the affair.

Wirecard executives have been on trial in Munich since December last year. Three former senior managers of the disgraced German payments company, including chief executive Markus Braun, face charges of fraud, embezzlement and accounting and market manipulation in a trial that is expected to continue into at least 2024. He denies the charges.

Attention will next month swing back to Singapore when the trial of James Henry O’Sullivan is scheduled to begin. The Englishman is not being charged in Germany but is alleged to be central to the Wirecard fraud.

O’Sullivan faces charges of abetting the falsification of documents, including papers that helped persuade Wirecard’s auditors at EY that the company had extensive cash reserves until it was forced to announce that €1.9bn recorded in its accounts did not exist. If convicted, he faces up to a decade in prison.

Companies controlled by O’Sullivan received hundreds of millions of euros from Wirecard in loans and payments for assets in transactions spanning several years, according to whistleblowers and documents seen by the Financial Times. He has never commented publicly on the events.

Jan Marsalek, Markus Braun’s protégé and Wirecard’s former chief operating officer, remains at large, with some reports placing him in Moscow.



To businesses struggling to hit their emissions targets, they are a lifeline; to climate campaigners, they are a vehicle for greenwashing. But to Singapore, carbon markets are above all an opportunity: the Asian city-state is betting big on an area of finance that it thinks can only grow as the world transitions to a low-carbon economy.

In its race with Tokyo and Hong Kong to be the region’s premier business hub, Singapore wants to become the preferred financial centre for governments and businesses that inevitably need to interact with the global carbon market to cut their emissions.

Its ambitions encompass both the largely unregulated international voluntary carbon market as well as the compliance carbon market — which is seen by governments as crucial to achieving carbon reduction targets.

In 2019, Singapore became the first country in south-east Asia to put a price on carbon — which companies will next year be able to offset by buying carbon credits. Last year, it went on to become the first in the region to launch a carbon exchange. It has also signed a string of deals with developing countries on carbon credit collaboration.

Much of Singapore’s ambition is born of necessity. With its 5.5mn population and tiny size, it has no natural resources of its own. But its central position in Asia allows it to serve as a bridge between established carbon markets in the west and emerging markets in the region. It can facilitate the flow of carbon credits and investments and, thereby, potentially accelerate its own emissions reduction plans.

“For a number of years now, Singapore has had ambitions in relation to hosting financial markets but, in particular, carbon markets,” says Pedro Barata, associate vice-president of carbon markets for the Environmental Defense Fund, a US non-profit organisation. “It wants to play a central role in terms of carbon trading in the region. Nobody else in Asia, to my knowledge, is trying to create similar infrastructure like Singapore.”

A large part of that ambition is focused on voluntary carbon trading — a system that allows the buying and selling of carbon credits internationally to incentivise and regulate emissions reductions.

If Singapore can harness the opportunity, it stands to benefit enormously from a market that could be worth $50bn by 2030, according to the consultancy McKinsey.

But it is a system that has been beset by controversies in recent months. Critics say it allows companies to continue polluting without materially contributing to reducing their emissions.

Carbon offsets were even described as an “oxymoron” by the independent Carbon Market Watch group, given the example of tree planting in China to offset the emissions generated by Shell in producing gas that was marketed as “carbon neutral” — as first reported in the FT.

In the past 18 months, such schemes have proliferated, many unverified. The pledges for carbon removal through tree planting, for example, would require a land area the size of the US, scientific studies have concluded. Furthermore, forests in the US that generated offsets bought by companies including BP and Microsoft were burnt in summer fires, calling into question their value.

“It is an interesting time to be going all in on carbon trading, but their reputation is good and you would probably trust an exchange in Singapore over say, Malaysia, Thailand or even Hong Kong,” says one Singapore-based carbon trader, who asked to remain anonymous.

Singapore’s government has acknowledged the challenge of ensuring that carbon credits uphold high environmental integrity standards. In February, it said that this year it would publish a “white list” of credits that would be acceptable for offsetting Singapore companies’ taxable carbon emissions. This list will include approved host countries, programmes and methodologies.

“We know this market is missing trust . . . Singapore has the right pedigree,” says Mikkel Larsen, chief executive of Climate Impact X, a global exchange and marketplace for carbon credits based in Singapore. “It has the basic infrastructure and experience with creating new markets.”

Jointly established by DBS Bank, Singapore Exchange, Standard Chartered and state investor Temasek, CIX launched its first nature-based standardised contract this month. The credits covered by the contract are generated through schemes that protect forests that would otherwise be destroyed or degraded, it says. Eligible projects include rainforests and biodiversity reserves in Asia, Africa and South America.

“Singapore’s emissions are large for a country of its size and it has no real means of getting to net zero,” says Vidur Nayar, head of Asia-Pacific environmental trading at Hartree Partners, a global energy and commodities trading group. “But the commodity traders are all here and so, naturally, you are seeing growth in carbon trading, too.”

Giving added heft to Singapore’s push is some good old-fashioned incentivising. The city-state will allow companies to use high-quality international carbon credits to offset up to 5 per cent of their taxable greenhouse gas emissions from 2024. While relatively low now, at S$5 per tonne, the tax will rise to S$25 per tonne in 2024, and S$45 from 2026.

Voluntary markets are only part of Singapore’s strategy, however. The country also has its sights set on compliance markets, which are established by governments as a means of cutting national emissions through mandatory cap and trade schemes. These are mechanisms where carbon emitters buy or sell credits based on whether they exceed or undershoot emissions limits set by the government.

Asia is one of the biggest growth areas for compliance markets: both South Korea and, more recently, China have established emissions trading schemes, and Indonesia and India will soon follow.

Under Article 6 of the 2015 Paris climate accord — the UN agreement to limit global warming to 2C, and preferably 1.5C, above pre-industrial levels — countries can also co-operate to share the benefits of emissions reduction schemes, in order to hit their national decarbonisation targets.

In May, Singapore signed a memorandum of understanding with Bhutan to co-operate on carbon credits under the terms of Article 6.

This deal was the 10th such MoU: other nations that have signed up with Singapore include Colombia, Kenya, Peru and Vietnam.

Experts say that companies operating in multiple countries will prefer a central, trusted venue for trading the credits that compliance schemes create — and Singapore wants to be that venue.

“It is Singapore saying . . . we will be your outlet, we will be your go-to financial centre for trading these, we will assist you with those trades, including getting the recognition of international standards,” says Barata from the Environmental Defense Fund.



Singapore is thriving as an Asian finance hub. Record amounts of capital are flowing into the city-state from China, south-east Asia, the US and elsewhere. Not only did Singapore gain from the closure of rival Hong Kong during the pandemic but the nation has benefited from a more neutral approach in a world marked by geopolitical polarisation.

But it has struggled with its ambitions for a key part of its finance hub strategy — to develop a thriving stock market with a pipeline of new equity listings. Monthly delistings often outnumber new companies and the number of quoted companies has fallen from 720 at the start of 2020 to 645 as of April. The Straits Times index for the market has essentially flatlined over the past five years, excluding a Covid-related dip and recovery.

And the market has been delivered a fresh blow by the dismal performance of a high-profile listing of a foreign business, Digital Core REIT. It is not just a matter of a steep share price decline. The circumstances of the real estate investment trust’s problems raise questions over the level of disclosure required on the market.

The owner of data centres in the US, Toronto and Frankfurt was spun out of US property group Digital Realty and was Singapore’s biggest equity listing by funds raised of the past five years and the fourth largest over the past decade, according to Dealogic. The company’s shares have dropped 35 per cent from the offer price and 60 per cent from an early 2022 high.

A key factor in that slide has been problems with two major tenants. Earlier this month, data centre operator Cyxtera, reported to be Digital Core REIT’s second-biggest customer, went bankrupt. The company has accounted for about 22 per cent of the trust’s rental revenue income.

Cyxtera’s troubles have been documented by the media since at least the beginning of this year. But until recently investors would have not known about them by reading only the disclosures by Digital Core REIT, or even that it was a very big customer of the trust. According to management, the Singapore-listed group is typically bound by confidentiality provisions in lease agreements.

Nor was the identity of the trust’s reportedly fifth-largest customer, Sungard, disclosed at the time of the IPO. Sungard went bankrupt for a second time in April 2022 — just four months after Digital Core REIT’s IPO. The trust informed investors of the bankruptcy of its fifth-biggest tenant 10 days after Sungard had filed in the US. It did not mention Sungard, which had accounted for about 7 per cent of the trust’s rental revenue, by name.

It was not until April that there was any mention of the troubles facing Cyxtera, when the trust released responses to shareholder questions. Cyxtera filed for bankruptcy protection two months later on June 4. This time the failure was disclosed the next day, though Cyxtera was still not mentioned by name.

Under Singapore’s continuous disclosure rules, companies have to disclose information that would be likely to materially affect the price or value of their securities. The exception is if the information is confidential, prepared for internal management purposes or concerns an incomplete negotiation. The Singapore Exchange says: “We have been assessing the information flow and promptness of disclosures bearing in mind the impact on the Reit’s financials.”

Mak Yuen Teen, a professor at the National University of Singapore, says if Digital Core REIT had been listed in the US, some of its “tardy disclosures” might have seen investors “come after them”.

A Digital Core REIT spokesperson said: “Upon learning that its second-largest customer had filed for bankruptcy, Digital Core REIT immediately requested a trading halt and promptly provided robust and timely disclosures . . . In general, we believe it is inappropriate to speculate or comment on any customer’s financial condition or course of action.” The company earlier told shareholders it expected “minimal impact” from the bankruptcy.

But the poor performance of Digital Core REIT’s share price speaks to the reduced confidence in the company’s prospects and the assets chosen for its portfolio. In seeking to attract more listings, it seems fair to ask: did Singapore get a poor deal with Digital Core REIT? The city-state has developed into something of a hub for Reits but as a centre for stock exchange listings, it has not matched its business achievements elsewhere. The woes of Digital Core REIT underline the importance of quality in listing candidates and strong regulation to ensure market integrity if it wants to do better.

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com



CSOP Asset Management is gearing up to launch what it claims will be Singapore’s first exchange traded fund focusing on the technology industry across south-east Asia and India.

The fund firm is aiming to raise up to $30mn by June 20, when the ETF will officially list on the Singapore bourse, with a longer-term goal of hitting $100mn in assets within the first year.

The CSOP iEdge Southeast Asia+ TECH Index ETF will be listed on the Singapore Exchange on June 20. The fund will track the iEdge Southeast Asia+ TECH Index, which provides exposure to 30 tech firms across six south-east Asian markets and India across information technology, software, retail, car manufacturing, and electronic components and manufacturing.

Just under 28 per cent of the portfolio is in electronics components and manufacturing, followed by a 19 per cent allocation to software and consulting companies and 16 per cent to miscellaneous retail.

US-listed companies with origins in south-east Asia and India make up the largest portion by market with a weighting of 43 per cent, followed by 18 per cent for Thailand, 15 per cent for Indonesia, 12 per cent for Singapore and 11 per cent for Malaysia.

Wang Yi, Hong Kong-based head of quantitative investment at CSOP AM, said a key factor behind the creation of the ETF was growing client demand for allocations to south-east Asia.

The challenge for investors in accessing the region is the fact that it is “a little fragmented” and there is no “aggregate portfolio they can easily access”, Wang argued.

The ETF invests in both locally listed companies, as well as the US stocks of local companies via American depositary receipts, which is how the ETF gets exposure to Indian companies, he explained.

The Hong Kong-based asset manager, which entered the Singapore market in 2019, believes the local tech sector is set to benefit from a combination of strong regional economic growth, a growing middle class, and a shift in industrial manufacturing capabilities away from China and into south-east and south Asia.

Exports from south-east Asia rose from $474bn in 2003 to $1.713tn in 2021, the firm noted, citing research from the Observatory of Economic Complexity, with much of this growth coming from the tech sector.

The firm said that south-east Asia was also expected to have 140mn new consumers by 2030, with the middle-classes expected to account for just under 70 per cent of the total regional population in the same period, citing World Economic Forum data.

The digital economy sector in the region grew at a compound annual growth rate of 24 per cent between 2019 and 2022 as well, with India seeing a compound annual growth rate of 16 per cent in the same period, according to research from Google, Temasek and Bain & Company.

The region should also benefit from what the firm refers to as the “fifth round of industrial relocation”, where manufacturing capabilities are now shifting from China to south-east Asia, after earlier shifts from the UK to the US, the US to Japan, Japan to the so-called four tigers of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea, and from the four tigers to China.

As more manufacturing and industrial facilities relocate to the region, CSOP AM anticipates income to grow, leading to more growth opportunities for regional tech companies and service providers, who should benefit as local consumers spend more on tech and tech services such as ride-sharing applications, Wang said.

Locally listed ETF assets in Singapore shrunk slightly in the first four months of this year, however, falling from $8.17bn at the end of 2022 to $8.03bn by the end of April, according to Singapore Exchange data — far below the $9.19bn figure at the end of 2021.

This latest ETF could also potentially be on the table to be cross-listed into the Chinese market via the recently announced ETF scheme between the Singapore Exchange and Shanghai Stock Exchange, Wang said.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.





Singapore’s new carbon exchange traded 12,000 tonnes of emissions on its first trading day as the city-state bets on the growth of an industry that has been slammed for corporate greenwashing.

Chevron, Vitol, Standard Chartered and China’s CICC on Wednesday traded credits on Climate Impact X, which is hoping to challenge other global exchanges run by US-based CME Group and Xpansiv in establishing a benchmark price for voluntary carbon trading.

Singapore is trying to leverage its status as a business hub in Asia to be the main carbon trading platform in the region. By winning enough liquidity from international carbon traders, it hopes to become a global price setter for carbon credits and lay the groundwork for an eventual futures market.

CIX, a joint venture among Singapore Exchange, state investor Temasek and banks DBS and Standard Chartered, said the initial price established for its physical carbon credits was $5.36 per tonne, about four times that for a similar nature-based contract at CBL, the world’s leading carbon exchange. Volumes on Wednesday were small as expected.

Voluntary carbon trading is a system that directs financing to climate-related projects. In buying carbon credits — certificates that represent quantities of greenhouse gases kept out of the air or removed from it — companies can offset their own emissions. The credits come from projects around the world that protect and support nature.

The industry is expected to grow as countries transition to low-carbon economies. A key challenge in carbon offsetting is how to price the credits, which is behind the efforts to launch spot and futures markets.

But a series of scandals related to credits linked to projects of questionable quality has dented enthusiasm among traders and hit volumes.

This has led to low prices on established exchanges, with CBL’s credits trading at about $1.15 on the exchange. That value is much less than the $5-$10 price range companies believe is their fair value, discouraging trade.

CIX’s experiment has been to provide a contract with fewer but higher-quality projects to compete with CBL and CME. It hopes to eventually establish stable trading volumes.

“It would be wrong to say [the scandals] have not put a dent in the market. Right now the market is a little bit more choppy than it was before” said Mikkel Larsen, chief executive at CIX.

“We could have waited for better times, but we decided not to. Building a carbon hub is not something you do overnight. If Singapore stopped and started every time something pushes against this, they will never get there.”

The credits covered by the contract are generated through schemes that protect forests which would otherwise be destroyed or degraded, according to CIX. The basket of 11 projects include rainforests and biodiversity reserves in Asia, Africa and South America.

“By excluding projects traders don’t like or trust, CIX are basically trying to create the Brent or similar index for carbon that sets a better benchmark,” said one carbon trader based in Singapore. Brent is the world’s most important crude oil benchmark.

Singapore has another carbon exchange called AirCarbon, a blockchain-based platform, but it has not had much traction with traders.

Letter in response to this article:

AirCarbon ‘sees strong interest from traders’ / From Thomas McMahon and William Pazos, Co-Founders, ACX, Singapore



Just as Singapore Airlines was giving employees an eight-month salary bonus after record profits, Hong Kong was giving away more than 4,400 free tickets for regional rival Cathay Pacific as the city sought to encourage visitors to return.

Shares of Singapore Airlines have soared to their highest levels in more than three years after the national carrier made clear the strength of its post-coronavirus pandemic recovery with an annual profit of S$2.16bn ($1.6bn) for the year ending in March.

In stark contrast, shares in Hong Kong-listed Cathay Pacific have dropped nearly 40 per cent from a high in April 2019. In March, the airline unveiled a HK$6.5bn ($830mn) loss for 2022 and shares have remained flat since.

Their financial divergence reflects the rise of Singapore, one of the first countries in Asia to reopen its borders after the pandemic, and the burnishing of its status as a business hub. Hong Kong, on the other hand, remained largely closed off to travel until late last year, losing its status as the region’s busiest airport to Singapore in 2022. Its slow reopening has affected Cathay Pacific, which is also reeling from labour shortages.

“Singapore was ahead of everyone last year in Asia-Pacific [with the reopening],” said Brendan Sobie, an independent aviation analyst based in Singapore. “They benefited from that tremendously.

“I don’t think Cathay’s first financial year after reopening will look like Singapore’s,” he added. “That honeymoon period caused by supply and demand imbalance is waning — they’ve largely missed out on those market conditions.”

Hong Kong tourism is still very early in its recovery, which is reflected in the carrier numbers. Singapore Airlines has reached nearly 80 per cent of pre-pandemic passenger capacity, while Cathay Pacific is still at less than 50 per cent.

Singapore Airlines and its wholly owned budget airline Scoot carried 2.7mn passengers in April, an 85 per cent year-on-year increase and just under the 3.1mn passengers they flew in the same month in 2019. Cathay Pacific carried 1.4mn passengers in April 2023, about 44 per cent of the number in April 2019.

At its annual meeting this month, Cathay’s chief executive Ronald Lam said the airline was unlikely to exceed 70 per cent of pre-Covid passenger capacity before the end of this year, citing labour constraints.

An average of 10 to 15 senior pilots have quit Cathay Pacific each month this year, said the Hong Kong Aircrew Officers Association, down from about 30 to 50 each month in the second half of last year.

The airline — which had a crew of 3,800 pilots in late 2019 — lost more than 1,800 pilots over the past three years, according to union chair Paul Weatherilt, but has only recruited about 400 new pilots. After seeing wage cuts of up to 40 per cent in 2020, pilots remain disgruntled, the union said.

Cathay Pacific said the “attrition rate has normalised across all staff groups” including pilots, adding that crew base pay has risen by 3.3 per cent from the beginning of this year.

“Besides Hong Kong having a later reopening timeline than other aviation hubs, Cathay’s slower recovery pace reflects [its] ongoing challenges with supply constraints across the aviation ecosystem . . . [such as] availability of certified manpower,” JPMorgan analyst Karen Li wrote in a note in March.

With wages now calculated by flight time, Hong Kong aviation officials have advised Cathay that some of their pilots have been taxiing on the runway at “considerably slower speeds”, according to an internal Cathay memo seen by the Financial Times.

In a further sign of crisis, Cathay fired three cabin crew after a clip accusing them of joking about a Mandarin Chinese-speaking customer’s English language ability went viral. Chief executive Lam said it had caused “significant damage to the image of Hong Kong and Cathay”. But Cathay’s flight attendants’ union hit back, complaining of low morale, increased workload and lower salaries.

Singapore Airlines, on the other hand, told local media it had brought back most of the 3,000-plus pilots — many of whom had been furloughed — by the middle of last year. Only a “very small number” left during the pandemic, management said at the time.

Singapore Airlines historically does not provide much detail on its staff, citing commercial reasons. The company did not respond to a request for comment.

Since the pandemic, Singapore has gained more transit traffic that traditionally went through Hong Kong.

“Singapore Airlines [did] well last year because they functioned as the only realistic transit hub in all of Asia,” a senior Asian airline executive said. Cathay reported a 68 per cent drop in sales originating from the Americas to $572mn in 2022 compared with 2019. Singapore Airlines had a 46 per cent increase in sales originating from the Americas to $1.1bn in the 12 months to the end of March this year, compared with the 12 months to the end of March 2020.

The booming market conditions that boosted Singapore Airlines’ bottom line are not expected to last. And Hong Kong is throwing billions of dollars towards luring back international business and tourists, such as with its recent Cathay campaign.

“We are still in a dynamic period, and many of us believe most of the benefits have been temporary,” said one Singapore Airlines executive. “I’m not sure we will see a profit like that again. Calling a winner seems too early.”



Singaporean state investor Temasek cut the pay of staff responsible for its failed $275mn investment in FTX, Sam Bankman-Fried’s cryptocurrency exchange that collapsed last year.

Temasek, one of the world’s largest investors, said it was “disappointed” with the investment and the “negative impact on our reputation”, after it was criticised for backing the start-up. The investment constituted 0.09 per cent of its S$403bn (US$298bn) portfolio.

“Although there was no misconduct by the investment team in reaching their investment recommendation, the investment team and senior management, who are ultimately responsible for investment decisions made, took collective accountability and had their compensation reduced,” Temasek said on Monday.

The statement concluded Temasek’s review of the deal, which was launched in November 2022, the same month FTX filed for bankruptcy. The Singaporean investor was hit by a rare public backlash after details behind its failed bet became public.

Temasek defended its “eight-month due diligence” process but critics questioned whether even basic checks were done into the start-up, which at one point was valued at $40bn when Bankman-Fried was in effect serving as the face of the crypto industry. Temasek described its trust in former chief executive Bankman-Fried as “misplaced”.

Lawrence Wong, Singapore’s deputy prime minister, told parliament last year that Temasek’s losses were “disappointing” and had caused reputational damage for the city-state. Ho Ching, the former Temasek chief who is the wife of Singapore’s leader, Lee Hsien Loong, called the fund’s loss “egg on our face”.

Temasek’s failed bet further compromised confidence in Singapore’s ability to regulate the digital assets industry. Singapore had encouraged crypto companies to set up operations locally and allowed both retail and institutional investors to trade in the risky asset class.

But a series of crypto failures connected to the city-state in 2022, including the collapse of hedge fund Three Arrows Capital and crypto platform Hodlnaut, put the city-state under scrutiny.

Experts warned that the report may fuel more criticism because it did not offer many details about the FTX investment and the due diligence process.

“It remains to be seen but there is a risk that such a cursory report may — rightly or wrongly — fuel public dissatisfaction rather than assuage them,” said Kelvin Low, a law professor at the National University of Singapore.

Temasek, whose funds are largely sourced from the return on its own investments, has doubled the value of its portfolio to S$403bn over the past decade according to the latest public information, largely thanks to its big bets on China and tech. It has made a number of investments into crypto and blockchain companies globally but maintains that its overall exposure to the sector is minimal.



The Singapore Exchange and Shanghai Stock Exchange are working to establish a new exchange traded fund scheme as they seek to deepen cross-border connectivity for issuers and investors in Singapore and mainland China.

The two exchanges have signed a memorandum of understanding for an ETF scheme with a master-feeder fund model, allowing investors in both markets to access feeder ETFs that link to locally listed ETFs on each other’s exchanges, according to a joint statement released on Monday.

This comes a year-and-a-half after the Singapore bourse inked an agreement for an ETF link-up with the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, one of the three independently operating bourses in the country.

Just a handful of companies have so far taken advantage of the ETF link-up between Singapore and China, however, with few others seemingly rushing to make use of the scheme.

In October last year, UOB Asset Management teamed up with its Chinese joint venture partner Ping An Fund Management to roll out the first ETF to be traded under a Singapore-Shenzhen master-feeder ETF scheme.

Assets in the Singapore-listed UOB AM Ping An ChiNext ETF did, however, skyrocket 244 per cent in the two weeks after its debut on November 14.

At the end of December, CSOP Asset Management launched two more Singapore-listed ETFs, marking just the second and third products under the ETF link.

CSOP AM, which opened its first overseas office in Singapore in 2019, plans to participate in the Singapore-Shanghai master-feeder ETF link-up as well as the Shenzhen one, given the differences between the two bourses.

“I don’t think the Shenzhen and Shanghai links are necessarily in competition because the products that are listed on the respective exchanges are different,” said Melody He, CSOP AM’s Hong Kong-based deputy CEO.

The Shenzhen Exchange was known for small-cap and ChiNext, whereas Shanghai traditionally offered more large cap and blue chip companies, she added.

She said that any ETF that might be cross-listed back to Shanghai or Shenzhen would need to have a “local flavour”.

“Chinese investors are quite interested in low-carbon themes and South-East Asia, this is an area which they’ve never really invested in, so it’s something that’s different from what they would find in China,” He said.

SGX Group CEO Loh Boon Chye said the latest partnership would “explore new areas of co-operation” between the two countries.

The Singapore bourse’s co-operation with the largest exchange in mainland China is set to widen the selection of ETF products available for listing of feeder funds, pave the way for greater collaboration between issuers and enhance investment options for investors in both markets, according to the release.

“SSE and SGX Group will continue to promote cross-border co-operation between China and Singapore and develop more connectivity products investing in selected ETFs to meet the growing demand for cross-border opportunities between both markets,” SSE president Cai Jianchun said.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.





The Cayman Islands has launched a fightback against attempts by Singapore and Hong Kong to rival it as a favourite destination for Asia’s hedge funds and super-rich to park assets.

Cayman Islands financial services minister André Ebanks visited Singapore and Hong Kong this month to advance plans to set up an office in one of the two Asian cities. It would be the Cayman Islands’ first base in Asia, and its officials would help investors to set up and manage funds based in the Caribbean territory.

The move comes after Singapore and Hong Kong approved new fund structures that offer international investors a way to shelter money in lightly taxed vehicles, with government subsidies to cover some set-up costs.

Use of Singapore’s new “variable capital companies” has exploded since they were introduced in 2020, with 889 set up so far — a pace investors say has taken even regulators by surprise as Chinese money floods into the city-state.

Uptake of Hong Kong’s “open-ended fund companies” has been slower, but 64 were set up in 2022, up from 40 a year earlier.

There are far more such vehicles in the Cayman Islands, but officials in the British overseas territory “think there’s a threat to their position”, said a Hong Kong-based funds specialist briefed on the initiative. “They haven’t had as much competition before.”

The Cayman Islands had been planning to set up an office in Asia for years, but the rapid take-up of the Singapore and Hong Kong vehicles has prompted more urgency, according to two people with knowledge of officials’ thinking.

“Minister Ebanks and I . . . had meetings with a number of local officials, agencies and law firms [in Hong Kong and Singapore] on matters related to opening and operating a Cayman Islands government office,” said Gene DaCosta, the Cayman Islands’ representative for Asia, in response to questions from the Financial Times. “No decision has been taken as yet on the location.”

The Cayman Islands delegation met hedge fund executives, fund lawyers and trade bodies for the private equity, hedge fund and venture capital industries, said people with knowledge of the trip.

One financier whose firm uses Cayman funds said the officials were seeking to reaffirm their relationship in the face of what was likely to become sharper competition from Hong Kong and Singapore.

“It was very much a two-way process, for the [Cayman Islands] government to meet stakeholders and get feedback about the jurisdiction,” said Ann Ng, a Hong Kong-based partner at the Cayman Islands law firm Maples Group who accompanied the officials to some of their meetings.

The pitch to Asian investors considering the Hong Kong and Singapore vehicles was that “Cayman funds represent the ‘old faithful’ of the investment world — tried, tested and trusted”, said a Singapore-based adviser who had talks with the delegation.

The Cayman Islands “have one particular strength: they are far away from the long arm of the Beijing government”, said another Singapore-based financial adviser who met the Cayman Islands delegation.

“Hong Kong can’t really argue that, and Singapore might have trouble, too, down the track with how things are going with mainland inflows,” the adviser said. A rush of capital from wealthy Chinese people into Singapore has become a politically sensitive issue in the city-state.

Several of the people said Hong Kong’s deeper capital markets and longer history as a global financial centre would until recently have made it the obvious choice for the Cayman Islands office. However, large numbers of companies, funds and family offices have relocated to Singapore in recent years.



It feels like déjà vu: back in Singapore, back to unpacking the topic of whether the buttoned-up country might be poised to emerge as Asia’s new capital of cool. Singapore’s presumptive rise as a destination in its own right – worth travelling for, rather than just transiting through – has been touted more than once in the past 15-odd years. In 2009, the catalyst was the city hosting an F1 night race and a concert, F1 Rocks, with Nobu Matsuhisa dispatching nigiri to VIPs in the pit and Beyoncé as a headline act. In 2013 it was a critical mass of chefs, mixologists and cultural venues with international talent behind them; in 2017, a similar set of addresses, all created by Singaporeans. Each time there was a groundswell of local enthusiasm, with creative types and Tourism Board officials labouring to lend substance to the “Singabore no more!” claim. And each time, out on the still-pretty-snoozy Singapore street, it was, if not quite failure to launch, also never quite the zeitgeist combustion everyone hoped for.

Now there’s renewed speculation that this staid island nation of 5.5 million might be having a(nother?) moment; but this time spurred in part by outside forces – regional business shifts and the geopolitical machinations of Singapore’s powerful neighbour, resulting in influxes of people, and wealth, from both Hong Kong and mainland China. FT reports estimate that more than 800 family offices have been established since the end of 2021; 2022-23 saw around 500 Chinese family offices, private-equity firms and wealth managers open or redomicile. (Singapore has already long been a base for UHNW residents from neighbouring Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.) Meta, Google and Apple all have their Asia-Pacific HQs here; some Hong Kong-based banks are relocating senior staff; blockchain and tech start-ups abound. The new expats – and the scads of capital they bring, along with the odd pearl-pink Bentley – are a favourite topic of conversation. (Likewise the city’s skyrocketing rents: friends talk of being pushed out of central neighbourhoods by rent hikes, while newly arrived mainlanders sign $100,000-a-month leases on penthouse flats and the city’s sought-after black-and-white colonial houses. In April, the government announced it would double its tax on private property purchases by foreigners to 60 per cent, in a move to cool a housing boom that has in part been driven by buyers from mainland China.)

Do the decoupling and diversification up there really account for cultural shifts down here? Culture in general, whether grassroots or institutional, is still one of Singapore’s more persistent challenges. The two factors collided in January at the inauguration of ART SG, the contemporary fair created by The Art Assembly, the team behind Art HK (now Art Basel Hong Kong). More than 160 galleries – both big names (Gagosian, Lehmann Maupin, White Cube, David Zwirner) and boutique stars such as the Paris-founded Almine Rech and Belgian-based Xavier Hufkens – convened at Marina Bay Sands Expo & Convention Centre, with an estimated 43,000 international art enthusiasts and powerhouse regional collectors. “You had some heavy-hitting galleries, which is a good indication of their belief in the market,” says Singaporean art adviser Talenia Phua Gajardo, whose company, The Artling, has both corporate and private clients across the Asia-Pacific region. “They’re not unrealistic; they know it’s not ‘do a booth and they will come’ – they need time to build networks. The goal was to position Singapore as a hub for connecting with regional collectors, and [those collectors] were all here. And the stuff in the peripheral programming was high-quality, which was gratifying to see.”

Art-world acquaintances posted on social media from SEA Focus, the south-east Asian contemporary art‑curation platform spearheaded by STPI Creative Workshop & Gallery (one of the city’s few internationally renowned arts venues), and from SAM, the Singapore Art Museum. This year, both of them were at Tanjong Pagar Distripark, a multistorey complex at the edge of the water that has in the past two years been emerging as a new arts cluster in its own right: SAM moved into new premises here in 2022, and the site already houses a handful of galleries.

There were also party shots from off-fair venues, exhibiting degrees of glamour and even a bit of raucousness that looked downright un-Singaporean. “I just felt there was something different,” says Alan Lo, the Hong Kong-born restaurateur, food-tech investor and philanthropist – he’s the co-founder of Duddell’s in his home city – of the energy during the event. Lo moved his family to Singapore during the pandemic, trading Hong Kong’s bristle of towers and peaks for Singapore’s fewer, and newer, ones, their sides sometimes furred with vertical greenery; the weaving shophouse-lined streets of Chinatown and Tanjong Pagar, incense still floating from the odd TCM purveyor lodged between two cocktail bars; and its justifiably world-famous 200-acre Botanic Gardens, where wizened qi gong practitioners trace arcane shapes in the air next to tabard-clad bootcampers from Melbourne or Leeds, amid broad-leaf mahogany and tembusu trees.

Lo intends to divide his time going forward: “Maybe it has to do with the fact that we’ve seen an influx of new people, whether from the mainland, or all the crypto guys, the tech and VC scenes that have also obviously been growing too. Whatever it was, it’s no longer the sleepy island state that it used to be – it’s more diverse, and dynamic. The pace is still slower than Hong Kong, but you don’t need that intensity all the time.

“And of course, the food scene.” Yes, that. Eating, drinking and nightlife (albeit a tame interpretation thereof) are where the city hit its stride some years ago. Ask a cocktail impresario anywhere in the world which Asian capital is on their radar, and Singapore is likely to be it. Breweries and distilleries now operate alongside homegrown bar concepts, many of them gorgeously designed: from classics such as 28 HongKong Street and Jigger & Pony to Atlas (with its 26ft gin “tower”), Junior The Pocket Bar (named for the teeny-weeny dimensions of its space on Ann Siang Hill), and buzzy newcomers Underdog Inn and Sago House. Singaporeans and the expats who call the city home love a tipple, and they love the new. Not for nothing did exclusive London wine club 67 Pall Mall choose Singapore as the site of its third location last year (and what a location: the 27th-floor flat overlooking Orchard Road formerly belonging to legendary film producer Runme Shaw; the room that was allegedly his bedroom is now known as the “Naughty Corner”).

In the restaurant world, “you’re seeing that ‘adding to the local tapestry’ thing a lot in food and drink”, says Wee Teng Wen, founder of The Lo & Behold Group. Wee has helped to create some of the city’s favourite addresses: Odette, the modern fine-dining venue, took home the “number-one in Asia” kudos at the 2019 San Pellegrino World’s Best awards. (His wife, Dawn Ng, is one of Singapore’s few internationally collected and represented artists; a large installation of her work graced the National Gallery Singapore’s atrium during the Fair.)

“Chefs are reviving old histories, old recipes,” he continues – and doing innovative new things with them. He and Alan Lo both cite Malcolm Lee, a young local who made his name reinterpreting the homey Straits-Chinese dishes of his childhood at a restaurant called Candlenut. Last year Candlenut’s business partner, Christina Ong (she of COMO hotels fame), also backed Lee’s new venture, Pangium, in a stunning space overlooking the city’s Botanic Gardens. “It’s Straits fine degustation – tasting menus done in a way no one else has,” says Wee.

Singaporeans have COMO’s Ong to thank in part for the evolution of Dempsey Hill, the leafy colonial army barracks-turned-lifestyle destination off Holland Road. Not that Singapore’s urban critical mass is ever especially overwhelming, the clingy humidity notwithstanding; but Dempsey has always been a shady, sedate reprieve atop its hill off Holland Road. Plane trees, their trunks covered in ferns, spread wide, dappled shade over green lawns between the barracks buildings, whose red-tiled roofs and whitewashed colonnades cast a faint bygone-era energetic shadow. Its cafés, shops and restaurants have historically been of varying quality but enduringly popular with the city’s Anglo-Euro expat community (for every wagyu burger or margarita joint, a fancy kids’ clobber boutique). Since about 2012, however, Ong has been upgrading in calculated increments. She partnered with Jean-Georges Vongerichten on The Dempsey Cookhouse & Bar, in the same barracks that holds Candlenut; London’s Dover Street Market is now in the one across from it. Culina, her cushy bistro-traiteur – already a Dempsey stalwart for some years – was fitted into larger, slicker premises alongside her other venues. Grandiflora, Sydney’s famous floral designers, now has a kiosk. The whole is known as COMO Dempsey, and has become a destination in its own right.

The halo effect has drawn other names. Australian chef Dave Pynt’s unique carnivore-centric take on modern American barbecue at his restaurant, Burnt Ends, has a diehard following in Singapore and beyond (and earned him a Michelin star). Last year he moved the restaurant’s Chinatown digs to a spectacular – and 10 times larger – space in Dempsey: all wood cladding, bold hanging lights, gleaming copper details and a long, long dining bar. “So much money has poured into Singapore,” Pynt says. “The volume of people who come through your door… they’re quite casual here, you know, but they’ve got budgets.”

Important multinational lifestyle hotel brands are betting on these budgets. The Standard and Edition Hotels groups have planted flags in the vicinity of mall-lined Orchard Road; both will open by early 2024. Talk on the ground has it that Ennismore’s The Hoxton has been in talks about a site in Jalan Besar, east of the CBD (a neighbourhood described by one local friend as “the Shoreditch of Singapore, such as that is”). Raffles reopened in late 2019 after a two-year, multimillion-pound renovation, and has never been better: all its verandas, spinning fans and four-poster-bed charms intact, but with showcase-y new bars and restaurants, a huge spa and glittering public spaces. A second Raffles, this one a resort, is being developed amid the yacht clubs and tony apartment complexes of Sentosa Island, off Singapore’s south coast.

The Artling’s Gajardo, meanwhile, is busy installing the art collection she was commissioned to create for the Mondrian Singapore Duxton. The new-build tower rises 13 storeys above Tanjong Pagar, a Chinatown-adjacent neighbourhood of weaving, shophouse-lined streets, small parks and fragrant temples that is historically one of Singapore’s primary nightlife hubs; an ace location, in other words. When it opens next month – with 302 rooms and suites, multiple restaurants and bars, a rooftop pool, and art by the likes of Ian Davenport and Andre Wee adorning its walls – the Mondrian will offer experiences that tie guests into the culture of the surrounding streets: hawker centre deep-dives, cult cocktail bars and small museums.

Lo & Behold’s Wee is already a hotelier; the Group opened the 37-room Warehouse Hotel, in a listed former go-down (local vernacular for a shipping warehouse) that was once a discothèque, in 2017, and it remains one of the city’s cooler stays. These days, he’s contending with co-living spaces, which are part of the company’s most ambitious project to date: the redevelopment of a former girls’ school, a full 230,000sq ft of empty space near Robertson Quay, a street or so away from the Singapore River. “The scale is kind of scary,” he admits with a smile. “But it goes back to what we do as a group, which is always about filling the gaps in the lifestyle ecosystem.” When it’s finished – some time next year, Wee reckons – the site will include boutiques with local designers and makers as tenants, a few curated eating and drinking outlets (of course), and an art exhibition and education space in the old hall. Lo & Behold will operate a couple of these restaurants; the rest are tendered out. “There are so many great local creatives and entrepreneurs – in retail, wellness, design – who are just completely off the radar,” Wee says. “Most don’t fit into the mall thing, which is still the primary retail platform, so they’re dislocated all over the city. The idea is to bring them together.

“I’m excited about this neighbourhood,” he says earnestly, warming to a topic he knows more about than most Singaporeans. “It’s a good expat mix; it’s equidistant between Orchard Road and the CBD. But it’s very under-served. Because most of the F&B runs along the quay, there’s no nucleus; we want to create that nucleus.” Worth revisiting the city in a year’s time again, then – déjà vu or no.



When Payal Kapadia finally took her Cannes Grand Prix-winning film All We Imagine as Light to Mumbai, it felt like a long-awaited homecoming. In the place she calls home, and where the film is set, it opened the Mami film festival in the historic art deco Regal cinema, one of the last remaining single screens in the city.

The late October weather was oppressively warm, but it also rained that day, notching up the humidity. Evoking sweaty train rides and pouring monsoon rains, it was a fitting reflection of the atmospheric imagery in Kapadia’s film.

“It was super nice,” recalls the writer-director from her home in Mumbai. “Finally the film is back where it belongs, and I’m very happy that people took very different things from it.”

Since Cannes, Kapadia has been travelling the world as her Malayalam-language film has become a festival darling, receiving near-unanimous critical acclaim, collecting awards and generating Oscar buzz. For Kapadia, an up-and-coming filmmaker who made her debut feature film on a shoestring budget, this level of success has come suddenly.

However, she is no stranger to Cannes. In 2017 her short film “Afternoon Clouds” was included in a section for new talent, and in 2021 her hybrid docu-fiction A Night of Knowing Nothing, set amid student protests at her alma mater, appeared in the Directors’ Fortnight section and won the L’Oeil d’or award.

But her real exposure into the limelight came only this year, as All We Imagine as Light, which was largely produced and financed in France, became the first Indian film to appear in Cannes’ main competition in 30 years. Kapadia lays the blame for this dearth firmly with the festival. “I don’t know why they didn’t choose other Indian films,” she says, mildly exasperated. “We make really good films, so that’s on them . . . Eeb Allay Ooo! by Prateek Vats was in the Berlin Film Festival’s Panorama section in 2020 — it’s a great film. Rima Das makes amazing work. Anamika Haksar’s films are absolutely radical — so other festivals have been selecting Indian films regularly.”

All We Imagine as Light follows two Malayali nurses from Kerala — Prabha (played by Kani Kusruti) and Anu (Divya Prabha) — who work in a Mumbai hospital and share a crammed and wind-battered flat with a pregnant cat. Prabha is tightly wound to the point of sullenness and is a stickler for morality. Her husband purportedly lives in Germany but hasn’t been in touch for more than a year. The younger Anu, on the other hand, is a free spirit who secretly sexts with her boyfriend. What’s more, she is Hindu and he is Muslim, something frowned upon or even restricted by law in parts of India (though not in Mumbai). She also slips pregnancy pills under the counter to women patients who have little reproductive agency. When the duo’s mutual friend Parvati, a hospital cook, is forced to move because of gentrification, Anu and Prabha embark on a road trip to help her settle back into her village.

The film captures the push and pull of existential challenges in the big city and ponders questions of identity, belonging and displacement. Shot in gauzy shades of blue and ochre, Mumbai serves as a muted backdrop as Kapadia quietly ruminates on life on its peripheries.

She admits she doesn’t know how to define her film, but the women at its centre epitomise the hardworking migrant labour that powers one of the world’s largest metropolises. This may explain its broad appeal. “I think people from big cities like New York and Paris identified with it,” she says. “This thing about happenstance female friendships in such places is something that I think speaks to everybody.”

Kapadia was interested in exploring the intergenerational friendship between the three women and wanted to dissect the question of love and desire in South Asian households. “Prabha’s relationship has this kind of legitimacy because she’s a married woman. But Anu is in love with a boy that nobody will accept. Even though she’s in love, it’s [considered] illegitimate,” she says.

The secondary character of Parvati grew from Kapadia’s urge to portray Mumbai’s gentrification. She says that moving back to the city after studying in the neighbouring city of Pune, she was shocked to see how much Mumbai had changed. “The areas I grew up in — Lower Parel and Dadar — had especially gone through a kind of violent gentrification. I felt that I needed to have a character who embodied the pain of that,” she says.

She also wanted to unpick complex identity issues in multicultural Indian society. “I was interested in this odd friendship between a Marathi cook [Parvati] and a Malayali nurse [Prabha], which in real life is not very common. In my utopian imagination, I wanted to say that this could be a possibility. Because I think that in India identity comes in the way of a lot of things. At least in friendship, it shouldn’t be the case — that’s my hope,” she adds.

While global and Indian festival audiences and critics took to the film immediately, All We Imagine as Light faced public criticism from an unlikely source. The Film Federation of India (FFI), when considering India’s submission for best international feature at next year’s Oscars, commented that Kapadia’s film felt like “a European film taking place in India”. The honour was given instead to Kiran Rao’s feminist dramedy Laapataa Ladies.

Although she has cited European auteurs such as Chantal Akerman and Agnès Varda as influences for their blending of fiction and documentary, Kapadia’s sensibilities are clearly grounded in India. Her film studies curriculum was packed with the work of the masters of Indian Parallel Cinema, a movement noted for its unvarnished realism that began in the 1950s with the seminal Satyajit Ray and continued through to the 1980s with luminaries such as Mani Kaul and Shyam Benegal.

Kapadia was influenced by the work of Govindan Aravindan and John Abraham, who made probing films about the human psyche on frighteningly small budgets. Abraham’s filmmaking style especially fascinated her. “I was inspired by his technique — editing, sound design and the use of stop-motion,” she says. “He packs in small moments of delight in very political films.”

Emulating this approach, Kapadia used a handheld DSLR camera to capture the everyday Mumbai street scenes her film opens with — workers unloading produce early in the morning, sellers sorting their wares, the throng of humanity on trains and at festival time. Shooting on tightly packed streets made her more aware of their personal space, she says. “I’ve always been a bit shy to put cameras in people’s faces. I tried to be mindful and the process taught me to be not intrusive.”

What emerges on screen is the gaze of a filmmaker capable of seeing humanity in the tiniest details of her subjects, bringing together elements of Indian arthouse and the European New Wave.

For Kapadia, it was vital for her that All We Imagine as Light got a theatrical release. “I hope the [success] sends a signal that films like mine are worth funding and distributing,” she says. “It is really important to me that the film has a life in cinemas so its journey is truly complete, unlike dumping it directly in streaming platforms.”

‘All We Imagine as Light’ is in UK cinemas from November 29

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FTWeekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



The head of Disney and Reliance Industries’ newly merged $8.5bn Indian entertainment titan plans to invest and “revitalise” television in the world’s most populous country even as western media organisations increasingly see it as a dying medium.

Uday Shankar, vice-chair of Jio Star — the freshly formed company whose merger was completed on Thursday — said traditional television revenue could experience “significant double-digit growth within the next several years” on the back of fresh investment in innovative content ranging from dramas to soaps.

“There is this whole narrative that television is dead and it’s all about streaming,” Shankar told the Financial Times in Mumbai in his first interview since the combination was approved by India’s regulators. “Television in this country for sure is not dead.”

While lagging growth in online streaming, Shankar pointed to a still robust linear pay-TV industry as more Indians steadily join the middle class.

EY predicts TV revenue in India, from subscribers and advertising, will increase by 10 per cent to $9bn in the three years through to 2026, while TV ownership will climb at a similar pace to reach 202mn sets.

“A large number of people are coming into the economic mainstream every year,” Shankar said. “One of the aspirational items of consumption that they acquire, or they want to acquire, is a TV.”

Shankar’s comments came as he outlined his plans after Disney and Reliance, the conglomerate run by Asia’s wealthiest man Mukesh Ambani that spans petrochemicals, retail and telecoms, agreed earlier this year to combine their Indian entertainment assets.

The combined entity has more than 100 television stations and more than 50mn streaming subscribers.

“It’s a monster merger . . . there is no competition,” said Shankar, a media industry veteran who will run the company, which is chaired by Ambani’s wife, Nita. “We have to reinvent the market and make it much bigger.”

The joint venture came together earlier this year after Disney battled to gain traction in India’s huge cricket and film markets, which have both tempted and thwarted global media majors who have struggled with highly cost-conscious audiences and fierce local competition.

After Disney acquired Star India in 2019 from Fox, the business became a financial drag. Internal debate swirled on whether to exit the country entirely, particularly after Ambani’s Reliance won the streaming rights to the wildly popular Indian Premier League short-format cricket tournament.

The new Jio Star, formed from these lossmaking media businesses, aims to hit profitability within five years. Investment bank Jefferies has compared its control over Indian sports rights to that of ESPN in the US and Sky Sports in the UK.

The media group, which has a roughly 35 per cent market share in TV, won over competition authorities after promising to shed a handful of regional TV channels and not bundle advertisements across its cricket portfolio or to raise rates exponentially.

Shankar said that “dominance in sports is highly overrated” and criticism of Disney and Reliance’s hold was “somewhat uninformed because sports rights in this country are awarded to you for a frighteningly short period of time — it’s anything from three to five years”.

Other Indian media houses have also attempted to downplay the industry impact of the merger.

Punit Goenka, chief executive of Zee Entertainment, whose long-planned tie-up with Sony would have created a $10bn rival to Jio Star before it acrimoniously collapsed earlier this year, said he did not expect to see much change after competing with the duo previously as independent companies.

“Their entire strategy is sports-focused whereas our strategy is completely entertainment-focused and, therefore, I do not think that we are really competing in that space or that segment,” he said on an earnings call last month.

“They may have a little bit more leverage on the advertising dollars that they can command given that they may have a significantly higher market share.”



Standing on his office balcony in India’s searing afternoon heat, veteran civil servant K Rajaraman gestures across a panoramic sweep of cranes. They tower over the skeletal structures of tower blocks and a nearly finished metro system. This 886-acre work-in-progress is Gujarat International Finance Tec-City — also known as GIFT City — India’s most ambitiously business-friendly project to date.

Fast-talking Rajaraman, who heads the regulator that oversees the onshore tax haven, recently returned from the US where he was drumming up more investment. International interest, he says, is “proof of the pudding” that it will be a success. The number of organisations flocking to the city — a long-standing pet project of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and created in his home state — already exceeds 700.

This is even more impressive given GIFT City’s location in one of India’s few dry states. It is a world away from the choked up chaos and energetic drive of cosmopolitan financial capital Mumbai, with its beery taprooms and fine dining.

Gujarat, which juts out into the sea in north-west India, is not on most tourist to-do lists — though it contains a national park in the south that is the last known natural habitat of the Asiatic lion. The state is largely a vast, alluvial plain with some low mountains. It is considered conservative and business focused.

Fittingly, GIFT city, which sits on the banks of the Sabarmati River in a flat and dusty landscape, offers something more pragmatic than Mumbai’s buzzing nightlife. As a special economic zone, it avoids India’s onerous red tape and strict capital controls, while granting 100 per cent tax exemptions over 10 of 15 years. Those sweeteners have lured businesses from JPMorgan to HSBC as well as Australian universities, insurance houses, ship leasers and local tech titans Infosys and Wipro.

Already, it is rising up the Global Financial Centres Index, which ranks competitiveness in over hundred hubs, from 92 three years ago to 52. That places it ahead of Mumbai.

“It’s Modi’s baby and allows his administration to say they are opening up,” said one western diplomat who has visited. Still, they pointed out that some foreign businesses were shying away because the city is in “the middle of nowhere”. “Are top investment bankers going to relocate there with limited nightlife and a few mid-range hotels?” they added.

Although more than 20,000 employees already work here, the area remains eerily quiet. Well paved roads carry little traffic. Entertainment options have been slow to arrive. “It’s a chicken and egg situation,” said an executive who has set up a new office in the city. He estimates it will take at least five years for the city’s social element to liven up.

There have already been some compromises over Gujarat’s prohibitive laws. Late last year the state government published guidelines that in theory allow the sale of alcohol in parts of the city. However this message has not reached everyone. The staff at one hotel with a supposed liquor licence looked puzzled by my thirsty enquiries.

A fund manager preparing to set up shop here compares the district’s early days to those of Dubai, another arid and previously alcohol-free financial hotspot. “Dubai initially was not very open to that,” they said, acknowledging that good staffing would remain a “challenge”. “We have a massive operation in Mumbai, so there’s going to be a ton of support out of there initially.”

The long-term political viability of GIFT City has also come into question after a weakened Modi returned to power following a worse than expected electoral showing earlier in the year. Now beholden to coalition parties during his third term, some observers wonder if the project will survive should India’s opposition eventually come back to power.

Rajaraman brushes aside such concerns, calling the economic transformation across the country “unstoppable” and the new city’s growth a key part of that drive. No matter who has been in power, he says, “the Indian reform story has been continuous for decades”.

chris.kay@ft.com



Browse the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) web pages of corporate India and you may notice the frequent absence of one word: “caste”.

“Gender”, “sexuality”, “physical ability” and “race” all get regular mentions on these public-facing sites, but “caste” — which negatively affects the lives of hundreds of millions of Indians — is usually missing.

Occasionally, the term can be found in downloadable documents, such as a company’s code of conduct. But, often, it is omitted there, too.

“It’s not surprising — it’s not a topic most Indian companies want to talk about,” says Christina Dhanuja, a DEI-caste strategist based in Chennai, South India.

Caste — an ancient system of social hierarchy based on purity and heredity — is a sensitive topic in India because discussing it also means talking about the privilege of the upper castes and the role of the country’s dominant religion, Hinduism.

It is also a subject that induces fatigue, because much has already been tried. India banned caste-based discrimination when it wrote its new constitution after independence in 1947 and it reserves 50 per cent of government jobs and university places for marginalised groups.

But these quotas are contentious and breed resentment among those who feel they cannot land coveted government jobs as a result. “It’s why our officials are so inefficient,” the boss of a chartered accountancy company told the FT recently.

With these measures failing to bring about equality or the demise of caste, many have placed their hopes in economic growth and modernisation. Yet, increasingly, this appears to have been a false hope and caste is now the lens through which many are viewing economic inequality.

“An undeniably unique feature of economic inequalities in India is that they are closely intertwined with the deeply rooted caste system,” say economists including Thomas Piketty in a recent report for the World Inequality Lab (WIL), a Paris-based research organisation.

Indeed, it is such a feature that, this month, the south Indian state of Telangana became the third to hold a caste census, to establish which communities are being left behind.

India’s opposition parties are also calling for a national caste census — to which the ruling Bharatiya Janata party may have to agree, given that low-caste Indians make up the majority of the population.

Caste was first laid out in Hindu scripture 3,000 years ago and has evolved into a hierarchy of four levels: Brahmins, or priests, at the top; followed by rulers and warriors; then merchants and labourers; and, below all, the Dalits, or untouchables.

Priests and warriors, together, are referred to as the upper castes and they own about 55 per cent of the country’s wealth, according to the WIL. They are thought to account for about 20 per cent of the population, but no one knows for sure because the last caste census was in 1931.

Dalits account for about 16 per cent of the population, or 220mn people, and can still face exclusion or even violence because of their caste, especially in rural areas. Labourers — who can also face discrimination — account for about 50 per cent, or 700mn people.

Caste is not as strictly enforced in cities, but it still plays a role in almost all social and economic relationships.

“People in companies like to say they are caste blind but, in reality, caste is everywhere,” says Meenakshi, a DEI expert with the Chennai-based human resources consultancy Kelp who prefers not to give a surname because of its privileged caste associations.

Many people still get asked their caste in job interviews and some Brahmin groups organise Brahmin-only job fairs.

One CEO of an investment firm recently told the FT that he did not feel bad about the caste imbalance at his firm because “Dalits have the quota system for their jobs”. He added that his company has a corporate social responsibility policy that assists marginalised communities through charity.

DEI principles finally arrived in India via multinational companies a few years ago, and have taken off both as corporate policy and as a public relations tactic.

However, Meenakshi says its provenance meant it came with priorities dictated by the west: it gave huge importance to issues such as women and race, but largely skipped over the issue of caste.

Many Indian companies have stuck with this template, but Meenakshi, Dhanuja and others want to “Indianise” the model so it incorporates caste at a high level.

This, they argue, will be good for the companies involved, unlocking wider pools of talent and a greater diversity of views. They point to various studies by McKinsey, the management consultancy, showing that the more racially and gender diverse company is, the better it performs.

Similarly, in 2019, the Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore released a paper showing that, when two companies dominated by different castes merge or acquire one another, they generate more market value then when two companies dominated by the same caste unite. However, the paper also noted that most companies prefer to merge with or buy entities with the same caste profile.

This search for sameness affects Indian companies’ hiring, too. In 2012, Canadian researchers found that 91 per cent of board directors in India’s top 1,000 companies came from the top two castes.

And a study by Jawaharlal Nehru University, in that same year, showed that candidates with high-caste Hindu names were 60 per cent more likely to be called for interview than people with low-caste names if otherwise identical CVs were submitted.

Statistics on the exact make-up of organisations today are impossible to find because very few companies keep records on caste. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that lower castes are vastly unrepresented in well-paid jobs.

“In an office of one hundred, you might not find a single Dalit,” says Vaibhav Wankede, a marketing executive from Mumbai who has written about the difficulties of being lower caste in white collar workplaces.

He says that Dalits often feel they need to mask their identity at work. “It’s everything from the food we eat, to the holidays we celebrate — all of that is a marker of who we are and a potential reason for exclusion,” Wankede explains, adding that “most Dalits just try to keep their heads down and get on with the work.”

To address the issue, Dhanuja suggests starting with something small like a survey, and then building up to in-person awareness sessions where the impact of caste is discussed.

But she says the way managers ultimately decide to bring caste into their DEI polices depends on the industry, the composition of their current staff, and what goals they set.

Meenakshi advocates a similar approach, focusing on teaching people what casteism looks like, and rethinking hiring practices so companies spot candidates who have skills they really need.

“All too often, the definition of merit is shaped by the skills upper-caste candidates tend to have: good spoken English, social confidence,” Meenakshi cautions — adding that companies should not discount the tenacity and hard work it takes for a lower-caste candidate to get to the same interview as higher-caste candidates.

Lastly, Dhanuja says companies should consider putting out caste-positive jobs ads, explicitly stating that roles are open to people of Dalit or other marginalised backgrounds.

She would, she says, go further and set targets for lower-caste hires, but she knows from quotas in the state sector that this can easily fail if HR managers are unsupportive.

For companies that think this all sounds too much like hard work, Dhanuja points out that caste awareness is on the rise and failure to adapt is risky. “If a company doesn’t want to do anything about it, they are just exposing themselves to law suits and reputational damage,” she warns.

But Pratap Tambe — a manager at Tata Consultancy Services and a frequent speaker on caste — is less convinced. He warns that any sudden shifts could result in a “backlash from negatively impacted interests” and a “high risk” of false discrimination allegations.

​Letter in response to this article:

Loans drive progress in India’s caste system / From Sunil Choudhary and Gil Yaron



In “Dream Houses”, a 1969 film by Nalini Malani, the promise of social housing in newly independent India is conjured through a stop-motion animation of an architectural model in iridescent colours. But seven years later, in Malani’s dual-channel video installation “Utopia”, its pulsing optimism is undercut by black-and-white footage of a woman in a high-rise gazing down at condemned shacks. The ironic juxtaposition reflects the crushing disillusionment triggered in 1975 by prime minister Indira Gandhi’s state of emergency.

Alongside a programme of forced sterilisation to target population growth, Malani tells me in London, the prime minister’s son, Sanjay Gandhi, moved to “aestheticise the city and remove all the slums”. One where she was filming in Mumbai was razed overnight. For artists such as Malani, this trampling of civil liberties crystallised the shocking collapse of Nehruvian democratic ideals since independence.

The emergency of 1975-77 is the starting point for The Imaginary Institution of India: Art 1975-1998, a cogent and compelling group exhibition at the Barbican Gallery in London, in collaboration with the Kiran Nadar Museum of Art in New Delhi. This private museum loaned more than half of the 150 works by 30 artists in a show focused on a seminal period that has disturbing echoes today. A parallel film season, Rewriting the Rules: Pioneering Indian Cinema after 1970, runs to December 12.

Although 1947, and the generational trauma of partition, tend to be seen as paramount, says Shanay Jhaveri, the show’s curator and Barbican head of visual arts, the emergency was a watershed. As artists confronted the post-independence realities of India’s failing infrastructure, population explosion, poverty and unrest, he tells me, “utopian ideals dissipated; art history gets entwined with social history.”

Fear of repression pervades the desolate streets in Gulammohammed Sheikh’s oil painting “Speechless City” (1975), deserted but for marauding animals against a blood-orange background. Sheikh, who had studied in London, was among figurative painters who drew on Indian miniatures for their urban narratives. Others turned to satire and caricature, from Vivan Sundaram’s scabrous pastel and ink work of Gandhi and son as grotesque gangsters, “The Pair” (1976), to Rameshwar Broota’s brilliantly economical oil painting on corrupt power, “Reconstruction” (1977), in which an arrogantly enthroned general intimidates the faceless minions around him.

Observing the widening gap between vaunted progress and those left behind, artists were drawn to the forgotten. In Sudhir Patwardhan’s oil painting “Dhakka” (1977), a muscular labourer’s back fills the canvas as he bends wearily to pick up his clothes, while in the craggy landscape of beggars and dejected workers in “Overbridge” (1981), the sumptuous blue of a man’s shirt forces the viewer’s gaze to his haunted face.

Like Patwardhan, Gieve Patel earned his living as a doctor in Mumbai, before commercial galleries opened in India. “Off Lamington Road” (1982-86) fixes in pastel colours the gamut of ecstasy and desperation he witnessed. In an alley crowded with goats and scooters, a man collapses. A woman lies bleeding. Others dance joyously amid the destitute. In the show’s opening oil painting, the chatting workers in Patel’s “Two Men With Hand Cart” (1979) are overshadowed by skyscrapers. Yet the pop-art pink of a monsoon sunset bathes the work in ebullient beauty and hope.

In bleak contrast are Savindra Sawarkar’s etchings of Dalit pariahs weighed down by the pots and brooms marking their so-called untouchability, and Pablo Bartholomew’s 1984 photographs of the aftermath of the Union Carbide gas disaster in Bhopal. In an unforgettable close-up, a father’s disembodied hand reaches towards a child’s face protruding, with sightlessly open eyes, from the dirt.

The link between art and activism becomes explicit in staged photography. Sheba Chhachhi’s black-and-white series Seven Lives and a Dream (1980-91) combines documentary images of anti-dowry demonstrations with staged portraits of women activists. Sunil Gupta’s Exiles (1987) pictures gay men at public monuments, such as a couple embracing at India Gate. Although homosexuality was decriminalised in 2018, the artist notes in the catalogue, the law “still only allow[s] gay sex in private”. Bhupen Khakhar skewers such absurdities in his oil painting “Two Men in Benares” (1982), in which a naked gay couple, penises erect, embrace furtively in the shadows while, in a distant temple, a holy man prostrates himself before a shiva lingam — a sacred phallus.

While the fast-expanding metropolis inspired art, urban artists — many of them privileged — championed rural and Adivasi (indigenous) art. Jyoti Bhatt’s photography documented disappearing traditions, while others gave ancient arts a contemporary edge, whether Meera Mukherjee’s beguiling, small-scale lost-wax bronze sculptures, or Himmat Shah’s modernist-inflected terracotta heads. Not only do Jagdish Swaminathan’s abstract canvases meld colour-field painting with tribal motifs, but as founding director of the Bharat Bhavan arts complex in Bhopal in 1982, he showed Adivasi art alongside that of contemporary artists — a radical approach he termed “contemporaneity”.

The largely wall-based works give way to installations in the 1990s, as the dual rise of communalism and consumerism transfigured art. MF Husain’s acrylic painting “Safdar Hashmi” (1989), depicting a murdered playwright with twisted limbs, is a harbinger of violence to come. Arpita Singh’s oil painting “My Mother” (1993) captures the riots that swept the country after the Ayodhya mosque was razed by a Hindu mob in 1992; its woman in white frowns amid the shrouded bodies lined up on the ground as green-uniformed militiamen wreak havoc. In the saturated, dreamlike colour of Sheikh’s oil painting “How Can You Sleep Tonight?” (1994-95), a couple lying awake in the moonlight embody a restless call to conscience.

A host of artists responded to turbulent times by abandoning figurative painting altogether. Rummana Hussain’s shattered terracotta pots, from which red powder spills like blood, are a visceral response to the carnage she fled in Mumbai, while Sheela Gowda’s cow dung sculptures, from patties to bricks, resonate with the cow’s associations to women’s work and non-violence. The material clashes with the spiritual in NN Rimzon’s “The Tools” (1993), whose fibreglass figure with arms raised in devotion stands in a ring of rusting agricultural implements that could become cudgels. Home ceases to be a refuge in “House” (1994), an installation by the erstwhile caricaturist Sundaram, in which a fire blazes on a video at the heart of a cuboid shack, while saws and hammers are embedded in the walls outside, along with hacked-off limbs.

Malani’s video installation, “Remembering Toba Tek Singh” (1998), responds to the show’s final event: the underground nuclear tests in Pokhran, Rajasthan, that were variously met with national pride and protests. Twelve monitors in refugees’ tin trunks play archival footage of Partition, of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and other nuclear explosions and refugee flows, while a video triptych stages a dialogue between India and Pakistan through two women actors fearful of a dawning nuclear age.

If Malani’s feat of memory charts how far the country had strayed from its founding ideals half a century after independence, this fine show attests to the inspired range, and formal inventiveness, of the artistic response.

To January 5 2025, barbican.org.uk



The decades-old coal-fired Trombay power plant stands on Mumbai’s eastern waterfront, shrouded in smoggy haze and flanked by oil refineries. The facility — a potent symbol of an enduring reliance on polluting energy — fuels the skyscrapers and homes of India’s financial capital.

India’s energy-hungry economy is sucking up more electricity than its green sources can provide, despite the billions of dollars invested in solar and wind farms by conglomerates such as Adani Group and Tata Sons, whose energy arm Tata Power operates the Trombay plant.

That means the world’s third-largest carbon emitter, after the US and China, remains wedded to its abundant coal power for more than 70 per cent of its electricity generation.

At the same time, the country is being ravaged by weather extremes from the world’s changing climate. Punishing heatwaves, for example, have prompted better off citizens to invest in air conditioners, exacerbating the problem.

“India’s situation is actually highlighting the complexity of energy transition,” says Nandini Das, a climate and energy economist at Climate Analytics, a research institute. “India still has a very deep focus on coal.”

The problem is acute for the country as it industrialises its economy, subsidising both carbon-heavy businesses and renewable sectors to promote their growth, in a bid to become a manufacturing hub that can steal market share from its Asian rival, China.

Over the past three years, this has helped to turn solar and wind energy into its cheapest form of electricity.

The switch came about after Prime Minister Narendra Modi set out plans to reach net zero by 2070 and his administration began pushing to make renewable sources half the energy mix by 2030.

“Currently, electricity from large renewable energy plants is much cheaper than new coal-based power plants, making it a win-win for both [the] climate and the economy,” says Nandikesh Sivalingam, director at the Center for Research on Energy and Clean Air, a research organisation.

However, India’s increasing use of coal to make up for shortfalls in electricity drove production and imports to a record in the first half of 2024, and is a “drag” on its green ambitions, according to scientific group Climate Action Tracker. It rates the nation’s climate targets and climate action as “highly insufficient”.

India’s share of global greenhouse gas emissions increased to 7.5 per cent in 2022, from 6.7 per cent in 2019, according to rating agency Moody’s, which now forecasts that power consumption will rise 46 per cent to 2,524 terawatt hours by 2031.

The agency also estimates that India will need extra funding of up to $215bn over the next seven years to bridge its renewable financing gap so that it can install around 44 gigawatts each year to hit its target of 500GW of green energy.

Christian de Guzman, senior vice-president at Moody’s, says that, while India’s progress has been “tangible and . . . frankly, quite impressive given the pace of growth in this economy, they’re not investing enough basically to meet their medium-term decarbonisation goals”.

Modi’s government, which faces multiple spending demands, cannot be expected to “fully plug” that amount, de Guzman adds.

India’s green transition is also clashing with political and economic realities. Only about 2 per cent of passenger vehicles sold in India are battery-powered. They are more expensive than combustion-engine vehicles and their charging and battery-swapping infrastructure is limited, hindering the industry’s growth in a country where GDP per capital is less than $3,000.

At the same time, India faces an employment crisis with a chronic shortage of formal jobs, raising questions about how it will provide work for millions, as well as support farmers. Agriculture accounts for about 22 per cent of India’s emissions, which is double the world average, with livestock’s methane emissions and dairy making significant contributions, Moody’s says.

“The agenda of decarbonisation should not end up costing us,” argues Amir Bazaz, head of infrastructure and climate at the Indian Institute for Human Settlements.

Still, the world’s most populous nation faces pressure from abroad and Indian officials bristle when questioned on their climate commitments. They say developed nations are responsible for historical emissions and countries such as India are morally right to use whatever energy source is readily available so they can catch up economically.

Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman recently denounced the EU’s planned carbon tax on imports, which will be levied from 2026, as “stifling”.

“We keep reminding ourselves in India that the emissions per capita is only a third of what the average emission per capita is globally,” she told the Financial Times’ Energy Transition Summit India in New Delhi in October.

But Das at Climate Analytics calls that mindset “very naive”, given India’s extreme climate vulnerability, as evidenced by increasing flooding and brutal temperatures.

In August, however, PM Prasad, chair of state-owned Coal India, which accounts for about 80 per cent of the country’s output, said his “vision is to ensure that there is no shortage of coal” and that “despite the country’s deep commitment to renewable energy, for climate change considerations, coal [will] continue to be pivotal for [a] few more years”.

With power cuts disrupting even India’s most affluent cities, Modi’s government is on board with that future, too. It has drawn out the lifespan of ageing thermal plants and wants to open 100 new coal mines with a production capacity of 500mn tonnes per annum by 2030 — to achieve Aatmanirbhar Bharat, or ‘a self-reliant India’, in fossil-fuel power generation.

“We are going to add more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere; it’s us who are going to be impacted,” says Das. “It’s not that by doing this we are giving [developed nations] some lesson, saying ‘now it’s our turn’. It’s not going to work that way.”



The writer is senior fellow, Peterson Institute for International Economics, former chief economic adviser to the Indian government and adviser to the government of Tamil Nadu

India’s rise as a major economy has long been held back by its failure to develop a robust manufacturing sector. The share of manufacturing in GDP has remained stubbornly low, even declining over the past decade despite the government’s enormous subsidy programme to encourage companies to “Make in India”. Can this failure be reversed, given the opportunity created by the stampede of capital away from China?

There are glimmers of hope. One state in southern India — Tamil Nadu — is experiencing a manufacturing boom, attracting the likes of Cisco, Corning, Foxconn, Ford, Google, Tata Electronics and Tata Jaguar Land Rover, and Nike suppliers. These investments are integrating India into global supply chains for electronics, automotives and footwear. What is the secret to its success?

There’s scope. The state’s manufacturing investments encompass a much wider range than elsewhere in India, notably including labour-intensive activities. This is puzzling, since Tamil Nadu is among the richest states in the country. So how can it attract labour-intensive manufacturing while much poorer states cannot? Essentially, because factories have been willing to tap pools of lower-wage workers, such as migrants from other Indian states and women. In fact, 40 per cent of all women employed in factories in India are in Tamil Nadu.

Then there’s scale. Several of the new projects will provide employment in the tens of thousands. This is astonishing in a country where the median company in labour-intensive industries employs just 21 workers, making it too small to be globally competitive.

Tamil Nadu — unlike India more generally — has also created the perception that it is a relatively easy place to do business. The state has long had a well-developed educational system, churning out hundreds of thousands of engineering graduates every year. This had made it the country’s manufacturing powerhouse, especially in automobiles and auto parts, which attracted considerable FDI in the boom years of the noughties. In addition, it offers generous incentives to investors.

But such incentives are available throughout India. The state’s talented engineers could be employed elsewhere. In Tamil Nadu, however, the state government has also grasped the critical importance of minimising risks to investors. There is a political consensus that once investors set up shop, they should not be subject to policy reversals, neglect, or discrimination.

Two examples are illustrative. In 2021, a food poisoning incident at an electronics plant seemed poised to become a full-scale political incident. The government swung into action, working with both capital and labour. It helped the victims speedily, thereby ensuring minimal operational disruption for the employer, and ensured that safety standards were upgraded.

Also in 2021, Ford announced it needed to shut production in the state. The Tamil Nadu government recognised market realities and helped Ford exit by resolving complex labour and land issues. That experience convinced Ford that risks of doing business there were low. So when the company decided this year to make a new investment in India, it again chose the southern state. The concept that easy exits incentivise enthusiastic entry has not been easy for Indian policymakers to grasp.

If India is to develop its manufacturing sector, this Tamil Nadu experience must be replicated in the poorer, populous heartland states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, with their cheaper labour pools. To be sure, the governance challenges will be immense and India’s geopolitical window will not remain open forever. But the model is there for emulation.

Josh Felman of Principal JH Consulting contributed to this article



Trading in Indian food delivery app Swiggy begins on Wednesday in a $1.3bn initial public offering that investors have already given a lukewarm reception, as it tries to grow in a fiercely competitive sector.

On Friday, institutional investors shored up Swiggy’s listing on its final subscription day as the Bengaluru-based company chased a valuation of about $11.2bn.

Swiggy’s listing — India’s second-largest this year — received bids more than three times the shares on offer, with the retail portion just covered.

It is one of a glut of Indian companies that rushed to list and capitalise on elevated valuations this year as the country’s stock market soared.

But Swiggy’s IPO, with early backers including Tencent and venture capital fund Accel cashing out, has landed against a backdrop of dismal earnings across corporate India. The benchmark Nifty 50 index has fallen 3.5 per cent over the past month with foreign investors dumping a record $11.2bn of Indian equities in October.

It comes just weeks after Hyundai’s tepid $3.3bn float of its Indian business, which was Asia’s largest IPO this year. While Swiggy slightly outperformed Hyundai’s ratios, it was underwhelming compared to earlier Indian sales that drew in fevered buying from local investors.

Operating in more than 600 cities in India, Swiggy’s losses widened 8 per cent to Rs6.1bn ($72mn) in the three months through June from a year earlier, as it faces strong competition from the industry’s profitable and dominant market leader Zomato, as well as newer challengers such as Zepto.

“It’s still some time away before Swiggy reports a strong performance,” said Karan Taurani, a Mumbai-based analyst at Elara Capital. He added that the company’s “fair” valuation at a roughly 60 per cent discount to Zomato leaves little “upside” ahead of its Wednesday debut.

Decade-old Swiggy pioneered ultrafast delivery services in India, serving groceries within 20 minutes in the country’s crowded cities. That business accounts for 40 per cent of the app’s food delivery sales and Swiggy has built out more than 500 local warehouses known as dark stores to enable a fast churn of small-volume orders in a tight radius.

Some analysts and local fund managers had warned that despite a surge in domestic investment among households, the IPO boom that saw India become the world’s largest listing market outside the US would struggle to be sustained by local bidders.

“There is concern about the IPO market”, said Nirgunan Tiruchelvam, the Singapore-based head of consumer and internet at Aletheia Capital, an advisory group focused on Asia.

Consumer goods companies in India are struggling with weakening demand in the country’s cities as stubborn inflation and a retail credit crackdown by the central bank hits the spending power of middle-class Indians.

At a press conference last month, Swiggy’s chief executive Sriharsha Majety dismissed signs of consumer strife. “At this point we have not been seeing that, the businesses have been demonstrating strong growth,” he said.

The Indian delivery sector has seen several high-profile casualties in recent years, such as Uber Eats and local courier app Dunzo. The latter collapsed this year despite backing from Reliance Industries, the Indian conglomerate owned by Mukesh Ambani, Asia’s richest man.

Swiggy has “lagged” Zomato, which went public in 2021, in both food delivery and quick commerce, according to Axis Capital. In response, Swiggy has earmarked about Rs12bn from the IPO proceeds to expand its dark store network, which feeds its rapid commerce arm operating in more than 30 cities.

While still a small part of India’s overall retail landscape, quick commerce has experienced explosive growth. Indian investment bank JM Financial predicts the industry could surge to $40bn by the end of the decade, driven by increasing urban demand for affordable and convenient delivery services.

“The food delivery business is, pun intended, delivering profits in other markets,” said Tiruchelvam, pointing to the success and scale of China’s biggest delivery platform Meituan.

“One is bullish about the asset class in a mass market like India where smartphone penetration is expanding and infrastructure for food delivery is improving.”



Foreign investors pulled more than $10bn out of Indian stocks in October, the biggest monthly exodus since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, on growing concerns that the market’s huge bull run may finally be coming to an end as the economy slows.

India’s two main share indices last month posted their worst monthly losses since March 2020 while the rupee fell close to a record low against the US dollar, as international interest cools in what was one of the hottest global markets.

Investors increasingly fear that Indian shares, which have more than tripled since March 2020, could now struggle in the face of weak corporate earnings, signs of an economic slowdown and moves by the central bank to curb exuberant retail lending.

“It’s a pretty classic cyclical economic downturn in India,” said Saurabh Mukherjea, chief investment officer at Marcellus Investment Managers in Mumbai.

“The question is if it’s a few quarters or a more prolonged affair,” said Mukherjea. He has been buying defensive stocks in sectors such as information technology and pharmaceuticals, which he believes will perform in “times of uncertainty”.

Investors have also sold down their positions to brace for volatility around the US elections and to free up money to chase the recent stimulus-driven rally in Chinese shares.

Following October’s outflow, net inflows from foreign investors for this year have dropped to just $2bn, according to stock exchange data. Even as money was still coming in earlier this year, foreign ownership of India’s stock market dropped to a 12-year low amid an Indian retail investor frenzy for shares.

A warning sign came in August with data showing that Indian GDP grew 6.7 per cent in the three months to June, its slowest rate in five quarters. India’s “growth glass looks half-empty”, said Nomura economists last month.

After hitting a series of record highs this year, the Nifty 50 index of blue-chip Indian stocks fell 6.2 per cent in October. The Sensex meanwhile fell 5.8 per cent, its worst month since March 2020. Even so, the MSCI India trades at 24 times forward earnings, just ahead of the roughly 23 times for the US’s S&P 500 index.

Also driving stocks lower is a wide swath of Indian industry reporting sluggish earnings, with misses so far exceeding earnings beats, according to Goldman Sachs, whose analysts have lowered their rating on the country’s equities from “overweight” to “neutral”.

“We track the extent of downgrades on earnings. What we are seeing in India is fairly intense. Even [some] consumer staples are missing numbers,” said Sunil Tirumalai, chief emerging markets strategist at UBS.

Data has indicated consumer confidence is slowing; Indian vehicle sales have dipped in recent months, while bellwethers such as Hindustan Unilever, the seller of Dove soap and Cornetto ice cream, had “muted” industry-wide demand growth, chief financial officer Ritesh Tiwari told analysts.

An inflection point for the glut of Indian companies coming to market in 2024 came with the highly symbolic $3.3bn listing of Hyundai’s Indian business on local stock bourses in October. Asia’s largest float this year was poorly received by retail investors, who were put off by its elevated valuation and an industry-wide vehicle sales slowdown.

Executives at Citigroup, one of Hyundai’s Indian bookrunners, nevertheless defended the listing and played down fears of a wider downturn.

“A temporary softness of one season or two months is not necessarily determining what our view on the outlook is for 2025,” Rahul Saraf, head of India investment banking at Citi, told reporters last month.

Other “large” clients are “very keen” to explore an Indian IPO, he added. “I think they’re actually encouraged with the listing of Hyundai [rather] than being discouraged.”

The cooling in sentiment also comes as China’s battered stock market enjoyed a stimulus-driven revival. Many overseas investors had been bullish on India while keeping positions in China low. But when Chinese stocks soared on news of the stimulus, many reduced Indian holdings to increase their bets on China or miss out on the rally.

But this shift would have limits, said Ashish Chugh, head of global emerging market equities at Loomis Sayles. “We don’t think the stimulus is going to solve the long-term problem of painful debt restructuring” given how much China’s economy came to rely on borrowing for investment, he said.

India’s rally over the past year has been driven primarily by domestic investors ploughing bank deposits and household savings into the country’s burgeoning public markets, but foreign investors may be growing concerned that even local risk appetite is close to saturation.

“[Local] retail money that is coming into the market is still supportive. But there are signs that you’re actually reaching some limits on that,” said UBS’s Tirumalai.

Much now depends on whether Indian authorities take action to prevent a potential multiyear economic downturn, said Marcellus’s Mukherjea. While the Reserve Bank of India has indicated it is open to easing its 6.5 per cent key policy rate, governor Shaktikanta Das has stated that a rate cut now would be too risky.

Given inflation is close to 6 per cent, the RBI “faces a tough call, but I think they need to start cutting rates sooner rather than later”, Mukherjea added. “Provided there is appropriate monetary and fiscal action, we should snap out of this by Christmas 2025.”



The Indian conglomerate Adani Group has begun to curb electricity supplies to Bangladesh and threatened to completely shut down power exports as the new government in Dhaka struggles with a backlog of overdue payments.

The infrastructure-focused company owned by billionaire Gautam Adani on Thursday started slashing cross-border electricity flows by as much as half from its 1,600-megawatt capacity Godda coal-fired plant in eastern India, according to data published by Bangladesh’s power grid.

The group has set a November 7 deadline for a full cut-off unless Bangladesh can clarify how it will settle amounts owed to the company, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Adani Group has previously warned that the overdue payments have become “unsustainable”. Its executives told analysts last month that the country owed about $800mn at the end of September.

Muhammad Fouzul Kabir Khan, the top energy adviser to Bangladesh’s interim government led by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Muhammad Yunus, told the Financial Times: “We are both surprised and disappointed at the decision.”

Khan said Bangladesh contested the amounts owed to Adani, saying the government had paid the company about $100mn in October, “double of what we’ve been paying in the earlier months”, and had opened a letter of credit for $170mn. He said Bangladesh now owed about $700mn. The amount, however, could rise as Adani continues to supply the country.

The dispute with the influential Indian tycoon, Asia’s second-wealthiest individual, underscores the vulnerabilities of Bangladesh’s economy after the dramatic ousting of authoritarian prime minister Sheikh Hasina by student protesters in August. Hasina fled to India and her current whereabouts are unknown.

The turmoil disrupted the critical garments sector in south Asia’s second-largest economy, which was already faltering thanks to its reliance on costly fuel and commodity imports.

Yunus’s government has sought an additional $3bn from the IMF following a $4.5bn bailout in 2022. Financing talks are ongoing after officials from the lender visited Dhaka in September and noted economic activity had “slowed markedly”.

Despite the cutbacks by Adani, Khan said Bangladesh was “managing” and had fired up more expensive power generation plants using liquid fuels such as diesel and furnace oil.

“We are forced to run them, which is bringing up the cost of electricity generation . . . we are trying to bring in additional coal-based power,” Khan said. “We’ll be able to manage, but this is not what we expect, because [Adani] are contractually bound to fulfil their commitment, so we’ll look at what contractual options we have.”

Cemented during a 2015 visit by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Dhaka, the agreement with Adani to supply electricity from its Indian coal power plant in Godda has been criticised by activists, who say the high cost of importing power does not make sense for Bangladesh.

Yunus’s interim government has characterised deals negotiated during Hasina’s 15-year rule as opaque and expensive, heightening Bangladesh’s financial distress.

It has set up an expert committee to re-examine energy agreements signed by Hasina’s administration, and Khan said he expected them to report back in about two weeks.

“They are looking at these deals, and this Adani deal is one of them,” Khan said.

Adani Group did not immediately respond to a request for comment but has previously said the cost of its electricity to Bangladesh was “very competitive” compared with that of other imported coal-fired power plants.In a filing last month, the conglomerate’s listed power business said it had been receiving payments from the Bangladesh Power Development Board “on a regular basis” and was “confident of recovering the overdue amount”.



“This is the perfect timing for India,” says Piyush Suri. Originally from Delhi before studying design in London, he’s one of the organisers behind Design Mumbai, whose inaugural exhibition of international and Indian design will be held at Jio World Garden next week.

The organisers — including founders of London’s 100% Design and Design Shanghai — spotted a gap. According to a report by IMARC group, the interior design market in India is set to grow from $31.5bn in 2023 to $67.4bn by 2032. And when it came to the city in which to host it, Mumbai was a no-brainer: “It was a very very easy choice,” says Suri. “It’s the financial, fashion and Bollywood capital of India. It’s the city that people look towards for the trends.”

They initially had in mind a split of 80 per cent international and 20 per cent Indian exhibitors. But the organisers, says Suri, were “so pleasantly surprised” by the maturity of the scene that now 45 per cent are from India. One of the brands that Suri says exemplifies the country’s outlook is Industrial Playground, a furniture company whose pop colours are mixed with shapes that “remind me of the old railway platform benches I grew up with”.

“What designers are doing is merging the traditional craftsmanship that India is known for with sustainable, modern technologies and practices,” says Suri. “This is very special for India.”

design-mumbai.com, November 6-9

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @ft_houseandhome on Instagram



A Canadian official has accused India’s powerful home affairs minister Amit Shah of overseeing violence and threats towards Sikh separatist activists in the North American nation, in the most direct claim against a close ally of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

David Morrison, Canada’s deputy foreign minister, told a parliamentary committee on Tuesday that he had confirmed Shah’s identity and alleged involvement to The Washington Post. The newspaper reported this month that Shah had greenlighted intelligence missions and attacks in Canada.

“The journalist called me and asked me if it was that person,” Morrison said. “I confirmed it was that person,” he added, without providing evidence.

Morrison’s allegation against Shah, who is seen as Modi’s right-hand man, will further inflame tensions between Canada and India, which have been embroiled in a dispute following the killing of Sikh separatist Hardeep Singh Nijjar in Vancouver last year.

Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has said there were “credible allegations” of Indian involvement in Nijjar’s death, provoking uproar in New Delhi.

Trudeau’s national security and intelligence adviser Nathalie Drouin on Tuesday confirmed she had leaked to the media that India was also linked to the killing of Sikh activist Sukhdool Singh Gill, who was shot in Winnipeg in September 2023.

India’s government has been exposed to multiple accusations of targeting overseas activists campaigning for an independent “Khalistan” in Punjab, a region that split between India and Pakistan during the subcontinent’s partition in 1947.

The US this month charged an Indian government official with directing a foiled plot to murder a Sikh activist overseas, who the Financial Times last year confirmed was Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, general counsel for US-based group Sikhs for Justice.

New Delhi considers such Sikh separatists as terrorists, and has rejected allegations of its involvement in Nijjar’s killing and the attempt on Pannun’s life.

Canada expelled India’s top diplomat in the country and five other officials this month, accusing them of involvement in “criminal activities” linked to Nijjar’s death and saying New Delhi had refused to co-operate with its probes.

India’s home and foreign ministries did not respond to requests for comment.

But the foreign ministry previously labelled Canada’s expulsion of its envoys “baseless targeting” and “completely unacceptable”, and responded by ordering six Canadian diplomats to leave the country, including Ottawa’s deputy high commissioner.

Shah, who is widely seen within India as a skilled political operative and Modi’s feared enforcer, has known the prime minister since the 1980s, when he worked for the Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the parent organisation of their governing Bharatiya Janata party.

The pair rose to power in their home state Gujarat, where Modi was chief minister. But their tenure in the state was marred by communal riots in the early 2000s in which more than 1,000 Muslims were killed.

Modi was accused of sanctioning violence, but was later cleared by the country’s Supreme Court.

In 2010, Shah was arrested and charged with murder in connection with extrajudicial killings, which he denied. He was later discharged by India’s top court for a lack of evidence.

Shah has remained one of Modi’s closest advisers, and is seen as having been behind some of the BJP government’s most controversial policies, including the revocation of special autonomous status for Jammu and Kashmir, India’s only Muslim-majority state.



Adani Enterprises, the flagship business incubator owned by Indian tycoon Gautam Adani, posted a more than seven-fold surge in quarterly profit fuelled by accelerated expansion in green energy and airports that offset weaker earnings from coal trading.

The eponymous infrastructure-focused company’s shares closed 1.6 per cent higher on Tuesday after it reported 663 per cent year-on-year growth in net profit to Rs17.4bn ($207mn) for the three months through September.

Its billionaire chair attributed the performance to “rapid growth” in the conglomerate’s airport division, which is India’s largest private operator, as well as at Adani New Industries, its green hydrogen and renewable manufacturing business. The two branches contributed about a third of the company’s profit before interest and tax.

Pre-tax profits at Adani Enterprises’ coal-supplying unit declined 30 per cent amid a similar fall in volumes. Electricity demand in India dipped 2.3 per cent on an annual basis in the quarter, according to S&P Global-owned Indian rating agency Crisil.

Adani’s combination of green energy investment with its coal business mirrors India’s drive to have half its energy come from renewable sources by 2030, while still extensively using the abundant and dirty fossil fuel at its disposal to meet ballooning long-term demand for electricity.

Adani has publicly tethered his nation-spanning infrastructure empire to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s goal of turning India into a developed country by 2047. On Tuesday, the tycoon said his incubator continued to “focus on investing in logistics, energy transition and adjacent sectors that are core to the economic growth of the country”.

The conglomerate has also been attempting to mount a comeback following damaging allegations of corporate fraud and stock market manipulation levelled against it last year by US short seller Hindenburg Research, which Adani Group has repeatedly denied.

Adani Enterprise, the oldest of the group’s 10 listed entities with diverse business interests from ports to broadcast media, raised about $500mn this month from international and domestic investors, a lower amount than the $2bn approved by its board earlier this year.

The group has revived an international expansion effort, including signing a Tanzanian port deal in May, while Adani has pledged to invest in other Asian nations including Bhutan.

However, some of the international moves have been fiercely opposed in countries including Kenya, where Adani’s proposals have been criticised by unions and legal groups. Kenya’s High Court in September blocked plans for Adani to operate Nairobi’s key airport and this month suspended proposals to revamp the country’s power lines.



The setting for the Jodhpur Rajasthan International Folk Festival (RIFF) is a 15th-century hilltop fort — one of the most spectacular in India. Concerts take place at sunrise, moonrise and throughout the day in its gardens, courtyards and sumptuous rooms. “We’re a destination festival,” says artistic director Divya Bhatia. “You need to be here to experience it and it’s timed to coincide with Sharad Purnima, the brightest full Moon of the year.”

A sunrise concert on a high plateau near the fort starts at 5.30am, the pre-dawn sky dark, the musicians barely visible. As the Moon recedes, glowing like a sunset, the five players become silhouettes. Then the sun catches their red turbans while the air grows noticeably warmer.

The first group are Meghwals from the local weaving community of the Marwar region around Jodhpur. Specialising in meditative Hindu prayers or bhajans, the singers are Hindu, but the accompanying musicians are Muslim. As the dawn progresses, the music gradually increases in pace — powerful vocals accompanied by a plucked lute, small hand cymbals, and the irregular rhythms of a dholak drum, played on each end of the instrument.

Next comes a troupe of Manganiyar, a hereditary musician community in Rajasthan celebrated for its virtuosity. The players are Muslim, but sing songs for their Hindu patrons — the state is rich in this syncretic music that transcends religious boundaries. By the time the concert ends at 7.30am, the day is already hot and the Mehrangarh fort in the background blazes orange in the sunshine.

The five-day Jodhpur RIFF, now in its 17th edition, is hosted by the Mehrangarh Museum Trust and its chair, Maharaja Gaj Singh II, hereditary ruler of Marwar (Jodhpur state). India’s maharajas were stripped of their titles, privileges and privy purse in 1971, yet Bapji, as he is affectionately known, commands huge respect, with people touching his feet when they encounter him.

As a fan of Rajasthan’s music, when Gaj Singh married in 1973 he arranged for a group of local Langa musicians — another hereditary community — to play in both Jodhpur and Delhi. “I feared they might be the last surviving group of musicians, but I took them to Delhi to give them more exposure and they were very well received,” he says.

Pre-independence, musicians would have played for the Maharaja at a huge number of royal and religious events, but now his resources are much diminished. So while there is support from the trust, there is also a greater reliance on tourism and ticket sales. “Tourism can help, but it is a double-edged sword,” Gaj Singh says. “It can earn musicians a living, but at the same time it dilutes the authenticity. You have an audience that doesn’t understand the music so it becomes limited.” When local musicians are playing to tourists they tend to concentrate on a small selection of familiar pieces that get a good response, rather than sustaining the deeper repertoire.

Rajasthan is India’s largest state, and has an incredibly rich diversity of music and instruments, though with urbanisation and digitalisation traditional musicians are suffering. This was one of the reasons for the founding of RIFF, which has since broadened its remit to include musicians from other parts of India and abroad — more than 400 performers this year.

Among the highlights are two instrumentalists: Asin Khan and Dilshad Khan, on sarangi, one of Rajasthan’s most sublime stringed instruments, played with a bow. A speciality of the Langa, it has three playing strings, but also 20 or so sympathetic strings, which resonate behind the melody and lend the instrument a haunting, ethereal aura.

Asin Khan plays in a folk style, Dilshad Khan in a classical manner. The folk sarangi is the original while the classical instrument was developed in the 20th century. Sultan Khan, who died in 2011, was one of the latter’s most celebrated players and Dilshad Khan’s principal teacher. The classical sarangi is larger, more resonant and is played with a song-like lyricism. The folk sarangi is more earthy and free from the complex raga structures that classical musicians have to follow. What makes the performance so engrossing is hearing two masters playing the same instrument in two different styles, making the enormous potential of the sarangi apparent in a very focused way.

Asin Khan lives in a village about 60km from Jodhpur, whereas Dilshad Khan spends most of his time in Mumbai, and though they hadn’t played together until recently, they meet as equals. Indeed, part of RIFF’s success has been in giving folk musicians the respect they deserve. The Maharaja admits that, in former times, folk musicians were at the bottom of the pecking order and many of them wouldn’t have been allowed into the fort.

“The festival is a force against feudalism, casteism and religious communalism,” adds Bhatia. “And to make people see the value of this music — most will never have heard anything like it, and most of the visitors are from India.” The festival also attracts a healthy number of foreigners — some 15-20 per cent of the approximately 3,500 people who attend each evening concert.

Among the Rajasthani musicians in the final concert was Sumitra Das Goswami, performing wedding songs from the female point of view, rarely heard outside of a wedding. “RIFF is a huge platform for folk artists of Rajasthan, who are scattered in many different villages across the state,” she says. “A lot of artists were discovered here and have made it abroad.” Sumitra is one of them, having recorded and performed with Laura Marling and Mumford & Sons at concerts in London and Bradford.

RIFF also has its international performers, with musicians from Norway, Estonia, Azerbaijan, Mauritius and Korea. Among the highlights are Estonia’s Puuluup (“Wood Loop”), a brilliant duo reviving the talharpa — a moribund plucked and bowed Estonian folk instrument — with looper pedals and electronics. They were part of Estonia’s Eurovision entry earlier this year, where their sophisticated music and irrepressible wit ensured they scored pretty badly. But at RIFF they are crowd favourites, the audience warming to their inventive, folk-derived music and amusing stage presence, and dancing in a frenzy in a palace courtyard well beyond midnight.

The Maharaja tells me that, as well as faithfully preserving tradition, he feels RIFF should be stimulating the creation of new Rajasthani music. Perhaps Puuluup can be an inspiration.

jodhpurriff.org



Xi Jinping and Narendra Modi, the Chinese and Indian leaders, have held their first formal bilateral meeting in five years, marking an apparent thaw in relations between the neighbouring nuclear-armed states.

The meeting, at the leaders’ summit of Brics nations in Kazan, Russia, on Wednesday, came days after the two countries announced an agreement on patrols along their disputed border, the site of deadly clashes four years ago.

The Chinese president used his meeting with India’s prime minister to urge co-operation between their nations as “two major developing countries and important members of the global south”, state news agency Xinhua reported.

China and India should “properly handle” differences and “set an example” for other developing countries to unite and promote “the multipolarisation of the world and the democratisation of international relations”, Xi said.

“The two leaders affirmed that stable, predictable and amicable bilateral relations between India and China, as two neighbours and the two largest nations on earth, will have a positive impact on regional and global peace and prosperity,” India said in a communique.

The two countries this week said they had reached an agreement on patrolling arrangements along their almost 3,500km disputed border in the Himalayas, known as the Line of Actual Control.

Troops from both sides clashed in hand-to-hand fighting in and around the Galwan Valley in eastern Ladakh in 2020, leaving at least 24 dead and prompting the Modi government to impose strict limits on Chinese foreign direct investment.

Since then, both countries each sent more than 50,000 troops to the border and bolstered roads and other infrastructure in the area, with India saying it would not restore normal relations with China unless “peace and tranquillity” were restored along the LAC.

In its communique, India said special representatives would meet soon to “oversee the management of peace and tranquillity in border areas and to explore a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable solution to the boundary question”.

Details have not been released of what the two sides agreed in their pact on patrols and some analysts in India have expressed doubt that it is a substantial breakthrough.

“I think it will be India’s major mistake if we feel that the India-China relationship will be back to where it was pre-Galwan just by having this agreement on patrolling,” said Namrata Hasija, a research fellow at the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy in New Delhi. “China is very good at optics.”

The two countries’ relations plumbed new lows last year when Xi abruptly announced he would not attend a G20 summit in New Delhi. Analysts in China said the snub was because India had held G20 side meetings in the run-up to the summit in the disputed region of Kashmir, which is also claimed by Pakistan, and in Arunachal Pradesh, an Indian state in the Himalayas that China claims as its own.

Despite the diplomatic chill, China has surpassed the US as India’s biggest source of imports, with a large deficit in Beijing’s favour. Some Modi government officials and advisers have favoured easing limits on foreign direct investment and visas for Chinese nationals, which business groups say are impeding India’s push to become a major “China plus one” manufacturing nation.

Lin Minwang, a professor at the Centre for South Asian Studies at Fudan University in Shanghai, said that during its development, China had run large trade deficits with advanced manufacturing economies such as Japan.

“If India wants to make much progress in manufacturing, they have to have strong trade with China because China provides low-cost intermediary and capital goods, which will reduce the burden for Indian industrialisation,” Lin said.

China’s emphasis on a “multipolar” world is seen by analysts as code for its agenda of eroding US global dominance and creating more room for its own emergence as a superpower.

Xi is keen to use groupings such as the Brics to promote his agenda of creating an alternative world order, even though it includes democracies such as India and Brazil that have better relations with Washington.



Every reader knows the moment when the paths of destiny fork. You must either become a Chucker, steel your nerves and give away old books before they march into the linen cupboards and storm the sofas, the dining table, the guest room, or become a Keeper, accept defeat and move to a larger home, just to accommodate the relentless tide of a personal library gone rogue.This is a fraught issue, as the late French novelist Georges Perec wrote in “Brief Notes on the Art and Manner of Arranging One’s Books”, his classic 1978 essay: “But for us, who continue to have to do with a human race that insists on thinking, writing, and above all publishing, the increasing size of our libraries tends to become the one real problem.”Note the neat reversal of responsibility — every true bibliophile believes, hand on heart, that they are not to blame for the steady accumulation of books in the house. I personally suspect that the volumes piled up everywhere in my own home, these paper towers of Babel that threaten to topple on the heads of unwary guests, have sneaked in from a parallel universe, multiplying the moment you take your eye off them. My husband and I have a modest collection of roughly 4,000 tomes, and yet we’re wading in up to our necks: how many is too many?

The novelist Hanya Yanagihara houses 12,000 books in double-sided bookcases that act as a wall; Umberto Eco, the late medievalist and author, arranged his living spaces around 44,000 books and another 1,200 antique volumes; the hugely popular British food writer Nigella Lawson has amassed a collection of more than 6,000, many of them cookbooks. And I take heart from the example of Bhimrao Ambedkar, the great anti-caste reformer who drafted India’s Constitution — his personal library ran to 50,000 volumes, at that time one of the largest private libraries in the world. A simple principle emerges: intention matters. Booklovers who organise their lives and their homes around their desire to have a research library at hand are seldom overwhelmed in the manner of us amateurs who buy books on impulse, letting a library grow over time.

Ambedkar is said to have built his home, Rajgruha in Bombay (now Mumbai), over three storeys specifically to accommodate his books, with ample room to add more during his lifetime. Eco’s vast collection is now in Italy’s Bologna University, except for 1,200 antique books sent to Milan’s Braidense Library, and is arranged in the precise order in which he’d kept them at home. And the late designer Karl Lagerfeld left instructions for the future maintenance of his 33,000 volumes. “Books are sufficient to themselves,” he said. “They ask for nothing and they are silently patient, but they are always there for you.”

That said, not all collections have a happy future. In The Diary of a Bookseller, Shaun Bythell, owner of The Bookshop, the largest second-hand bookshop in Scotland, chronicles the fate of books once loved, now unwanted by inheritors and family members. He salvages what he can, inspects collections in the libraries of great country houses. And he explains to optimists who show up at his store with worn editions of Dickens that not all old books are worth much beyond sentimental value. Similarly, in the auction houses of Kolkata on Russel Street, and in the busy second-hand book market in New Delhi’s Daryaganj, painstakingly acquired collections are hawked for less than a few pounds, or sold by the kilo.

Over three decades, I went from being a Keeper, determined to cherish every last bequest, gift and purchase because it seemed like a truer record of my changing interests and passions than even a diary, to being a gentle but firm Chucker. I tried and failed at some of the “rules” of letting go of old books — Marie Kondo’s suggestion that you discard what doesn’t spark joy is useless when you have fond memories of much of your collection, and the sage dictum to give away a book for every one you buy only works for the most organised among us. Instead, I take my cue from gardeners, pruning and weeding our collection every few years, giving hundreds of books away to friends or small libraries. Some books will never go — my grandmother’s collection of romances, copies autographed by writers, the old, tattered friends I passionately love. But every reader outgrows their own reading, in time. I would rather those books were in the hands of others who will care for them, turn their pages, give them an honoured space on their shelves. The tower on the desk is Eiffelesque; my husband’s study should bear a sign warning friends to enter at their own risk; time for another cull. Don’t be afraid of discarding old books; there is such pleasure in letting them go, to find the readers they deserve.

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



India and China have reached an agreement on patrolling arrangements along their disputed border, a senior Indian official has said, paving the way for an easing of tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbours that have overshadowed their diplomatic and trading relations.

Vikram Misri, India’s foreign secretary, announced the understanding on the eve of a summit of leaders of Brics countries due to begin on Tuesday in Kazan, Russia, which the Indian and Chinese leaders — Narendra Modi and Xi Jinping — are both due to attend.

India and China refer to their frontier as the Line of Actual Control, and clashes between the two sides in eastern Ladakh in 2020 left at least 24 troops, mostly Indians, dead.

“I can share with you that over the last several weeks, Indian and Chinese diplomatic and military negotiators have been in close contact with each other in a variety of forums,” Misri said at a press briefing in Delhi.

“And as a result of these discussions, agreement has been arrived at on patrolling arrangements along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the India-China border areas, leading to disengagement and a resolution of the issues that had arisen in these areas in 2020.”

China’s foreign ministry did not immediately comment on the Indian statement. At a regular press briefing in Beijing on Monday, foreign ministry spokesman Lin Jian reiterated that China would work towards “greater Brics co-operation” and a “new era for the global south”.

The potential agreement comes a month after Wang Yi, Xi’s top diplomat, held talks with India’s national security adviser Ajit Doval. Chinese state media said at the time that the two sides had “agreed to work together to create conditions for the improvement of bilateral relations”.

India and China fought a major war in 1962, and the almost 3,500km-long LAC, which crosses through some of the world’s highest places in the Himalayas, is one of Asia’s most tense arenas of geopolitical conflict.

China has built villages along the LAC in Tibet in an effort to bolster its presence there, and India is undertaking a similar effort under its “Vibrant Villages” programme.

After the clashes in and around Ladakh’s Galwan Valley, both sides each deployed at least 50,000 more troops to the LAC, with India diverting some soldiers there from the areas bordering Pakistan. India’s government complained that areas where its troops formerly patrolled freely had been blocked by their Chinese counterparts.

The Modi government has since 2020 driven a hard line on the issue, making de-escalation around the LAC a condition of resuming “normal” relations with Beijing.

Details of which specific areas were covered by the understanding announced on Monday were not immediately available.

In the wake of the 2020 violence at the LAC, India banned dozens of Chinese apps and began implementing some of the toughest restrictions on inward investment from China of any country.

Businesspeople have, however, in recent months complained that the draconian restrictions on Chinese foreign direct investment and the provision of visas to Chinese nationals were slowing India’s drive to develop its manufacturing sector, and some officials inside the Modi government favoured easing them.

Additional reporting by Ding Wenjie in Beijing



Inderjeet Singh Gosal says he is not afraid to die for an independent Sikh homeland in India’s Punjab region.

The 35-year-old’s declaration sounds incongruous as he sits in his comfortable home in Toronto’s suburbs. But after the assassination of his predecessor as head of the Khalistan movement, Hardeep Singh Nijjar, the risk is real.

“I know what I signed up for, death doesn’t scare me,” Gosal said. “India’s threats or any assassination attempts would not stop my effort for . . . Khalistan.”

This week Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, expelled six Indian diplomats, including the high commissioner, because of their alleged involvement in the killing of Nijjar, who was gunned down in Vancouver in June 2023.

Trudeau on Monday said: “We will never tolerate the involvement of a foreign government in threatening and killing Canadian citizens on Canadian soil, a deeply unacceptable violation of Canada’s sovereignty and of international law.”

India, which sees the Khalistan activists as terrorists, has denied any involvement and expelled six Canadian diplomats in response. It accuses Ottawa of tolerating violent extremism that has cost the lives of its citizens.

India has levelled the same accusation at the US. Last week, federal prosecutors charged an Indian government official with orchestrating a plot to murder a Sikh activist in New York City. India has designated that activist, Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, a terrorist under its Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.

The tit-for-tat expulsions between India and Canada are the latest episode in the increasingly fraught relations between Ottawa and New Delhi over the activities of Canada’s large Sikh community.

The movement for a sovereign Sikh state called Khalistan dates back to India’s independence from Britain in 1947 and gained momentum after anti-Sikh killings in the wake of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s assassination in 1984.

Sikhs such as Gosal describe the violence as a “genocide” that forced thousands to flee India, many to Canada. Some 771,790 Canadians identified as belonging to the Sikh faith in the 2021 census, making it the largest Sikh community outside India.

Canada’s relations with India have soured in recent years as Prime Minister Narendra Modi has become increasingly critical of what he says is Ottawa’s failure to clamp down on Sikh extremism.

The worst mass murder in Canadian history, the bombing of an Air India flight travelling from Montreal to London in June 1985, has been blamed on Sikh extremists. All 329 people on board were killed. Two pro-Khalistan diaspora Sikhs were charged in the incident but later acquitted.

While the majority of Canadian Sikhs are peaceful or not engaged in the Khalistan movement, Ottawa has listed other Sikh groups such as Babbar Khalsa International and the International Sikh Youth Federation as terrorist organisations.

The rift also highlights the complex nature of diaspora politics in Canada.

“We are a migrant nation, and diaspora politics is a real facet of Canadian politics,” said Colin Robertson, a former diplomat who is vice-president of the Canadian Global Affairs Institute in Ottawa. “This complicates our foreign policy because you always have to make allowance to minority groups. Sometimes you have to turn a blind eye to extreme views, as it has an impact on various ridings [constituencies].”

India has long pleaded with Canada to curb behaviour it considers a terrorist threat and which Ottawa sees as permissible political activism.

Pannun admitted to Indian media last year that he posted flyers outside the Sikh temple near Vancouver where Nijjar was killed that read “Kill India” and featured names and photos of Indian diplomats.

In turn, Canada has alleged growing Indian interference in its Sikh communities. That came to a head last year when Trudeau accused the Modi government of being involved in the fatal shooting of Nijjar.

The Royal Canadian Mounted Police on Monday warned Canadians about suspected Indian involvement in “serious criminal activity”, including drive-by shootings, home invasions, violent extortion and even murder. The Indian government denies any involvement.

A public inquiry that has been running since last year has also heard evidence that India directly interfered in Canada’s 2019 and 2021 general elections.

Former Canadian intelligence agent Phil Gurski said the inquiry highlighted how Trudeau’s government had either ignored, played down or repeatedly missed warnings of foreign meddling in Canadian life, whether political or in diaspora communities.

“Canada’s intelligence community is not happy,” he said. “They’ve been saying this for a while.”

Gurski said Canada was caught between global pressures from superpowers China and India, and local politics and security concerns. It is also aware India is strategically important for the Five Eyes alliance of the US, Canada, the UK, New Zealand and Australia.

“The political power of Sikh diaspora is real,” he said. “Trudeau could kiss the Sikh vote goodbye if they did favours for India, like sending a wanted separatist back. Canada does not want to upset the diaspora vote, they rely on it.”

For Gosal, the claims made last week about Indian government involvement in Nijjar’s death came as no surprise.

“We knew it was India from the minute they killed Nijjar. We knew there was a threat or it was dangerous, but we didn’t think it would go this far, that they’d kill a Canadian citizen on Canadian soil.”

He claimed that in February, months after he took over leadership of the Khalistan movement, a bullet was fired into a window at a site run by his construction business. An Indian account on X had posted about the shooting before police arrived.

In August, local police called him to warn he was the target of a murder plot, he said. “All this is absolutely tied to the government of India,” said Gosal. “They are posting tweets about it, openly making threats. They’re not trying to hide it.”



Trading in the world’s second-largest IPO of 2024 begins on Tuesday, but retail investors have already given a lukewarm reception to the $3.3bn listing of Hyundai Motor India, amid a slowdown in car sales in the country.

The retail segment of the Mumbai offering was only 50 per cent subscribed last week as many baulked at the $19bn valuation for the Korean carmakers’ India unit, despite a publicity blitz that saw wraparound front-page adverts emblazoned across India’s financial newspapers.

By last Thursday’s cut-off, the Rs278.7bn issue had drawn bids just over two times the amount offered, shored up by institutional investors that had included Singapore’s government, the BlackRock investment company and Fidelity and Vanguard funds.

“The valuation was very full,” said a senior Mumbai banker, highlighting Hyundai’s pricing at about 26 times the Indian unit’s earnings. It values the Indian unit at 40 per cent of the market capitalisation of its South Korean parent on the Seoul exchange. “They didn’t leave much on the table,” the banker added.

The Indian debut, where the Korean group is selling a 17.5 per cent stake, is the country’s third-largest IPO ever in dollar terms, the biggest in Asia this year and the world’s second largest after warehouse operator Lineage’s $5.1bn US listing, according to Dealogic data.

The weak early bidding for Hyundai’s offering was in contrast to other blockbuster floats this year in India, with its stock market becoming the world’s largest listing venue outside the US. It has included the $782mn IPO of mortgage provider Bajaj Housing Finance, which last month drew bids more than 64 times the shares offered.

Samuel Kerr, head of equity capital markets at Ion Analytics, called Hyundai’s listing “another jewel in the crown after a marvellous year for Indian deal activity” at a time of “depressed” Asian listing volumes driven by the “significant economic slowdown in China”.

Hyundai, India’s second-largest carmaker with a 14.6 per cent market share after Maruti Suzuki’s near 40 per cent, plans to spend the IPO proceeds on increasing its local presence. It is expanding production capacity for its sport utility vehicle line-up and intends to introduce four EV models.

Hyundai has made significant inroads into India compared with other foreign carmakers — Ford and General Motors have abandoned the market in recent years — but the listing has coincided with a slowdown in India’s motor industry, with consumers hit by stubborn inflation.

The Nifty Auto index has fallen 6.9 per cent this month, and Bajaj Auto, one of the country’s biggest sellers of motorcycles, saw its shares plunge 13 per cent after it issued a sales warning on Thursday.

Signs of weaker sales during India’s months-long festival season “definitely hampered the situation”, said Abhishek Jain, head of research at Mumbai brokerage Arihant Capital, who added that Hyundai’s offer had been “aggressively priced” for such a large IPO.The float marks the first time Hyundai has listed outside its home market and is part of a global push following an erosion of sales in China over the past decade, where it has been hit by the rapid rise of domestic rivals.

Hyundai said its Indian unit accounted for about 18 per cent of global sales last year. With 1.4bn people and one of the fastest-growing large economies, India recently overtook Japan as the third-largest car market in the world after China and the US, according to data from the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers.

The Korean company entered India in 1996 and first began mass producing its compact Santro car two years later. Hyundai now plans to invest $3.8bn in the country over the next decade and expand local capacity to about 1.1mn units by 2028 from 824,000 units now.

Hyundai operates two car plants close to the south-eastern city of Chennai and last year it acquired GM’s largely mothballed factory in the western Indian state of Maharashtra. “They need to expand their capacity in India, given the strong demand growth there,” Yoon Hyuk-jin, an analyst at SK Securities, said in a recent report.

Lee Hang-koo at the Jeonbuk Institute of Automotive Convergence Technology, a South Korean research group, said the IPO would help Hyundai narrow the market share gap with Maruti Suzuki, a joint venture set up by the Japanese company and India’s government in 1982.

“Hyundai is looking at India as an alternative market to China,” he said.



US federal prosecutors have charged an Indian government official with orchestrating a plot to murder a Sikh activist in New York City.

The move threatens to escalate tensions with New Delhi just days after Canada expelled six diplomats in a bitter dispute over an extrajudicial killing.

The Department of Justice said Vikash Yadav, described as a “senior field officer” in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s administration, directed a “murder-for-hire” scheme from India.

According to the DoJ, the plot involved paying a hitman $100,000 for assassinating a US-Canadian citizen who was part of a separatist movement advocating an independent Sikh state.

Although prosecutors did not name the target of the foiled plot, the Financial Times last year confirmed it was Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, general counsel for US-based group Sikhs for Justice.

The Indian embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the indictment.

In charges unsealed on Thursday, prosecutors claimed Yadav — who is believed to be in India — had overseen a scheme to kill Pannun, providing his address in New York and his phone numbers to the would-be assassin, who was an undercover US agent.

In June 2023, Yadav was also allegedly communicating about the assassination of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, an associate of Pannun’s and a fellow Sikh activist, in a suburb of Vancouver, Canada.

Yadav sent a video of Nijjar’s body to an associate, prosecutors said, and days later forwarded a news article about Pannun, writing: “[I]t’s [a] priority now.”

In a statement on Thursday, Pannun said the US had done its “fundamental constitutional duty” to protect citizens.

“The attempt on my life on American soil is the blatant case of India’s transnational terrorism, which has become a challenge to America’s sovereignty and threat to freedom of speech and democracy, which unequivocally proves that India believes in using bullets while pro-Khalistan Sikhs believe in ballots,” he said.

The charges against Yadav come as tensions between Canada and India reached a new high, with the countries expelling each other’s diplomats earlier this week.

The two nations have been embroiled in a bitter dispute since Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said last year there were “credible allegations” of Indian government involvement in Nijjar’s death — claims that have been vigorously denied by New Delhi.

US assistant attorney-general Matthew Olsen said on Thursday the charges against Yadav were “a grave example of the increase in lethal plotting and other forms of violent transnational repression targeting diaspora communities in the United States”.

He added: “To the governments around the world who may be considering such criminal activity and to the communities they would target, let there be no doubt that the Department of Justice is committed to disrupting and exposing these plots and to holding the wrongful actors accountable.”



Elon Musk appears to have won a contest with Indian telecom tycoons Mukesh Ambani and Sunil Bharti Mittal over the way satellite spectrum should be awarded, as the billionaires battle over the introduction of space-fed internet to the world’s most populous country.

Ambani, Asia’s richest man and chair of oil-to-digital services conglomerate Reliance Industries, along with Mittal’s Bharti Airtel, have been trying to persuade India’s government to auction satellite spectrum, in line with the usual competitive method in the mobile market they dominate, rather than just allocate it.

Musk, chief executive of SpaceX and owner of the Starlink satellite broadband service, took to his social media site X this week to say that any such moves by India would be “unprecedented, as this spectrum was long designated by the [International Telecommunication Union] as shared spectrum for satellites”. India is a member of the ITU.

Soon after, Mittal voiced his support for the auction process. Addressing a conference in New Delhi, he specifically told Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who sat in the audience, that satellite companies serving urban areas “need to pay telecom licences like everyone else”.

Ambani’s Reliance had written to the telecoms regulator and the government last week, accusing it of pre-emptively concluding that allocation was the way forward, according to a letter seen by the Financial Times and a person familiar with the matter.

But on Tuesday, Indian communications minister Jyotiraditya Scindia said there were no plans afoot to auction space spectrum. “Much appreciated!” Musk posted on X in response. “We will do our best to serve the people of India with Starlink.”

This year, the Financial Times reported that Mittal and Ambani were frontrunners to introduce satellite internet services ahead of Musk’s Starlink, which has yet to receive licences. The Indian businessmen enjoy a near duopoly in telecoms domestically and EY-Parthenon estimates that space broadband is a potential $1bn annual revenue market for the country.

“We have deep pockets and we can spend money to buy extra spectrum . . . this will keep small players away,” said a person close to Reliance. “If it is not auction, and allocation, because it’s a new technology, a lot of unwanted players might enter.”

India’s parliament late last year enacted a law that allowed allocation of satellite-based spectrum, instead of the country’s traditional auction method. Last month, the telecoms regulator requested feedback from industry players, with a deadline set for later in October.

Bharti Airtel, which plans to launch satellite internet in a joint venture with Anglo-French group Eutelsat OneWeb, said in a statement that operators serving urban areas and retail customers should go through the auction process.

A person close to the company said only services reaching currently unserved communities should be assigned spectrum, to allow for a “level playing field” after Indian operators invested “billions of dollars” in terrestrial connections.

“The local guys are arguing there should be uniformity in the rules,” said Vivekanand Subbaraman, technology analyst at Ambit Capital in Mumbai. “Principally, they want these companies to be subject to the same licensing norms, the same spectrum norms.”

However, another industry expert described the tussle as an “ego battle”.

“It’s more about ensuring that the telecom industry remains in control of the local players rather than foreigners coming in and dictating their agenda,” they said. “I can’t think of any other explanation, it’s not like there’s a scarcity of spectrum, it’s abundant.”

A simple assignment of spectrum may hand Musk’s company, the largest and most successful of its kind, a “first-mover advantage”, while an auction process would allow Indian players time to get their products market-ready, said the person close to Reliance.

Musk told Modi last year that he wanted to bring Starlink, which operates more than 6,000 low-orbit satellites, to India to connect remote communities. Musk also has his eye on the long-term potential of India as a location for a Tesla plant, despite cancelling a trip to New Delhi earlier this year to prioritise talks with and focus on its Asian rival China. Reliance, along with India’s space and telecoms regulators, did not respond to requests for comment.



On the day that India and Canada expelled most of one another’s diplomats in an ugly dispute over an extrajudicial killing, Canadian police dropped another bombshell.

They claimed representatives of the Indian state were linked with the gang of one of the country’s most notorious criminals, Lawrence Bishnoi.

The 31-year-old Punjabi has spent the past decade in jail, facing multiple criminal charges. Most recently imprisoned in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s home state of Gujarat, he has been accused by police in Punjab, Mumbai and elsewhere of continuing to plot extortion, murder, and other crimes from behind bars.

On Monday night in Ottawa, Brigitte Gauvin, a Royal Canadian Mounted Police assistant commissioner, said “organised crime elements” were being used against Sikh Canadians such as the late Hardeep Singh Nijjar, who campaigned for an independent state, or “Khalistan”, in the Punjab region, and was shot dead last year.

She went on to mention the Bishnoi gang by name, saying: “We believe that that group is connected to agents of India.”

Bishnoi was already a familiar figure to many Indians. He was born in 1993 near the Pakistan border in India’s majority-Sikh Punjab state, one of its main sources of emigrants to Canada, the US and the UK.

He has been charged in more than three dozen cases, some of which are pending, and convicted of offences including attempted murder and possession of illegal firearms.

During Bishnoi’s decade in prison, news reports — often based on anonymous police sources — have linked him or his gang members, whose number Indian authorities estimate at 700, with shootings and other crimes. He has given interviews from behind bars, leading to speculation that he has access to phones or other devices in prison.

Now Bishnoi’s group was being named at a press briefing about a murder case in Canada that has inflamed tensions with India, and has stirred disquiet among New Delhi’s western partners, which have been keen to bolster it as a strategic ally against China.

An Indian government official, who asked not to be named, on Tuesday accused Ottawa of making “vague accusations” and putting the burden of denial on New Delhi, in an apparent response to the Bishnoi claims.

“At the [Canadian police] press briefing, assertions were made about connections of certain individuals to India,” the official said. “In no case were specifics provided.”

India’s government has not directly responded to the Canadian police claim about Indian agents using Bishnoi’s syndicate. Bishnoi’s lawyer could not be reached for comment.

Bishnoi is frequent fodder for Indian tabloids, and this was the second time this week he made national headlines. On Sunday, an associate of his gang claimed responsibility for the fatal shooting of Baba Siddique, a politician who was close to Bollywood stars in the commercial capital Mumbai.

Claims of possible links between Indian officials and criminals have added further pressure to the diplomatic crisis over Nijjar’s fatal shooting, as officials in Canada and the US investigate claims that the world’s largest democracy sponsors killings overseas.

India on Monday rejected what it called “preposterous imputations” by Canada, and expelled six diplomats, hours after Ottawa deported six Indians including its high commissioner Sanjay Verma. India said its diplomats had left because of fears for their safety.

Mélanie Joly, Canada’s foreign minister, said the six had been identified as “persons of interest” in Nijjar’s killing in a suburb of Vancouver. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said Canadian police found “clear and compelling evidence” that agents of the Indian government were involved in “activities that pose a significant threat to public safety”.

In the separate US case, federal prosecutors have charged Indian citizen Nikhil Gupta with conspiracy to commit murder-for-hire in a foiled plot against US-based Sikh separatist Gurpatwant Singh. They say that scheme was directed by an Indian official. Gupta has pleaded not guilty in the case, which has alarmed Washington.

The US Department of State on Monday said an Indian committee of inquiry into the alleged murder plot would be visiting Washington from Tuesday. India’s government has denied involvement in the Nijjar killing and the Singh plot, but analysts say its vow to investigate the latter is a reflection of the greater value it places on ties with the US.

“It is extraordinary for a country that calls itself democratic, and is considered democratic by other countries, to do what they’re accused of doing,” said Priya Chacko, an associate professor of international politics at the University of Adelaide. “It’s something that you would expect from an authoritarian regime.”

Indian media on Tuesday reported widely on Canada’s linking of the Bishnoi gang with the crimes in Canada. Broadcaster India Today dismissed it as an “old claim”. Modi’s government has accused Canada of harbouring extremist Sikhs and criminal elements in its diaspora population.

Bishnoi and his gang have been connected with other violent crimes in India. In April this year, when gunmen fired shots outside Bollywood superstar Salman Khan’s home in an attempt on his life, Indian media connected Bishnoi with the case. He did not claim responsibility, but he had previously been captured on film threatening Khan, saying he would “definitely kill him”.

Khan was convicted in 1998 of poaching two blackbucks, an endangered species of antelope; Bishnoi’s community, a religious grouping that practises vegetarianism, views the animal as sacred.

In 2022 Bishnoi’s name was linked to the assassination of Sidhu Moose Wala, a Punjabi singer. His gang claimed responsibility for the shooting, but Bishnoi himself never did, though he and several others were charged. He has denied responsibility for the murder.

In Canada, police in May charged three men with first-degree murder in Nijjar’s killing.

One analyst described the Canada-India showdown as indicative of a “more muscular foreign policy” under Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party-led government.

“To see two countries that are both democracies and both claim to be advocates of the rules-based international order — and both close allies of the US — have such a public breakdown in relations is surprising,” said Chietigj Bajpaee, senior research fellow for south Asia at Chatham House. “These are two countries that are supposed to be on the same side.”

Canadian police continue to investigate Nijjar’s death, along with what Trudeau said were allegations of Indian state involvement in “clandestine information-gathering techniques, coercive behaviour targeting south Asian Canadians, and involvement in over a dozen threatening and violent acts”.

But the allegation of the Bishnoi gang’s involvement has compounded an escalating scandal. Chacko said: “It’s extraordinary for a government to be accused of working with a criminal gang.”



Canada has expelled India’s highest-ranking diplomat and five other officials after accusing them of involvement in “criminal activities” linked to the assassination of a Sikh activist.

Canada’s foreign minister Mélanie Joly said the six had been identified as “persons of interest” in the murder of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, a Sikh separatist who was shot dead in a suburb of Vancouver in June 2023.

Ottawa said it was expelling six Indian officials, including Indian high commissioner Sanjay Kumar Verma, after saying New Delhi had refused to co-operate with its investigations.

“We continue to ask that the Indian government support the ongoing investigation in the Nijjar case, as it remains in both our countries’ interest to get to the bottom of this,” said Joly.

The accusations deepen an extraordinary dispute that started after Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau claimed last year that there were “credible allegations” of Indian government involvement in Nijjar’s death.

India’s ministry of external affairs said it had summoned Canada’s chargé d’affaires in New Delhi over the “baseless targeting” of Verma and other diplomats, which it described as “completely unacceptable”. New Delhi announced it was expelling six Canadian diplomats, including Stewart Wheeler, Canada’s deputy high commissioner, asking them to leave by Saturday.

A senior Canadian police officer said there were “links tying Indian government agents to homicides and violent acts” directed at Sikh supporters of an independent “Khalistan” in the Punjab region, which is split between India and Pakistan. New Delhi considers the activists to be terrorists.

Mike Duheme, commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP), suggested the activity went beyond Nijjar’s assassination. He said there had been “well over a dozen credible and imminent threats to life, which had led law enforcement agencies to warn members of the south Asian community and specifically members of the pro-Khalistan movement”.

Trudeau said there was evidence Indian government agents were involved in activities that included “clandestine information gathering techniques, coercive behaviour targeting south Asian Canadians, and involvement in over a dozen threatening and violent acts, including murder”.

A Canadian government official said Verma and five other diplomats had been informed that they were “persona non grata”, effective on Monday morning.

Trudeau on Monday described India’s actions as a “deeply unacceptable violation of Canada’s sovereignty and international law”. He said he had raised the matter with Narendra Modi, prime minister of India, and had “impressed upon him that it needs to be taken very very seriously”.

Duheme, the police commissioner, said the Canadian force had investigated and charged “a significant number” of individuals for their involvement in homicides, extortion and other criminal acts of violence.

New Delhi said it reserved the right to take “further steps” in response to what it called “the Trudeau government’s support for extremism, violence and separatism against India”.

Trudeau caused an uproar in India last year when he said Canada was investigating “credible allegations” that Indian agents might have been behind the assassination of Nijjar, who campaigned for the creation of an independent “Khalistan”.

The accusations, combined with a US criminal case brought against suspects in an alleged murder plot against Gurpatwant Singh Pannun, a US-Canadian Sikh separatist, shone a light on claims of alleged official targeting of diaspora activists whom India considers terrorists.

India has rejected allegations of government involvement in Nijjar’s killing and the attempt on Pannun’s life.

Canadian authorities in May arrested and charged three Indian nationals with Nijjar’s shooting. The RCMP said at the time it was investigating whether there were any ties to the government of India, adding that others might have been involved in the killing.

Wheeler told reporters in New Delhi: “The government of Canada has done what India has long been asking for, and Canada has provided credible, irrefutable evidence of ties between agents of the government of India and a murder of a Canadian citizen on Canadian soil.”

Joly confirmed in a statement that Monday’s expulsions were because of “a targeted campaign against Canadian citizens by agents linked to the government of India”.

India rejected what it said were “preposterous” and “ludicrous” allegations against its diplomats, and attacked Trudeau personally.

“His cabinet has included individuals who have openly associated with an extremist and separatist agenda regarding India,” the ministry of external affairs said.

Verma could not immediately be reached for comment.

The diplomatic dispute over Nijjar’s killing has brought relations between India and Canada to a low point, with New Delhi expelling most Canadian diplomats and temporarily suspending visa services last year.

Indian officials have accused the Trudeau government of pandering to Sikh voters with views New Delhi considers extreme, in what it has called “vote bank politics”.



I never used to look at airline route maps too closely. But now, when I journey from one peaceful country to another, I take a keener interest in where exactly we are flying over.

On a flight from London to New Delhi last week, I noticed with incredulity that the route map suggested that we were passing between Donetsk in eastern Ukraine and Crimea. The flight then took us over Russia (this was Air India), then just north of Iran, then over Afghanistan — and finally on to India.

Journalists like to talk about “trouble spots”. But the journey from western Europe to India felt like a trip between two “safe spots” separated by a sea of troubles.

How long can the world’s safe spots keep the sea of troubles at bay? And what is the best strategy for preserving the peace and prosperity of countries that are living on the edge of regions at war?

I’ve encountered different answers to those questions on three trips I’ve made over the past month — to Germany, to Bulgaria and now to India.

In Germany, there was a stark division of opinion. Boris Pistorius, the country’s defence minister, has warned that Russia could attack a Nato country within five to eight years. Norbert Röttgen, a prominent member of the Christian Democratic opposition, argues that the best way to prevent that happening is to defeat Russia in Ukraine. He wants to see much more military aid for Kyiv and a dramatic increase in German defence spending.

But the parties of the German far right and far left — which now account for about 30 per cent of the electorate — argue that it is not Russia but the US and Nato that threaten the peace of Europe. They want to give up on Ukraine and to reach out to the Russians.

That school of thought is also increasingly prominent in Bulgaria. One pro-Nato Bulgarian politician laments: “We have lost the word ‘peace’ to the pro-Russian forces.” Bulgarian liberals fear that it is not just rhetorical battles that they may lose in their struggle with pro-Putin populists. With the country heading for its seventh election in three years, the prestige of Bulgarian democracy is declining. Liberals fear their country could be vulnerable to the appeal of a pro-Russian strongman, like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán. The gains for Bulgarian democracy and sovereignty made after 1989 feel newly fragile.

The population of Bulgaria is roughly 20 per cent of that of the Indian capital alone. India’s sheer size and its distance from the frontline mean that its elites wave away suggestions that a victorious Putin would threaten their own security.

American, Japanese and European policymakers have made frequent efforts to persuade their Indian counterparts that a Russian victory in Ukraine would embolden China — whose forces killed Indian troops in a border clash in 2020. But the conventional wisdom in New Delhi is still that India needs a strong Russia to balance China.

In much of the global south, western arguments about Russian aggression and war crimes are rejected as hypocritical, given America’s unstinting support for Israel. But while Modi’s India sees itself as a leader of the global south, the country views the Middle East very differently. Shekhar Gupta, a prominent Indian journalist, observes that there is an “overwhelming pro-Israel mood among the majority in India”. One prominent member of the governing BJP told me: “The average party footsoldier is all for Israel bombing the hell out of Muslim terrorists.” India has abstained on several UN resolutions condemning Israel and continues to be an enthusiastic buyer of Israeli weaponry and technology.

To the extent that Indians feel threatened by the spreading war in the Middle East, their main concerns are a rise in oil prices, an upsurge in Islamist militancy at home and risks to Indians working in the Gulf. The safety of Indian troops serving with the UN in Lebanon may soon be added to that list.

Even the threat posed by China has an upside for India. The country stands to benefit, as western multinationals try to diversify away from China and lessen dependence on Chinese technology. That effort received official backing with the launch of a US-India initiative on Critical and Emerging Technology — deepening co-operation between the two countries on a range of areas including space, semiconductors and artificial intelligence.

Rising geopolitical tensions are seen as a business and strategic opportunity for India. As a result, the sense of foreboding about the direction of the world that is so evident in Europe and in liberal America is strikingly absent in official Indian circles.

Are Indians wrong to feel largely protected from the conflicts and tensions in the wider world?

One disquieting possibility that should concern them is the risk that various regional conflicts could become increasingly entangled. They already touch each other at various points. Russia and China have conducted joint air patrols near Alaska and the Sea of Japan. Iran has supplied weapons to Russia. If Israel attacks Iran, Russia might return the favour or seek to profit in other ways. With the western alliance distracted by conflicts elsewhere, China might see a chance to up the pressure in Asia.

If the conflicts in Europe, the Middle East and Asia begin to merge, the world’s sea of troubles will soon be lapping on India’s shores.

gideon.rachman@ft.com



India’s powerful copycat pharmaceutical industry is set to roll out generic weight-loss drugs in the UK within weeks, with one leading producer forecasting a “huge price war” that could widen access to the popular medicines.

Bengaluru-based Biocon is the first company to win UK authorisation to offer a generic version of Novo Nordisk’s Saxenda weight treatment and is ready to launch sales by November.

Saxenda is an older drug of the same GLP-1 drug class as the Danish company’s popular Ozempic diabetes treatment and Wegovy weight-loss medication.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Biocon chief executive Siddharth Mittal declined to comment on his pricing strategy for generic Saxenda, but predicted his company’s sales of the drug would reach £18mn annually in the UK after the expiry of its patent protection there next month. Mittal said he expected Biocon’s generic version of Saxenda to be approved by the EU this year and in the US by 2025.

“When the generics come in there will be a huge price war,” he said. “There is a huge demand for these drugs at the right price.”

In the US, Israeli drugmaker Teva in June launched a generic version of Victoza, a Novo Nordisk diabetes drug based on liraglutide, the same active ingredient as Saxenda.

The introduction of generic versions of Saxenda could prove a “dry run for semaglutide”, the active ingredient in Ozempic and Wegovy, said Christopher Sharp, an intellectual property lawyer at Pinsent Masons.

Sharp said there was likely to be strong competition from generics companies interested in developing GLP-1s “because the prize is so high”.

Biocon and other large Indian generic producers including Cipla, Dr Reddy’s and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries have been eagerly awaiting the erosion of Novo Nordisk’s exclusivity on GLP-1s.

The Danish company’s patents for semaglutide, the active ingredient in its blockbuster weekly Ozempic and Wegovy treatments, will begin to expire across Asia, Africa and the Americas from 2026 and from 2030 in the US.

Wegovy and Ozempic powered Novo Nordisk to record sales in 2023. The global market in GLP-1s is expected to grow to over $140bn by 2030 from under $40bn in 2023, according to GlobalData, a data provider.

Experts say entry of generic competition can typically result in a loss of around 80 per cent of the market share of the original supplier, and falls in drug prices of about 20-30 per cent.

Novo Nordisk’s sales of Saxenda are down 36 per cent in the first half of 2024. The drug must be injected daily and is less effective than once-weekly treatments such as Wegovy and rival Eli Lilly’s Mounjaro.

Novo Nordisk declined to comment. The Danish company is focused on increasing supply of semaglutide to meet runaway demand in the US and existing markets and to introduce it to new countries.

“They don’t have enough manufacturing capacity,” said Prashant Nair, director at Mumbai-based Ambit Capital. “[That] is something Indian companies can provide and if that happens then India and other emerging markets can open up.”

India is expected to be a core driver of GLP-1 sales for the country’s generic drug sector, the world’s biggest. The World Health Organization estimates 77mn Indian adults suffer from type 2 diabetes and government health surveys show almost one in four are overweight or obese.

India’s government has also announced it will subsidise the manufacturing of diabetes and weight-loss treatments once the patent for semaglutide expires in the country in 2026.

“There’s been some government push,” said Joydeep Ghosh, a partner at Deloitte India. “There are several serious large-sized Indian generics players who are well positioned even now.”

Srikanth Mahadevan, a director at Deloitte focused on healthcare, said sales of weight-loss drugs in India were estimated to be just a tenth of those in the US, but that would change once the country introduced semaglutide treatments.

India was going to be a “huge market given how big the patient base is”, Mahadevan said.



More than half of young people in the UK say financial support from their parents comes “with strings attached”, according to a survey commissioned by law firm Charles Russell Speechlys.

Fifty-six per cent of the 2,000 Gen Z adults polled said financial gifts from their parents came with conditions or restrictions, which might include seeing entrepreneurial children’s business plans, or asking unmarried children who were buying properties with their partners to sign cohabitation agreements, the law firm said.

The Opinium-conducted poll found that just under half of Gen Z (those born between 1997 and 2012) felt obliged to follow parental guidance when buying a house; about 40 per cent felt the same way when it came to wedding planning and starting a family.

“There’s always a tension when you’re trying to manage relationships in a family and there’s money involved,” said Sally Ashford, partner at Charles Russell Speechlys (CRS).

More than two-thirds of the young adults polled said it was likely they would rely on support from their parents for significant life expenses, such as buying property, planning a wedding or buying a car.

In the UK, first-time buyers in particular have come to rely upon parental wealth as rising prices have left all but the wealthiest struggling to buy property without support. In 2023, nearly six in 10 first-time homebuyers received family assistance in getting on to the housing ladder, according to estate agent Savills.

Ashford said parents often placed conditions on the gifts they made “to protect assets, not to stop children being able to use them. They want to make sure that if something goes wrong in their relationships or their lives, [the assets] aren’t lost for the family.”

Problems could arise over concerns that children might go “off the rails” and misuse the money or among “siblings of different ages who need money at different times”, she said. Ashford added that children’s partners could also be a source of tension, especially when they “came into the family with less wealth”.

For those whose children want to buy a property with their partner, declarations of trust — legal documents that record the terms of ownership — can prove useful, CRS said. However, in the case of divorce, the family court does not have to divide the ownership in line with the declaration of trust.

Advisers say parents should start talking about the family wealth early to avoid tensions later. Conversations could start “at the dinner table”, said Iain Tait, head of the private investment office at wealth manager London & Capital. “Don’t bottle it up, because the longer you leave it, the more difficult it becomes.”

Ollie Saiman, co-founder of wealth manager Six Degrees, said parents could teach their offspring the value of investing while protecting their assets by putting money into children’s pensions. Parents can put up to £2,880 each year into a junior self-invested personal pension (Sipp) and receive a 20 per cent top-up in the form of tax relief from the government.

“By gifting into a Sipp you’re effectively creating an investment portfolio for the child that they can see but can’t access until they turn 57,” said Saiman. “It can help them start to get to grips with what happens to money when you invest it.”

Tait said parents thinking about gifting should consider their children’s feelings. He gave the example of a child who has worked hard to build up a deposit for a house, and then has a large amount donated by a parent. “Feeling like you need to move into a framework created by your parents can be quite difficult,” he said.



Reform UK is gearing up for a fresh influx of funding as it hosts several former Conservative donors at a £25,000-a-head dinner in Mayfair next week.

Party leader Nigel Farage and treasurer Nick Candy are hoping to raise more than £1mn from the event at the Mayfair private members’ club Oswald’s on Tuesday, party officials said.

Individuals who have collectively gifted hundreds of thousands of pounds to the Conservative party in the past are expected to attend the dinner, in a pivot to Reform that will increase pressure on Tory leader Kemi Badenoch following several defections from her party.

Tickets to the event range from £10,000 to £25,000, and the event expects to attract up to 90 people, said a person familiar with the arrangements.

One former Tory donor planning to attend told the Financial Times they had chosen a £25,000 ticket, instead of a cheaper option, in order to examine how the party “treat senior donors, whether they respect them”.

The individual, who has given substantial sums to the Tories and asked not to be named, said: “The interest in supporting the Tories is at an all-time low. The interest in supporting Reform is slightly better, but the jury is still out whether it will deliver or not.”

The person added they understood the event was a trial for further such fundraisers, adding: “Reform want to see if this kind of thing works.”

Party officials are also making preparations for a larger gathering in the summer — dubbed a Reform festival — that they hope will attract thousands of paying attendees.

The summer event would be “a celebration of all of the incredible progress Reform has made and all that we and our supporters will achieve together in the coming years”, said another senior figure in the party.

The two events form part of a drive to raise tens of millions of pounds for the party, as it strives to increase its appeal going into this year’s local elections, and with an eye towards the next general election later this decade.

Reform is polling at 24 per cent, one point above the Tories, and three points below Labour, according to an average of recent polls, fuelling concern in the governing party and the main opposition.

The former Tory donor said they hope Farage will “unite the two strands” by merging the Conservatives and Reform parties. The two parties have ruled out any such move or making an electoral pact.

But an inpouring of cash into Reform’s coffers would be a fillip for the party after technology billionaire Elon Musk signalled his reservations about giving a sizeable donation to it in recent weeks.

Reform insiders say an uptick in donations will be the latest sign of the challenger party’s domestic momentum, after Farage and Candy travelled to Washington for Donald Trump’s inauguration earlier this week and showcased their connections to Maga Republicans.

Farage’s party faces a major test in the local elections in May, however, to prove its support base is not simply a paper phenomenon. Last spring the party fielded candidates in one in seven council seats up for election, and gained a paltry two councillors in total.

This year party insiders are hopeful of making far more significant gains, including two newly-created mayoralties: Greater Lincolnshire, which they will contest with former Tory Andrea Jenkyns against a Conservative opponent, and Hull and East Yorkshire, where Labour are also in contention.

Candy, who amassed a fortune in the property market and previously donated hundreds of thousands to the Tories, joined Reform as its treasurer last month, vowing to donate at least £1mn of his own money to the party. He has since boasted he will raise at least £40mn for Reform.

A Tory spokesperson said: “The Conservatives are under new leadership and working hard to renew and rebuild trust with the British people.”



More than 3.4mn people are yet to file their tax return a week before the deadline, with tax experts warning HM Revenue & Customs is taking a tougher approach on self-assessment penalties than in the past.

Failure to submit a self-assessment tax return by January 31 attracts an immediate £100 penalty, which applies even if there is no tax to pay, or if the tax due is paid on time. And there is potential for further penalties the longer the return is late.

Separately, there are additional penalties for failing to pay on time, with fines of 5 per cent of the tax due after 30 days, six months and 12 months.

HMRC said this week that 8.6mn people, roughly two-thirds of those required to file a tax return, had already done so. It urged anyone still needing to file a return to do so by the deadline.

Tax experts warned that HMRC is more likely to give penalties in relation to tax returns than in the past. In addition to the penalties, taxpayers will also have to pay a late payment interest rate of 7.25 per cent on the tax owed.

Neela Chauhan, partner at UHY Hacker Young, an accountancy group, said: “HMRC sees fines as an essential part of the taxes it raises for the government and it will issue fines even if you miss their deadlines by a small margin.”

A freedom of information request submitted by the firm found that the number of people penalised for missing the January deadline increased by nearly 50 per cent to 600,000 in 2022-23 from 410,000 in 2021-22.

Meanwhile, the value of penalties issued for late payment of self-assessment tax also jumped to £167mn in 2022-23, up from £120mn in 2021-22.

However, she added that it was important to challenge any fines and penalties if you believe them to be incorrect, as they can be cancelled or reduced if the taxpayer can show a reasonable excuse.

Of the 600,000 late penalties issued in 2022-23, 50,000 were cancelled following a challenge.

Those who want to pay their tax on time but cannot afford to pay it in full by the deadline can set up a “Time to Pay” instalments plan with HMRC.

More people have been required to file a tax return as a result of the government cutting allowances and freezing many tax thresholds since 2022, and experts expect this trend to continue.

Freezing thresholds, rather than raising them in line with inflation, increases tax receipts as rising wages and asset values tip ever greater numbers of people into the tax system or on to higher rates, a phenomenon known as “fiscal drag”.



A barrage of grim UK economic data this month has given chancellor Rachel Reeves “permission” to pursue a more aggressive growth agenda, according to senior government officials, trampling on Labour sensitivities and putting her on a war footing with regulators.

The chancellor will next week deliver a “growth” speech against the backdrop of a stagnating economy, recent turmoil in the bond markets, and a survey on Friday showing UK businesses cutting jobs at the fastest pace since the financial crash, barring the pandemic.

Reeves, who wants to accelerate a number of flagship investment projects, is said by colleagues to have decided after her recent battering at the hands of the markets and political opponents to go “faster and further” to pursue growth.

“There’s a view in the Treasury that all of this is fine,” said one minister. “It is seen as permission for them to go harder on growth measures.”

An ally of the chancellor said: “She has been frustrated by the speed at which things have been happening. She wants to use the power of the Treasury to show where we want to go next. This is politically contentious stuff.”

For example Reeves, who attracted Conservative criticism for visiting Beijing this month, is pushing for fast-fashion company Shein to list in London, in spite of concerns about standards in its factories in China. She is also supporting an expansion of Heathrow airport.

Market turmoil at the start of the year led to claims that Reeves’ job was on the line, but her supporters say she has used the episode to respond with “strength and decisiveness”. She said this month she would be happy to be known as “the Iron Chancellor”.

The Conservatives, however, say this is laughable. “It is clear Labour are out of their depth and out of ideas to get the economy growing,” said Andrew Griffith, shadow business secretary. “Working people are paying the price for Labour’s war on business.”

Griffith notes that for all Reeves’ deregulatory talk, she is about to impose on companies a raft of new employment laws, which the government estimates will cost business £5bn.

But Reeves — who this week was talking up the British economy at the World Economic Forum — has shown in recent days a willingness to use the power of her office to take decisive action across Whitehall, some of which is privately applauded by the Tories.

Ministers this week ousted Marcus Bokkerink as chair of the Competition and Markets Authority, the monopolies regulator that has been criticised for allegedly hobbling growth.

His departure was a signal to other regulators they must push harder on growth, according to Treasury officials. “Sometimes a message has to be sent,” said one.

Reeves’ focus on spurring on regulators has received the private admiration of the opposition. “We should have done this ourselves,” said one former Tory Treasury minister.

Yet while some Tories privately approve, Reeves’ actions have ruffled some on her side of the aisle. She has been accused by former shadow chancellor John McDonnell of leaving the door open for critics to say Labour was “defending corporate abuse and profiteers”. Another senior leftwing Labour MP said: “It’s desperate.” She appears, however, to be comfortable making such enemies.

The chancellor also sided with the banks this week in a Supreme Court case that will determine whether they have to pay out potentially tens of billions of pounds in redress in a motor finance mis-selling case. A new non-dom tax regime has been loosened.

Next week, Reeves is also expected to signal her backing for airport expansion in the south-east, including Heathrow, in spite of fierce criticism from the green lobby and London mayor Sir Sadiq Khan.

Whitehall insiders believe Reeves leaked the move to bounce her cabinet colleagues; Starmer himself has previously voted against a third runway at Heathrow, while Ed Miliband — who threatened to resign from Gordon Brown’s government over the issue — this week played down any suggestion he would quit. Meanwhile judicial reviews of contentious infrastructure projects will be curtailed.

Given the threat posed to her precarious fiscal plan by sluggish growth, Reeves has told the Treasury to stop focusing on Budgets and concentrate on boosting investment instead.

Officials are working on a range of projects — some with fruit-related code names — to get investment into Britain.

One relates to a massive new Universal theme park being proposed for a site near Bedford, with officials close to talks between the company and Treasury saying that they are “progressing well”.

Backers of the project claim it could generate as much as £50bn in economic value in its first 20 years. The Treasury has been asked to provide financial support, including for the upgrading of an M1 motorway junction and the building of a new station.

One official briefed on the talks, dubbed Project Mandarin, said they were nearly complete: “It’s one of those negotiations you could conclude if you wanted to.” Another person briefed on the talks added: “It’s very close. It’s almost there, but not there yet.”

Officials said the package of support focused mainly on guaranteeing infrastructure investments and improvements, which will be critical to carrying the thousands of people travelling to visit the 500 acre site.

Executives at Comcast — whose Universal Destinations & Experiences is behind the scheme — have in the past told the FT that they wanted to build “one of the greatest theme parks in the world”.

Universal Destinations & Experiences said: “We continue to have productive discussions with the UK government.”

Alongside the theme park, Reeves is also trying to finalise negotiations with AstraZeneca to revive a stalled vaccine manufacturing site in Speke, Merseyside.

The project was paused after the Treasury sought to reduce the amount of state support provided to the British pharmaceutical company’s vaccine centre, cutting a pledge made by the last Conservative administration from about £90mn to £40mn.

Meanwhile Reeves is also expected to signal her support for a £9bn highway and tunnel across the river Thames in east London, which would use private finance to defray the cost to taxpayers.

There are also signs that the government hopes to avoid any criticism that it is focusing all its firepower on the south east of England.

The Treasury has announced plans to review the “green book” it uses to evaluate the value of proposed investment decisions, long the focus of ire from critics who believe it favours London and the surrounding region.

It has also promised to build a pipeline of investable projects outside of the south east, with the help of the Office for Investment. Reeves is being watched closely by northern mayors, who had been courted by the Labour government when it first took office.



Judges have imposed a cap on legal costs in a High Court dispute between the publisher of the Daily Mail and alleged victims of phone hacking, including Prince Harry, after finding that the amounts both sides were planning to spend were “manifestly excessive”.

Associated Newspapers and a group of seven claimants including Sir Elton John and Elizabeth Hurley, as well as the Duke of Sussex, had budgeted for a combined total of almost £40mn to fight the case.

But in a ruling on Friday the High Court only permitted costs of about £4mn each. Mr Justice Nicklin and Senior Master Cook said that while either side could exceed the limit, they were unlikely to be able to recover expenses incurred above the cap if the other side were ordered to pay their costs.

Colin Campbell, a consultant at law firm Kain Knight and a former costs judge, said the ruling would likely work to the advantage of Associated, as the better-resourced party.

The case is the final leg of Prince Harry’s protracted legal battle against the UK’s tabloid press. The prince this week settled his claims against Rupert Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers, publisher of The Sun, after the company issued an apology for intruding into his private life and agreed to pay him “substantial” damages.

The claimants in the case against Associated, who also include actor Sadie Frost and former Liberal Democrat MP Sir Simon Hughes, allege the company published stories about them in the Daily Mail and The Mail on Sunday based on information gathered unlawfully. Alleged techniques include “blagging” sensitive records through deception, using private investigators and intercepting voicemail messages.

Associated has firmly denied the claims, previously describing them as “simply preposterous” and “lurid”.

The company had planned to spend £19.8mn fighting the case while the claimants had budgeted for £18.7mn, according to the costs ruling published on Friday.

The judges said they “had little difficulty concluding that such sums were manifestly excessive”.

They added that the claimants’ respective legal teams had “considerable expertise in this type of litigation and were not starting from scratch”, citing other legal proceedings such as the case against Murdoch’s company.

The claims were “really rather simple”, the judges added. The claimants “will either succeed or fail in demonstrating” that each of the articles they have complained about was the product of unlawful information gathering.

A trial has been scheduled for nine weeks, although it is not expected to begin until next January. Several pre-trial hearings have been scheduled for this year.

The judges said on Friday that they did not want to impose an “irreducible minimum” for costs but set “reasonable and proportionate parameters”.

They added they did not wish to “downplay the complexity of the factual issues that may arise” but wanted to put them “in the context of the sorts of litigation that come before the courts”.



When teenager Axel Rudakubana embarked upon a murderous frenzy in the seaside town of Southport last July, he not only destroyed the lives of his victims and their families but also sent shockwaves through British society.

On Thursday the 18-year-old received a 52-year jail term for the killing of three small girls and the maiming of 10 other people, an atrocity that was followed by a wave of online disinformation and anti-immigration rioting across England.

When full details of Rudakubana’s disturbing history finally emerged this week, they triggered a furious debate about the UK’s approach to open justice, as well as the state’s understanding of modern terrorism.

Rudakubana was arrested at the scene of last July’s killing spree at a Taylor Swift-themed dance class, still standing over the body of a child with a kitchen knife in his hand.

In the days and weeks that followed, police released very few details. Disinformation began to spread online, including incorrect claims that the attacker was an illegal immigrant.

Violent race riots followed and the authorities were later accused of a cover-up, particularly by those on the right of British politics.

It is a claim that police, prosecutors and the Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer, himself a senior lawyer and former head of the Crown Prosecution Service, have repeatedly denied.

“If this trial had collapsed because I or anyone else had revealed crucial details while the police were investigating — while the case was being built, while we were awaiting a verdict — then the vile individual who committed these crimes would have walked away a free man,” said Starmer on Tuesday.

Starmer’s position, and that of prosecutors, is based on British contempt of court laws dating back to the early 1980s, which restrict what information can be released ahead of a trial to prevent the jury being swayed.

However barrister Jonathan Hall KC, who is currently reviewing terror legislation for the government, called the state’s interpretation of contempt law in the Southport case “ultra cautious”.

Police could, he told the Financial Times, have safely released Rudakubana’s age, ethnicity, nationality, his birthplace of Cardiff and the fact he was from a Rwandan Christian background.

Naming him would have been more complex, as he was 17 at the time, but Hall said prosecutors could and should have applied for a court order to do so.

“Imagine if [police] had put out a clear, calm, authoritative, honest, transparent statement on Twitter [now X] early on,” he said.

“Some people are of course going to believe the worst, or in a conspiracy theory, but most people are just looking for information.”

The state’s silence may ironically have been counter-productive at trial, said Hall, because the jury could have had disinformation in their minds instead.

The justice system would now do well to “refine” its understanding of what “prejudicial” means in a social media era, he said, while decades-old contempt of court laws are reviewed.

The case has also sparked debate about the country’s understanding of, and response to, acts of terror.

Within days of the Southport killings, police discovered that Rudakubana was in possession of an al-Qaeda training manual.

Prosecutors would later argue that this had been used to plan the attack. He had also manufactured the deadly poison ricin in his bedroom, before storing it in a plastic box under his bed.

However while he was charged with the possession of terror-related material, he was not charged with committing an act of terror. Even police working on the inquiry said that they initially struggled to grasp why.

“I’m saying: is this not now terrorism, is this not now terrorism, is this not now terrorism?” recollected senior investigating officer Jason Pye, a detective chief inspector at Merseyside police, of his conversations with prosecutors as the evidence unfolded.

A terror charge would also have made his investigation more straightforward, he said. Under terrorism legislation, Rudakubana could have been detained for seven days.

Without it, police had a maximum of 72 hours to put their case together and gather medical evidence relating to the 13 victims.

“It would have absolutely meant we had the time to do a lot more things,” said Pye of a terror charge.

According to prosecutors, the sheer range of material found on Rudakubana’s 43 devices — coupled with his lack of explanation for his actions in interview — meant he could not be charged under the Terrorism Act 2000.

That defines terrorism as being “for the purpose of advancing a political, religious or ideological cause”. It was later updated to include racial ideology.

Among more than 164,000 seized documents was violent material relating to the Nazis, Gaza, Grozny and Iraq, as well as footage of the attack on Bishop Mar Mari Emmanuel in Australia last April.

“He wasn’t fighting for a cause,” said prosecutor Deanna Heer on Thursday. “His only purpose was to kill.”

Starmer said this week that he understood “why people wonder what the word ‘terrorism’ means”.

“And so, if the law needs to change to recognise this new and dangerous threat, then we will change it — and quickly,” he added.

Nevertheless Hall, who is now reviewing the legislation for home secretary Yvette Cooper, said he is “sceptical” of widening the terror definition.

Casting the net more widely, he said, could bring in individuals such as football hooligans or organised criminals.

Rudakubana’s case has also prompted questions over how well Britain’s existing anti-extremism agencies are equipped to cope with young people fixated by violence.

In 2022, aged 15, he told Lancashire police that he had thought about poisoning people and manufacturing poison for that purpose, which he later did. The force said it would not comment further ahead of a public inquiry.

Rudakubana was also referred to the government’s Prevent anti-extremism programme three times between 2019 and 2021.

Initially he was referred aged 13, when his school noticed him researching school shootings online.

Subsequently he was flagged for posting on Instagram about the former Libyan dictator Colonel Gaddafi, while in April 2021 he was found to have been looking up the 2017 London Bridge terror attacks at school.

On each occasion, Prevent closed the case, noting that there was no coherent ideology behind his actions. He did not become a subject of interest for counterterror police.

Speaking ahead of sentencing, Vicki Evans, senior national co-ordinator for counterterrorism policing, said that at the time of his referrals the programme had not caught up with a new generation of extremists.

“At the time the Prevent partnership response to the increasing fixation with extreme violence was evolving, but was less developed than it is today,” she said.

“Although improvements to help tackle this challenge have been made,” she added, “it is right that questions are asked about what more needs to be done.”



Britain boosted its electricity exports to France on Friday as high winds that ripped across the country gave it excess supplies of power.

France turned down the power it produces from its nuclear fleet by as much as 4 gigawatts — enough for millions of homes — as it imported extra electricity from Britain, according to Montel Analytics.

It highlights the changing nature of the power system as intermittent wind and solar energy are used to provide electricity to homes, businesses and factories.

Winds of up to 114mph from Storm Eowyn also show Britain’s growing dependence on its neighbours to buy and sell electricity to balance out an increasingly weather-dependent power system.

Electricity supply and demand has to be matched second-by-second, meaning that at times of high wind, Britain and other countries might be producing more than they can use themselves.

Britain has a number of cables, known as interconnectors, that link its power system to neighbouring countries including France, Norway, the Netherlands and Belgium.

Jean-Paul Harreman, director at Montel Analytics, said France had entered the early hours of Friday morning exporting electricity to other countries due to its own low domestic demand.

But traders soon started importing from Britain as its surfeit of electricity became clear. “France was exporting into every country it borders,” he said.

“Then Britain said, we don’t need your power, we want to reverse the interconnector. So France was already exporting and then it got extra power from Britain.

“They [France] didn’t have more capacity to export, so they turned down some of the nuclear power plants.”

Britain now has about 30 gigawatts of wind capacity, about half of which is offshore, where wind speeds can get very high.

If output is too high from wind and other generators and extra power cannot be exported, the country’s National Energy System Operator can end up having to pay wind farms to curb their output.

As Storm Eowyn hit overnight, several wind farms in Britain had to be paid to switch off, even with the exports, according to Montel Analytics.

France’s nuclear power fleet is run by state-owned energy giant EDF, which is also building the UK’s first new nuclear power station in a generation, Hinkley Point C, and wants to build a second, Sizewell C.

Nuclear power plants, which supply the majority of France’s electricity, cannot be easily turned on and off like a gas or coal-fired power plant, but output can be adjusted up to a point.

As well as adjusting its nuclear output, France used electricity overnight to pump water up to hydropower reservoirs, meaning they are ready to dispatch the water to produce electricity when needed.

Britain’s electricity system is becoming more complicated to manage as it becomes more dependent on intermittent supplies of electricity from wind and solar power.



Andreessen Horowitz is closing its London office and pulling back from its much-touted expansion into the UK, as the Silicon Valley investor seeks to refocus on the US cryptocurrency industry following the election of Donald Trump.

The group made a high-profile entry into the British capital in 2023, opening its first office outside the US with a focus on the UK’s crypto industry amid a crackdown on digital assets by American regulators.

The Financial Times reported on Friday that the venture capital firm had signalled to local entrepreneurs and policymakers that it would scale back the time and money it intended to invest in the country.Soon after, Anthony Albanese, a managing director at the group who helps to lead its crypto investments, announced the firm would close its UK offices altogether.“We’re excited by the enthusiasm for crypto building and adoption in the UK and are encouraged by the recent positive policy announcements and actions. However, we have chosen to focus on the US given the new administration’s strong policy momentum and will therefore be closing our UK office,” wrote Albanese on X.“This doesn’t change our confidence in the UK’s growing role in crypto and blockchain. We will continue to invest in great entrepreneurs no matter where they are in the world, including the UK. We also remain ready to help the UK with its ongoing crypto efforts.”

The partner originally tapped to lead the UK effort, Sriram Krishnan, stepped away from his London-based role last year before leaving the company altogether to join the Trump administration in recent weeks.

Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz, the firm’s founders, have become supporters of Trump, while advising him on technology policy.

The switch comes as Trump signed an executive order on Thursday aimed at promoting cryptocurrencies in the US and working towards potentially developing a national digital asset stockpile.

Prices in tokens such as bitcoin have soared since Trump’s election, under the belief that the new administration will advocate light-touch regulation of the crypto sector.

Andreessen Horowitz opened its London office with official fanfare two years ago, with then prime minister Rishi Sunak saying he was “thrilled” at the group’s arrival, and that the move was a “testament to our world-class universities and talent and our strong competitive business environment”.

At the time, Andreessen Horowitz, which has $43bn of committed capital, made much of its push into the UK, having invested in a number of UK-based crypto companies including Arweave, Aztec and Improbable.

“London is a major financial hub, it’s a major tech hub and frankly it’s a very attractive place for people to live,” Chris Dixon, who leads Andreessen Horowitz’s crypto investments, said to the FT in 2023.

One UK official downplayed the US investor’s reduced ambitions in the country, saying: “They were never really here.”



Donald Trump returned to the White House this week, with a host of radical plans that threaten to heavily affect the UK – spanning tariffs, the Ukraine war, energy and climate policy. How should the British government handle the new president and his prospectus? Host Lucy Fisher is joined by FT Westminster colleagues Jim Pickard and Anna Gross, plus US national editor Edward Luce, to consider the incoming turbulence from across the Atlantic. Plus, the team discusses the political fallout from the Southport atrocity.

Follow Lucy on Bluesky or X: @lucyfisher.bsky.social, @LOS_Fisher, Jim @pickardje.bsky.social, Anna @AnnaSophieGross, and Edward Luce @edwardluce.bsky.social and @EdwardGLuce

Want more? Free links:

The field is now wide open to Trump

The strange liberal nonchalance about Trump’s return

Elon Musk warned Reform UK donation might be difficult after joining Trump administration

Southport and the ‘lone wolf’ policy conundrum

Sign up here for 30 free days of Stephen Bush's Inside Politics newsletter, winner of the World Association of News Publishers 2023 ‘Best Newsletter’ award.

Presented by Lucy Fisher. Produced by Lulu Smyth. The executive producer is Manuela Saragosa. Original music and mixed by Breen Turner. The FT’s head of audio is Cheryl Brumley.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



A cacophony of outrage has broken out at Rachel Reeves’ demand that regulators should do more to support the economy. Consumer groups fear losing protections; antitrust lawyers mutter about monopolies; government departments manoeuvre to avoid cuts to bodies they sponsor. Others, meanwhile, have taken the opportunity to exhume dark warnings about the light touch regulation which fanned the flames of the 2008 crash.

The chancellor is right. Light touch regulation is not Britain’s current problem. In fact regulation has been one of our few consistently reliable growth industries. There is no inherent tension between the economy and smart regulation which prevents monopolies, keeps markets competitive and promotes capital formation. But in far too many cases, we have something different: constantly changing rules which businesses struggle to keep up with; complexity spawning ranks of lobbyists; and inherent mission creep.

Right now hundreds of sites with permission for high-rise housing are standing empty, because the new Building Safety Regulator is struggling to process them, eight years after the tragic Grenfell Tower fire. The Financial Conduct Authority, which failed to spot the Woodford scandal despite warnings from ex-City minister Paul Myners, seems obsessed with imposing diversity rules on companies, in a tenuous attempt to prevent “groupthink”. Whatever you thought of the CMA’s decision on Microsoft’s application to take over a gaming company, the many months it spent dithering were unimpressive.

There is plenty of room for improvement. But while swapping one chairman (ex-Boston Consulting Group) for another (ex-Amazon, ex-McKinsey) may bring a different culture to the CMA, it’s not a lasting solution. While some of these bodies are demonstrably failing, most are only as good as the remit they were given, by the politicians who set them up. The reason the UK has the highest electricity prices in Europe, crippling manufacturers, is that ministers have long used energy regulation to further their own environmental objectives.

Reeves’ instinct is that “the balance has moved too far on regulating risk”. This is partly because Whitehall itself is risk-averse. Officials, keen to de-risk decisions, have a tendency to push too many to Westminster’s sprawling landscape of arms-length bodies. Sponsor departments, in turn, are often reluctant to look too closely at how they are working: making a nonsense of the monitoring architecture, five-year reviews and impact assessments. But ministers are risk-averse too; and especially prone to “Something Must Be Done”-ery. The classic example was in 2000, when the response to the terrible Hatfield rail crash was to introduce safety regulations which caused chaos and were so expensive that they in effect valued the life of a train passenger at over a hundred times more than one in a car.

In 2015, when I was working in Downing Street, I was surprised to discover that a Whitehall department I was dealing with didn’t even have a list of the regulations it was responsible for. I asked a senior adviser what had happened to the “bonfire of the quangos” which George Osborne had launched five years before. Initially annoyed by my scepticism, he eventually admitted that while some inroads had been made, the system had pushed back, and the result was less a bonfire than a tiny spark. In 2021, the Public Accounts Committee found that spending by those bodies had since trebled; and Meg Hillier, the PAC’s Labour chair, challenged the then government to explain why they were set up in the first place.

Britain used to be really good at smart regulation. The creation of regulatory sandboxes, and the speedy rollout of the Covid-19 vaccine, shows that we still can be. But government also needs to ask itself some hard questions about what the state is for, and why we need bodies with confusing levels of overlap. Do we really need both Ofgem and the National Energy System Operator? The Environment Agency and Natural England? When Great British Railways is launched, what will be the point of the Office of Rail and Road?

Sir Dieter Helm, professor of economic policy at the University of Oxford, argues that the regulation of energy and water has become far too complex. He has proposed that they be regulated as networks, through a single regulator. That would be a much more effective approach. And unless we are able to flex our regulatory systems to better perform their objectives, how will Britain ever be nimble enough to cope with advances in AI, or synthetic drugs?

You don’t have to be a raving libertarian to feel that Reeves is on the right track. The problem, of course, is the dissonance between what the chancellor and business secretary are saying, and what the government is actually doing. It is setting up a large number of new arms-length bodies. And it is on the verge of unleashing an unprecedented set of new employment regulations, many of which will be unworkable. Just one little clause in that package will make every pub subject to being sued by both their staff and their customers — because its demand that employers protect their employees from harassment will clash directly with customers’ right to free speech.

There is still time to get this right. But politicians who want regulators to meddle less must curb their own instincts to interfere. That doesn’t come easy.

camilla.cavendish@ft.com



British Land and Singapore’s GIC have sold half of Citadel’s new City of London office tower, currently under construction at Broadgate, to Abu Dhabi’s Modon Holding.

A deal to bring in a new investor at 2 Finsbury Avenue, which is one-third pre-let to Ken Griffin’s Citadel and due to complete in 2027, has been hotly anticipated as a sign of growing international investor confidence in the top end of London’s office market, despite concerns about post-Covid demand.

Modon is an Abu Dhabi-listed real estate group backed by sovereign wealth fund ADQ and International Holding Company, which is chaired by Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed al-Nahyan, one of the United Arab Emirates’ most powerful men.

Simon Carter, chief executive of British Land, said the deal was “a vote of confidence for both Broadgate and the City”.

British Land, the FTSE 100 UK landlord, and GIC will each retain 25 per cent ownership of the tower through their Broadgate joint venture.

The willingness of an international sovereign-backed investor to bet on City office development is a positive sign for the market after a brutal two-year downturn.

Investment in London offices in the first three quarters of 2024 was the lowest since 2003, according to MSCI, with scant investor interest in large blocks. Blackstone’s roughly £300mn bid to acquire the “Can of Ham” skyscraper was seen as a positive indicator, but the deal with seller Nuveen fell through last year.

Modon’s chief executive Bill O’Regan said: “The quality and leasing potential of 2 Finsbury Avenue together with the experience and reputation of our partners, made this a compelling entry for Modon into the London real estate market.”

2 Finsbury Avenue will consist of two towers of 21 and 36 storeys, linked by a 12-storey podium. It marks a major expansion of the Broadgate campus in the City of London, which is already home to UBS.

Financial terms of the sale were not disclosed on Friday. British Land valued the development at £310mn in September 2024, with £628mn of costs still to come before the project is complete.

Griffin’s hedge fund Citadel and its sister firm, market-maker Citadel Securities, agreed to let 250,000 sq ft last spring, marking a two-thirds expansion of Citadel’s London office space. The deal includes an option for the US firm to increase its lease to half of the building.

The transaction represented a record rent for the City of London at the time, British Land said. The landlord later launched a search for a new investor, saying it wanted a partner to “share [the] risk and cost” of the project and free up capital for its other developments.

Many developers slammed the brakes on new flagship office projects in recent years, as construction and financing costs rose, office values faltered and investors worried about the impact of homeworking on office demand.

Those factors have resulted in a limited supply of top-quality buildings coming to market, allowing landlords to boost rents.

Carter said he expected a “significant imbalance between demand and supply for new and substantially refurbished space, particularly in the City, leading to strong rental growth at the top end of the market”.

CBRE and Knight Frank advised British Land and GIC. Cushman & Wakefield represented Modon.



Elon Musk’s social media platform X has refused to remove a video that Axel Rudakubana watched minutes before murdering three young children, despite numerous requests from authorities in Australia and the UK.

Australian internet regulator eSafety said on Friday it noted with “great sadness” that the video — which shows the violent stabbing of a bishop in Sydney in April — was watched by the killer on X even though the regulator had requested the material be taken down from the platform for months before the attack in Southport last summer.

Immediately following the Australian attack, companies including Google, Microsoft, Snap and TikTok “acted quickly to co-operate with eSafety and ensure the Wakeley stabbing video could not be accessed from their platforms. Some of these companies took additional, proactive steps to reduce further spread of the material,” the regulator said. “X Corp chose not to remove the video from its platform.”

The footage of the stabbing circulated online in April but X only geoblocked the footage in Australia, meaning that people elsewhere in the world, and local users of VPNs, could continue to view the violent attack.

UK home secretary Yvette Cooper said this week that the government was contacting X directly to ask it to remove the video from the platform. “Companies should not be profiting from hosting content that puts children’s lives at risk,” she told the House of Commons.

Rudakubana, 18, was sentenced to life with a minimum of 52 years in prison on Thursday after admitting to the murder of three young girls at a Taylor Swift-themed dance class in Southport.

Musk posted on X repeatedly in the wake of the killings, accusing UK Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer of “prioritising mosques over British girls in their dance classes”. Musk also amplified posts by far-right agitator Tommy Robinson that claimed “Muslims run through the streets unchallenged by police, attacking any non-Muslim”. The interventions led to accusations that he was inflaming tensions that led to rioting across British towns and cities last summer.

On Friday, Musk shared an article about the Southport killings, saying “never forget”.

But he has so far refused to intervene to compel his company to take down the video that Rudakubana watched, and the video was still circulating on X as of Friday afternoon.

The Financial Times contacted X to ask why it had not removed the video but received no response.

The court in the Rudakubana case heard this week that a search of a Lenovo tablet found in his house showed that he had deleted his entire browser history apart from one search on the day of the attack. Six minutes before he left to carry out the murders, he had searched X for “mar mari emmanuel stabbing”.

When police carried out the same search of X during their investigation, they found it led to posts containing footage of the Sydney attack three months earlier.

The prosecution also outlined Rudakubana’s online profiles and social media handles in court, including his X account. As of Friday, his X account — which is protected, so that only followers could see his posts — had not been taken down.

The Australian regulator sought to take legal action to try to force X to comply with a ruling to fully remove the video in April, a move that divided the country over whether the government was suppressing free speech or was correct to protect social media users from harmful and violent content.

Musk criticised the decision, accusing the eSafety “commissar” of trying to censor the internet.

That provoked a furious reaction from the country’s politicians, including Anthony Albanese, the prime minister, who said it was “distressing” that X was fighting the order to remove the video and criticised the billionaire’s stance.

However, a court opted against extending an injunction on the video being shown on the basis that X had taken “reasonable steps” to stop the video being shown in Australia. The case had been seen as a potential test case for whether local regulations could be applied on a global basis.

The eSafety commissioner dropped its case in June pending a review of Australia’s online safety laws.

Additional reporting by Hannah Murphy



UK businesses are cutting jobs at the fastest pace since the financial crisis, excluding the pandemic, as rising costs reignited stagflation fears in the British economy, according to a closely watched survey.

The S&P Global flash purchasing managers’ survey on Friday showed the net share of businesses reducing staff numbers in January and December was the highest since the global financial crisis in 2009, outside of the onset of Covid-19 in 2020.

In the latest significant job cuts, Supermarket chain J Sainsbury this week said it was axing 3,000 roles.

The data will come as a blow to chancellor Rachel Reeves, who has spent this week at the World Economic Forum in Davos talking up the British economy; next week she will give a speech on her plans to boost growth.

The survey contained some positive news with the headline index, which tracks overall activity in the private sector, rising to a three-month high of 50.9 points in January from 50.4 in December.

Economists polled by Reuters had expected the index to fall slightly to 50 points. Any reading above the 50 mark suggests that most businesses are reporting growth in activity and companies surveyed highlighted product launches and successful marketing as driving activity.

But the S&P survey also indicated that cost burdens on business rose at the fastest pace since May 2023. Many businesses passed on higher costs to consumers resulting in the fastest increase in average prices charged since July 2023.

Chris Williamson, economist at S&P Global Market Intelligence, said the survey’s results “add to the gloom about the UK economy, with companies cutting employment amid falling sales and concerns about business prospects”.

He warned that inflationary pressures had “reignited, pointing to a stagflationary environment which poses a growing policy quandary for the Bank of England”.

Lower employment was attributed to hiring freezes and the non-replacement of voluntary leavers in the wake of rising payroll costs, according to the survey.

Many businesses suggested the Labour government’s decision to raise employers’ national insurance contributions, which takes effect in April, had resulted in cutbacks to recruitment plans, while others cited the impact of a post-Budget slump in business confidence.

The Conservatives have claimed that Reeves’ tax-raising October 30 Budget will destroy jobs and hit growth, and that a major package of labour market reforms — still being finalised by ministers — will also hit hiring.

Andrew Griffith, shadow business secretary, said Reeves would be forced into a U-turn to save jobs, including possibly reversing her planned labour market reforms or the £25bn increase in employers’ NICs.

Griffith said: “To turn this around fast something’s got to give, whether it is the jobs killing Employment Bill, the NI hike or the anti-growth red tape still spewing out — or ideally all three.”

The Treasury said: “By bringing back political and financial stability, we are creating the conditions for growth and this week PwC confirmed that the UK has become the second most important destination for global investment after only the US.”

Earlier this month, a BoE survey showed that on average in November and December, 53 per cent of businesses expected lower employment in response to an increase in employers’ NICs. Sixty-one per cent expected lower profit margins and 54 per cent to raise prices.

A separate survey published by the research company GfK on Friday showed that consumer confidence fell by 5 points to the lowest level in more than one year in January against a backdrop of concerns over job cuts and higher borrowing costs.

Elliott Jordan-Doak, senior UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said payroll tax increases, global uncertainty and tariff threats were “driving inflation and output in opposite directions”.

He added that growth was not weak enough to warrant faster rate cuts, but inflation was strong enough to warrant caution, suggesting the Monetary Policy Committee “has to plot a middle ground”.

Similarly, Elias Hilmer, economist at Capital Economics, said the PMI figures “won’t alleviate the BoE’s concerns about the weakness of activity, but the further strengthening in price pressures suggest it will cut rates only gradually thereafter”.

Aligned with markets, he expects the BoE to cut rates by a quarter-point to 4.5 per cent in February.

The UK economy registered no growth in the three months to September, marking a sharp slowdown from the 0.4 per cent in the previous quarter. The BoE expects no growth also in the final quarter of 2024.



It’s been the busiest January I can remember. Three weeks into the new year and one topic dominates client meetings: pensions and inheritance tax (IHT). Some families could now be paying hundreds of thousands of pounds extra in tax on death due to coming rule changes. Many want to start planning to avoid this now.

Take two of our clients, Mark and Nicola (not their real names). Their strategy had been smart — fully funding Isas while also salary sacrificing big contributions from their business into pensions, simultaneously reducing their corporation tax bill.

They were heading for a comfortable retirement, with a nice home in Yorkshire and investable assets of more than £3mn. And they had the reassurance that their children would also be financially secure, because nearly all of what was left of their estate on death would be free of IHT.

Last year’s Budget shattered that dream. Now, if our couple die suddenly soon after April 6 2027, their sons could face an IHT bill of more than £1mn.

The total tax charge on money left in a pension to loved ones might now be 64 per cent. This is because pensions face a double tax hit. First, there is the 40 per cent IHT charge. That would make a £1mn pension pot worth £600,000. Next, the rules as they stand mean that if you die after the age of 75, anyone drawing money from that pension pot will pay income tax at their marginal rate. At 40 per cent, that could mean another £240,000 eventually going to HM Revenue & Customs.

But it could be worse. Because of tax tapers, the marginal rate for those earning between £100,000 and £125,140 is 60 per cent — an anomaly Rachel Reeves sadly left unchanged. That would give HMRC 76 per cent on funds extracted by a beneficiary who fell within this income band.

It doesn’t end there. Adding pensions to IHT has made some families worry they’ll topple over the tax cliff edge that arises because of the gradual withdrawal of the residence nil rate band for estates over £2mn.

I won’t bombard you with the maths. Suffice to say that in some circumstances the marginal rate of IHT alone becomes 60 per cent. Add in income tax and, in extremes, the tax could in effect be as much as 84 per cent. You would have to be poorly advised to pay that. At least you have control over the drawing down of benefits so you could make an inherited pension the last pot you draw from, holding off until your marginal rate is lower. But it doesn’t make life simple!

On top of the pensions issue is the halving of business property reliefs beyond £1mn, which has riled so many farming families. On some farms £1mn does not even cover the cost of machinery, leaving many wondering whether farms that go back generations can remain viable. This has rightly generated a lot of coverage, but entrepreneurs wanting to pass on businesses or who die unexpectedly while still in harness face a similar challenge.

All these changes are forcing many families to bring forward gifting strategies, triggering a “beat-the-clock” game of passing on large parts of their estate seven years before they expect to die to avoid any IHT.

The new rules on pensions will not come into effect until 2027, but at a time of year when many of us are reviewing our finances, it is a good idea to start considering the implications today if IHT affects your family.

For some it will make sense to draw the tax-free lump sum from their pensions — 25 per cent of any pot up to a maximum of £268,275 — and give that to the children as a one-off gift to help with house purchases. This will be subject to the seven-year gifting rules, reducing the nil-rate band available on death within seven years of the gift. Any tax liability tapers after three years.

A simpler approach is to give the money gradually, drawing down more from your pensions and investments than you need and giving the excess away. Yes, you pay income tax but remember that you enjoyed a tax break on your pension contributions and couples who pool their assets smartly may be able to reduce the impact of income taxes.

Gifts from excess income are free of IHT but I suggest making regular monthly payments and keeping a record of all transactions in case HMRC challenges your estate on death.

The changes force people to review other assets, too. I have been asked about putting holiday homes into the children’s names. It is not that simple. If the property has risen in value since bought it you could find yourself with a big capital gains tax bill. Be aware too that you may have to pay rent to continue to use it. And your children will be entitled to sell it if they need the money. You will lose control. A shared ownership structure may be more effective.

With any gifting strategy there is always the risk of giving too much too soon. Many clients worry about demotivating the next generation. Others are concerned about the money being lost through divorce. This last one can be addressed to some degree with legal contracts. I know some farming families, for instance, who are creating a family constitution. This includes as a condition of inheritance that any family member marrying — or remarrying (this applies as much to the parents as the children) — should agree a pre-nup. And if already married they should go for a post-nup. The constitution brings a degree of professionalism to an emotional subject. It is a way of saying: “We don’t dislike your spouse, and it is not personal. We are just trying to ensure the viability of the family’s legacy for future generations.”

The other big risk with bringing forward gifting strategies is that you end up short yourself late in life when most vulnerable and needing care. Gradual giving can help mitigate this risk.

With the best care homes costing more than £4,000 a week, you need to do some serious cash flow planning, considering possible scenarios. Your greatest gift to your children can be that you are still financially self-sufficient in later life. As ever, do not let an obsession with avoiding tax or ignorance of the rules lead you into financial folly.

Clare Munro is a tax adviser at Weatherbys Private Bank



Blackstone is closing in on a deal to take full control of a £2bn portfolio of more than 5,000 UK railway arches, buying out its partner five years after a deal that symbolised the advance of US private equity into the UK economy.

The US private capital group, which is the world’s largest commercial property investor, has agreed to buy TT Group’s half of the portfolio, which the two investors acquired from Network Rail for £1.5bn in 2019, according to people familiar with the matter.

The transaction would involve Blackstone buying out TT’s stake in the Arch Company, which owns the portfolio. The deal, first reported by Green Street News, has yet to be finalised.

The brick arches under railway lines are an iconic part of British streetscapes and home to a range of small businesses from micro breweries to auto repair shops and hairdressers.

Network Rail’s sale of the vast portfolio became symbolic of private equity’s increasing role in the UK domestic economy, making Blackstone and TT the landlord to thousands of small businesses.

The deal brought greater investment to the arches, but also raised concerns about more aggressive management and rent increases.

Some small businesses faced steep rent increases as they were dealing with the hardship of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Arch Company at the time offered some occupiers rent holidays and set up a hardship fund to assist struggling businesses. It also negotiated a “tenants charter” with the Guardians of the Arches tenants association.

The new owners also invested heavily in the portfolio. Some 1,400 arches were derelict when Network Rail agreed the sale and are now being brought back into use.

TT Group, owned by the Pears family and formerly known as Telereal Trillium, is one of the UK’s largest privately held real estate investors, with a portfolio worth more than £9bn.

The group is looking to free up capital for new investment while Blackstone would prefer to have complete control of the portfolio, said one of the people familiar with the matter.

Blackstone and TT declined to comment.



Good morning. Axel Rudakubana has been handed one of the longest jail terms in UK history — he will serve at least 52 years in prison before becoming eligible for parole. It comes after he admitted to the murder of Bebe King, six, Elsie Dot Stancombe, seven, and Alice da Silva Aguiar, nine, at a dance class in Southport last July.

It is highly likely he will never be released.

It is also very probable the law will end up being tweaked so that in the event of a similar future case (the only reason why Rudakubana did not receive a whole life sentence is that he was 17 at the time of the murders) the possibility of parole in cases like these is downgraded from “wholly theoretical” to “non-existent”.

The more complicated question is about how and if the UK counterterror system should change in response. I wrote a bit about that earlier this week, but now that he has been sentenced and I can write more freely I want to revisit some of it and address some of the trade-offs and some of the misconceptions about the policy challenge.

The challenge that the Southport murders pose for the British state is that it is not a mental health story or a “traditional” terror story. Many of your responses to Tuesday’s newsletter talked about the deleterious effects of cuts to children and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) and other youth services more broadly during the last government.

I’m not saying that these cuts have not had important negative effects for the health and happiness of people in the UK. But they were not a factor in this case: Axel Rudakubana was not, and is not, mentally ill. His defence team did not submit any evidence of mental illness and indeed their submission in mitigation was deliberately and explicitly thin. Rudakubana’s defence was led by Stanley Reiz KC, one of our most respected criminal defence lawyers. He had a Rolls-Royce defence team, and you can be sure that had there been an even halfway-plausible case to be made in mitigation about Rudakubana’s mental health they would have found it and made it.

This isn’t a case about a young man of unsound mind committing a series of horrific crimes. It’s one of a young, violent man consciously planning and choosing to commit an atrocity. But nor is it one of a young, violent man doing so in service of a particular cause. Police seized 43 electronic devices from Rudakubana’s house, and were able to access the contents of 32 of them. They contained more than 164,000 downloaded documents spanning a vast range of extreme violent imagery and information. But what they did not contain was any evidence of an underlying motivation beyond a desire to commit a horrific act of violence.

Rudakubana was known to CAMHS, had been expelled from his school, and was three times referred to Prevent, the deradicalisation programme. He had been convicted for assaulting another student. In November 2019, he was referred to Prevent by a teacher after searching for information about mass shootings on a school computer. In February 2021, he was again referred, this time after a pupil reported he had uploaded images of Muammer Gaddafi to Instagram. Two months later he was referred again by a teacher who noted that he had two tabs open about the 2017 London Bridge attack. Between October 2019 and May 2022, Lancashire police responded to five calls about his behaviour from his home address.

One reason why Rudakubana’s referrals to Prevent didn’t go anywhere is that on no occasion did Prevent find evidence of any underlying ideological reason for Rudakubana’s behaviour other than an interest in violence. And he did not end up being detained for his own safety and that of others because he was not mentally ill. The UK, like most states, essentially has two routes to pre-emptively stop atrocities, and neither fitted Rudakubana. The challenge facing the government is: is it possible to construct a route that would?

Anyone who is familiar with mass shootings will note some immediate similarities. Martin Bryant, who in 1996 killed 35 and injured 23 others in Port Arthur, in what was the deadliest massacre in Australia’s history, had studied the Dunblane massacre which occurred earlier that year. Seung-Hui Cho, the perpetrator of the Virginia Tech shootings, was reportedly transfixed by the 1999 Columbine high school massacre.

Now, most mass killings are not considered to be acts of terrorism, though there are occasional calls in the US to treat all school shootings as terrorism, and calls in many parts of the world to treat some or all forms of domestic violence as terrorism. (I will return to both of these at a later date as they have implications for how the British state might respond to the Southport murders.)

Our understanding of why mass shooters — and more broadly, “spree killers” who may use other weapons — do what they do is not very good, in part because so many mass shooters either end up shooting themselves or being shot by law enforcement. Our ability to detect “lone wolves” of any description is already limited. Frankly, the only policy lever that any nation has found that works to reduce this problem is gun control. It’s the lever that Britain pulled after Dunblane, and tightened further after the Plymouth shooting in 2021. It’s the lever that Australia pulled after Port Arthur, too.

The state clearly failed multiple times to spot the threat that Rudakubana posed. While it may be easy to look at the list of instances and go “well, why is the home secretary fretting about making it harder to buy kitchen knives on Amazon?”*, that is misplaced. While taking steps on the purchase of knives addresses a very small part of what went wrong here, this is the lever that we know works. Yvette Cooper is absolutely right to want to make buying a knife as tough as she possibly can. We will never be able to outright stop the use of knives, so there is a limit to how far she can go, but she is absolutely right to explore it.

Both Cooper and Keir Starmer have argued that this case is a reason to change the UK’s counterterror system so that it is better geared up to address and monitor “violence for the sake of violence”, and the new, more incoherent “pick and mix” terrorism that MI5 director-general Ken McCallum warned about in his annual threat update last autumn. They have asked Jonathan Hall, the government’s independent reviewer, to review whether the UK’s definition of terrorism needs to be expanded.

What we define as terrorism matters in this case because we grant greater powers to law enforcement to detain, search and monitor people if they are engaging in acts defined as terrorism than we do common murderers.

There are inevitably trade-offs here. For example, there would be reductions in freedom and liberty if we were to increase the scope of what is and isn’t considered to be terrorism. It also places strain on the security services and on the UK’s counterterror resources. As Hall himself said in an interview with the Times:

This is genuinely difficult. Taken together, Hall’s review, Cooper’s beefed-up scrutiny of the Prevent programme and the new inquiry into the failures to pick up Rudakubana will provide a useful framework to assess how and whether we should go further.

An important difference between Islamist extremist terror (roughly 75 per cent of MI5’s counterterror caseload) and the extreme far right (roughly 25 per cent) is that Islamist extremists tend to aim for mass death, while the extreme far right tends to go for specific targets.

There are exceptions to that, of course, but “mass death” may well be the way to square this circle. Rudakubana was cultivating ricin for that very purpose. Treating violence designed to inflict mass death for its own sake as a form of terrorism might be a way to marry Starmer’s desire for greater powers with Hall’s justified concerns about it swamping the security services.

*Full disclosure, one of the pundits to have been thoughtlessly and reflexively dismissive of that measure is me, as listeners who heard me on LBC’s Cross Question will know. Several of you wrote to take me to task about it and rightly so. I’m always grateful for the many thoughtful replies and emails I get from Inside Politics readers. They sharpen my thinking immensely and I am sorry I have been particularly sloppy at replying to them recently.

This article was updated to correct the date of the Columbine massacre to 1999.

I’m off to see the West End transfer of what was far and away the best play I saw last year — The Years, the stage adaptation of Annie Ernaux’s memoir. There are still tickets here.

However you spend it, have a wonderful weekend!



The idea behind the concept of generations is that people born at a certain time share similar experiences, which in turn shape common attitudes.

The “Greatest” and “Silent” generations, born in the early decades of the 20th century, witnessed economic adversity and global conflict, going on to form relatively leftwing views. Baby boomers grew up accustomed to growth and prosperity, and went on to lean strongly conservative.

It was a similar story for millennials, who entered adulthood in the aftermath of the global financial crisis to be greeted by high unemployment, anaemic income growth, and ballooning house price to income ratios, going on to champion strongly progressive politics.

A lot of analysis and discourse treats millennials and Gen Z as close cousins, united in their struggle to achieve the prosperity of earlier generations. But the validity of that elision depends a lot on where you look.

Millennials right across the western world really were united in their economic malaise. From the US and Canada to Britain and western Europe, the cohort born in the mid to late 1980s lived its formative adult years against a backdrop of weak or stagnant wage growth and cratering rates of home-ownership.

Absolute upward mobility — the extent to which members of one generation earn more than their parents’ generation at the same age — fell steadily. In the US, by the time someone born in 1985 turned 30, their average income was only a few per cent above that of their parents at the same age, a far cry from the clear, palpable generation-over-generation gains of 50 to 60 per cent made by those born in the 1950s.

On both sides of the Atlantic, the narrative of millennial malaise is no myth. They may go down as the most economically unlucky generation of the past century.

But we then hit a fork in the road. For young adults in Britain and most of western Europe, conditions have only got worse since. If you thought the sub-1 per cent annual growth in living standards endured by millennials was bad, try sub-zero. Britons born in the mid 1990s have seen living standards not merely stagnate but decline. Right across Europe, there is precious little for the youngest adults to be happy about.

But in America, Gen Z are motoring ahead. US living standards have grown at an average 2.5 per cent per year since the cohort born in the late 1990s entered adulthood, blessing this generation not only with far more upward mobility than their millennial elders, but with more rapidly improving living standards than young boomers had at the same age. And it’s not just incomes: Gen Z Americans are also outpacing millennials in their climb up the housing ladder.

All the signs are that in the US, the decades-long slowdown in generation-on-generation economic progress has not only stopped but gone into reverse. Americans born in 1995 are enjoying even more upward mobility relative to their parents than those born in 1965. Zoomers by name, zoomers by socio-economic nature.

Both the change in young Americans’ economic trajectories and the divergence from their European counterparts pose interesting questions.

From a sociological perspective, in an age of borderless social media narratives and algorithms that reward negativity, can the meme of young adult adversity survive contact with America’s Gen Z reality? And with a stream of negative social comparisons only a smartphone away, how will the growing realisation that young Americans are on a higher trajectory affect young Europeans?

Turning to politics, will the youngest cohort of American voters tread its own path? The fact that it was not only the youngest men but also young women who swung behind Donald Trump in the US election suggests this may already be happening. A group that comes to see itself as among life’s winners may not develop the same instinct for social solidarity that its downtrodden predecessors came to hold.

In an era of “vibe shifts”, the pivot from a sense of downward mobility to one of rising prosperity may prove the biggest yet. A divergence in the mood music on either side of the Atlantic will also surely inject fresh urgency into Europe’s search for an uptick of its own.

Whichever way you look at it, the restarting of the economic conveyor belt in America could prove to be a hugely significant moment.

john.burn-murdoch@ft.com, @jburnmurdoch



A Regent’s Park mansion formerly owned by Saudi royals that fell into receivership nearly two years ago has sold for £139mn to a mystery buyer in one of London’s largest ever property sales.

The Holme, which sits in a four-acre private garden within ​​Regent’s Park in central London, has been sold to a UK subsidiary of Zedra, a corporate service and wealth management firm that runs trusts on behalf of various clients, according to UK land records.

The £138.9mn sale vies with billionaire Adar Poonawalla’s roughly £138mn purchase of Aberconway House in Mayfair in 2023 as the second most expensive house ever sold in London.

“This is a once-a-decade kind of property . . . a mini stately home in the middle of London, in its own parkland,” said Roarie Scarisbrick, a buying agent at Property Vision. “This is not a house for the shy and retiring type.”

UK companies have to publicly register their beneficial owners. This requirement was extended to overseas companies that own property in the UK in order to increase transparency after Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

But there are still gaps in the regime, which have drawn criticism from transparency advocates and some lawmakers. The individuals behind some properties can still be obscured through trusts, where information about the ultimate beneficiaries is disclosed to the government but not made public.

Proposing transparency measures in 2023, then-housing secretary Michael Gove said: “Trusts can be used for wholly legitimate reasons. But they can, and are, created with deliberately labyrinthine structures to obscure the ownership of assets and make it easier for corrupt individuals to operate.”

The company registered as the new owner of the Holme is controlled by a Luxembourg-based Zedra entity, according to corporate records.

The UK government has published new draft regulations that will allow anyone to apply for information about trusts held in the register of overseas property owners — with certain limits, for example, to protect information about minors. If approved, the regulations are expected to take effect in August.

The Holme came on the market in early 2023 seeking a price as high as £250mn after debts secured against the property expired. It was previously bought on behalf of Prince Khaled bin Sultan al-Saud of Saudi Arabia and his family in 1991 via a Guernsey-registered company called Quendon Ltd, which later listed five of Prince Khaled’s children as beneficial owners.

The 207-year-old villa, which is owned on a long lease from the Crown Estate, would probably require complex and costly renovations given its heritage status, people familiar with the property said. One of a handful of private residences located inside the central London park, the Holme’s neighbours include the US ambassador’s residence at Winfield House.

Public records show the property was sold in mid-December by Trinity Investments, an Irish company managed by London-based hedge fund Attestor. The fund is known for its debt strategies, and made a multimillion-pound loan to Quendon secured on the property.

Attestor and Zedra declined to comment. Agents Knight Frank and Beauchamp Estates, who were appointed to sell the house, declined to comment.

London’s most expensive house sale, the 45-room mansion at 2-8a Rutland Gate, was secretly agreed just before the Covid-19 pandemic and involved a British Virgin Islands company buying the property for £210mn from a Curaçao-registered entity. The Financial Times revealed in 2022 that the buyer was Evergrande founder Hui Ka Yan, once China’s richest man.



My godmother, a sprightly 77-year-old, died very suddenly last week. Her passing was so unexpected that when the news first reached me, I felt sure it was a scam. Alas.

As we slowly adjust to life without her, there is some comfort that it all happened so quickly. Survived by my godfather, she has also been spared the trauma of dealing with the administrative and financial aftermath had he died first. It turns out this is something that had worried her in her later years, and finding that out has made me even sadder.

With major changes to the inheritance tax treatment of pensions on the horizon, I fear the grim complexity of sorting out a deceased person’s financial affairs while you are grieving can only get worse.

My FT colleague Miranda Green used the term “Sadmin” to describe it. We received an overwhelming response to a podcast we made last year about her protracted struggle with financial providers to settle her late father’s estate.

One detail that will forever stick in my mind is a phone call she made informing her dad’s private pension provider of his death, which resulted in her being quizzed about an apparent overpayment. So much for empathy! “You do feel that you’re talking to a faceless bureaucracy that no longer cares because that person isn’t going to take their business elsewhere,” she reflected at the time.

Firms urgently need to pull their socks up, but so too does the government. Grieving families have been navigating long delays in the probate system since the pandemic, and more estates are being drawn into the inheritance tax net. HMRC reported an 11 per cent year-on-year increase in IHT receipts this week, and this is set to rise substantially in 2027, when IHT will be applied to inherited pension pots.

As a consultation on the measures ended this week, financial providers branded the proposals “unworkable” claiming they will lead to increased costs and severe delays in money being paid to bereaved families, even in cases where no IHT is due.

The key sticking point they are urging the Treasury to rethink is who pays the IHT bill. Under the current proposals, pension schemes would be responsible for paying any IHT due directly to HMRC before any funds are distributed. Yet in order to calculate any tax liability, providers would have to work with executors to find out the value of other pensions and the person’s wider estate, and how to apportion the nil rate band.

Any readers who have ever tried communicating with a pension company will know that the speed of response to the most basic of queries is often glacial. So what are the chances of pension schemes correctly calculating IHT liability within six months of a person’s death, after which late interest payments will be incurred?

The Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association has sensibly proposed that estates should be responsible for paying the tax, with an extended 12- month period to settle before any interest is charged, to give families and pension schemes time to work out the calculations.

It has also raised important questions about how IHT will be applied to death-in-service payments. A form of life insurance for employees, I have previously urged readers to ask HR departments if such benefits are linked to a pension scheme, and thus potentially subject to IHT in future (if yours are, ask what your firm intends to do about this before 2027).

An awful lot of misery and additional distress could be avoided if the government listens and responds to these concerns. But what about the steps we can personally take to prepare for the inevitable and make things easier for those we leave behind?

If you enjoy reading personal finance articles in the FT, chances are you are the “money person” in your household. I certainly am — so it doesn’t have to be divided along gender lines — but advisers tell me it frequently is. Nor is this issue confined solely to older generations. I have a great many friends — including same sex couples — who are happy to outsource virtually all financial management to their other half.

This risks storing up big problems in the future if the “money person” dies first — and even more so if the couple were not married or in a civil partnership and thus unable to share tax allowances and defer IHT bills until the second death.

If the money person was also the biggest earner, assets such as pensions are likely to have been built up in their sole name. IHT changes will require pension providers to be informed promptly of a person’s death — but what if a surviving spouse does not know about them?

A decade of auto enrolment means people have pension pots from previous jobs all over the place, resulting in an estimated £31bn worth of “lost” pensions — a problem that can only compound.

I did an item about this on daytime TV two weeks ago, and was bombarded with messages on social media from widowed women telling me of their struggle to find old pensions and life insurance policies they thought their husbands had taken out. Many messages were tinged with a sense of shame about their inability to navigate the system and track down this much-needed money. Heartbreaking.

Free digital services such as Gretel are making this slightly easier, but the industry needs to take much better ownership of this problem.

As do we all, of course. How prepared would your partner be if the worst happened, or if you were suddenly taken ill and unable to manage the finances? It’s easier if you have a financial adviser, but often, they will only have a relationship with the “financial lead” of the family.

A recent study by Boring Money found that women over 65 who display at least one “vulnerable” characteristic were the least satisfied with financial advice — the key shortcoming being clarity and communication.

As well as sorting the basics such as your wills, lasting powers of attorney and life insurance, the digital nature of modern finances is another problem. Miranda had several Tesco bags full of old paperwork to help piece together her father’s affairs. If your finances are in the cloud, how much more difficult is this process going to be?

I recommend a workbook called I’m Dead: Now What? that you can buy online and fill in with helpful instructions about all kinds of things (not just money) that will make things easier for those you leave behind.

Having conversations with our nearest and dearest about these things while we are still alive is awkward. But the alternative is much worse.

Claer Barrett is the FT’s consumer editor and author of the FT’s Sort Your Financial Life Out newsletter series; claer.barrett@ft.com; Instagram and TikTok @ClaerB



UK ministers are exploring scrapping promised stricter audit rules for private companies as the government seeks to dial back regulation in a bid to boost economic growth.

Business secretary Jonathan Reynolds and employment minister Justin Madders have met large audit firms and big investors in recent months to discuss watering down or axing reforms that would designate about 600 companies “public interest entities”, according to people familiar with the talks.

The previous Conservative government pledged to reform the UK’s audit regimes after multiple high-profile corporate failures, such as outsourcer Carillion, retailer BHS and café chain Patisserie Valerie.

In 2021, ministers proposed classifying the largest private companies and Aim-listed companies as public interest entities (PIEs). They acted after BHS’s collapse sparked questions about whether audits of non-listed companies should be scrutinised in greater depth to prevent similar failures.

The designation would place the audits of roughly 600 non-listed companies with 750 employees and more than £750mn in annual turnover under a tighter regulatory system overseen by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC).

Reynolds told the Financial Times in 2023 that, if Labour won power, it would push through the long-delayed reforms. But one person familiar with the government’s thinking said the reforms were now “ancient history” because tighter auditing requirements were viewed as “another barrier, a ceiling to growth”.

With Reynolds worried that the proposals would incentivise companies to duck below the 750-employee mark or move overseas, the government might instead compile a list of firms selected for qualitative “importance” or abandon the proposals altogether, the person added.

Ministers have in recent weeks vowed to pursue growth, and last month ordered 17 of the biggest watchdogs to set out measures to boost the economy.

On Tuesday, the government forced out the chair of the competition regulator after taking the view that the agency was not sufficiently focused on growth.

The FRC was first tasked in 2018 with improving audit quality after a rash of high-profile failures. The previous Tory government drew up a package of reforms, which included replacing the current regulator with the more powerful Audit, Reporting and Governance Authority.

But it watered down the proposals in 2022, reducing the number of new PIEs from as many as 2,000 to 600.

Auditors had complained about the tighter scrutiny applied by the regulator in relation to PIEs, with top 10 firm Grant Thornton saying it had sworn off 70 per cent of its PIE work in the five years to 2022.

Labour used its first King’s Speech last year to promise a draft Audit Reform and Corporate Governance bill. The draft legislation might still include the current PIE proposals, one of the people said, and ministers could opt to hash out the details in parliament.

One ally of Reynolds said the minister was still open-minded about the “specific thresholds” to apply to PIE, adding that the business secretary was listening carefully to views on the subject and considering the wider economic impact of the audit reforms.

The Department for Business and Trade said it would welcome the thoughts of interested parties before publishing the draft bill later this year.

“Our top priority is boosting the economy and raising living standards for working people and that’s why our audit reform is focused on growth and supporting business to invest,” the department added.



Ordinary people hit with enormous, life-changing bills; families stuck in unsafe buildings; homeowners forced to pay rip-off charges to faceless management companies — the steady drumbeat of leasehold scandal stories is alarming if, like me, you are planning to buy a flat in London.

Leasehold is a curiously English type of home ownership, where buyers purchase the right to live in a home, typically a flat, for a set amount of years, rather than the property itself. Usually, they also pay a ground rent, and a “service charge” covering the maintenance of the property. Detractors describe the system as a feudal relic; overly complicated and riddled with scope for abuse.

Sebastian O’Kelly, chief executive of the campaign group Leasehold Knowledge Partnership, says the problem is “private equity punters” who have found ways to exploit the system. Many believe “fleecehold” needs to be abolished.

Reform has been on the horizon for years, but has been repeatedly delayed — most recently, a law rushed through parliament in the final days of the last government was found to have “flaws”, according to ministers. While the government announced that one measure, eliminating the two-year wait to extend a lease after purchasing a flat, took effect on Wednesday, consultations on how to implement some other parts of the new law are expected this year.

In the meantime, what do I do? I’m preparing to move and, although I have owned a leasehold flat with no problems, I am acutely aware of what could go wrong.

“I just wouldn’t go near any of that leasehold stuff,” a friend advised me as we discussed it after dinner. I looked around his elegant London house and thought: easy for you to say.

Some 4.8mn properties in England are leasehold — just under a fifth of the total. In London, which has a large number of flats, the proportion rises to one in three. Avoiding leasehold implies a big sacrifice in the location and type of property I can buy.

“It’s not a toxic system per se,” says Mark Chick, senior partner at law firm Bishop & Sewell and a director of the Association of Leasehold Enfranchisement Practitioners. “The system can be navigated successfully. It is just a system where there have been historic abuses or individual examples of poor behaviour,” he adds.

“As a species, it works,” says Chick. “There are plenty of people who do own flats and don’t have problems.”

So if you are buying leasehold, how can you better protect yourself from the exploitative and neglectful?

The first step is to be clear on what it is you’re buying. When you purchase any apartment anywhere, you usually sign up to pay a share of the cost of running and maintaining the building, whatever that may be — but unlike with a house, you don’t have total control over these. On top of that, comes the leasehold system.

Charley Lowe, solicitor at law firm Wedlake Bell, says misunderstandings are common. “I have many clients who come to me when buying a flat and when I refer to ‘the lease’ they say ‘hang on, I’m not renting it, I’m buying it’, so there is certainly a lack of understanding generally,” she says.

Some leasehold apartments have an arrangement where the residents have control of the service charge, rather than a freeholder. Other flats are sold as “share of freehold”, where the building is jointly owned. Both are seen as superior, as it means the apartment owners have greater control over costs, although the responsibility can be time consuming and disagreements absolutely can occur.

When searching for a flat, getting your hands on all the relevant information is often not as easy as you might think: many online listings don’t specify the service charge or ground rent, or even how long is left on the lease (renewing can be costly, especially once it falls below 80 years). Estate agents will provide these details when asked, but ask for more and it can get tricky.

During my own search, I asked one agent for a copy of the lease — essentially the contract that I would be signing, but was told the seller didn’t want to “dig it out”. (You can get it from the Land Registry, by post, for a small fee.)

Matt Lewis, consultant solicitor at Commonhold and Leasehold Experts, says that a problem with the conveyancing system in England and Wales — and this goes for freehold too — is that “you only get pertinent information later on, by which point you’ve spent considerable sums of money on legal services and perhaps committed to other costs such as surveys”.

There are some questions you can ask up front, however (see box)

O’Kelly says a good solicitor is important. “Choose one carefully and pay them properly . . . You [should not] use a ‘factory’ conveyancing legal service when buying a flat — and certainly never employ a lawyer recommended by an estate agent or a developer.”

The most well-known problem with leasehold flats is cladding, which was thrown into the limelight by the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017. The disaster led to much stricter rules on fire safety in blocks of flats, contained in the 2022 Building Safety Act.

The first thing to note is that it’s not just cladding — buildings are now thoroughly assessed for fire risk and problems must be rectified. Common problem areas to look out for are inadequate fire-stopping (gaps in walls to stop fires spreading), flammable balcony materials and insufficiently fire-resistant doors, says Lewis.

Getting these fixed is often expensive and figuring out who will pay for it is crucial. Lewis described the law in this area as “particularly complex and contains a fair amount of traps for the unwary”, so get specialist advice if you want to buy a flat in this situation.

Everyone I spoke to for this article said it was important to find out who the managing agent and freeholder are, and research them online.

“If you end up looking at a property that has one of those notorious landlords, that’s probably a red flag and you’re going to want to walk away,” says one solicitor who declined to be named.

O’Kelly says to look at press coverage, court reports, Companies House and the website of his own Leasehold Knowledge Partnership. “The really big landlords, all of them are abusing the system, in my view,” he says.

Managing agents should also be checked. There is no formal regulation of these companies, but being accredited to trade body The Property Institute is a good sign.

What if, after you purchase, something goes wrong, or you suspect malpractice?

First, scrutinise your annual service charge accounts — ask specific questions that signal “I see what you’re doing there”, says Lowe. Freeholders and managing agents are legally required to account for every penny of service charge money — you can ask to see receipts.

An ombudsman is available for low-level complaints, but more serious ones require legal action. And here, the advice is to tread carefully. Legal action would probably have to be disclosed to a buyer, making it harder to move on.

Freeholders can in some cases claim legal costs from leaseholders — if you sue them, you could end up paying their legal bill as well as your own — though this is due to change under the reforms. Get legal advice before withholding your service charge, as this may put you in breach of the lease and could mean you end up paying the freeholder’s legal fees personally, or even have your property repossessed.

If enough of your neighbours are also aggrieved, in some cases you can apply for the “right to manage”, whereby leaseholders take control of block management and the service charge.

But in the end, all property ownership carries risk, as does renting. What’s important is flushing out the risks, and weighing them against a property’s price, location, size and everything else we consider when buying ourselves a home. As Chick puts it: “Nothing can ever be risk-free, but you can go into it with your eyes open.”



Watch and jewellery brands have highlighted the impact on business of the removal of tax-free shopping in the UK.

Rishi Sunak, then chancellor of the exchequer, scrapped the VAT Retail Export Scheme in Great Britain — which allowed visitors from outside the EU to reclaim the value added tax on goods bought — with effect from January 1 2021, following the Brexit transition period.

Business leaders have since called for the reinstatement of tax-free shopping, with more than 300 — including watch and jewellery brand executives — signing a letter to the current chancellor, Rachel Reeves, in October.

“Tourists are feeling completely unwelcome and disincentivised to come shopping in the UK,” says signatory Sophia Hirsh, managing director of Mayfair-based jeweller Hirsh London. “We deal with a lot of clients that would come normally year on year, sometimes twice a year. They still enjoy coming to London but instead of spending 10 days here, they’ll fly in, take the Eurostar to Paris, do some shopping, come back and fly home — or fly down to Milan. They’re changing their habits and it’s purely because of the tax-free shopping.”

Sales to overseas tourists accounted for 4 per cent of turnover at Hirsh London between February and November 2024, compared with 30 per cent for the whole of 2019, says Hirsh, who attributes the slump to the removal of tax-free shopping. And, four years on from the change in policy, her brand is not alone in reporting a drop in trade to international visitors.

Five per cent of retailer Watches of Switzerland Group’s UK market came from a combination of sales to tourists in its stores and airport outlets at the end of 2024, compared with 33 per cent pre-Brexit, says chief executive Brian Duffy. He says it is UK retailers that “have really lost out” from the removal of tax-free shopping because they have “no beneficial offset” — unlike the European luxury brands on London’s Bond Street that also have stores in Paris.

Antoine Pin, chief executive of Tag Heuer, says it is difficult to identify the specific impact of the removal of tax-free shopping on the Swiss watchmaker’s UK sales because there are other factors to consider, including the global economic environment, Brexit, and “the ups and downs of the sector” post Covid. However, he says there has been a “double-digit drop” in both footfall and purchases by international tourists compared with 2019.

Over the same period, Tag Heuer has seen an increase in sales to overseas visitors in Paris, Switzerland and Italy, Pin points out. “Again, you don’t correlate 100 per cent, but you see the expansion of the business out of the UK,” he says. “We also can trace some of our clients who used to buy in the UK, who are now buying out of the UK.”

Pin says some tourists consult the internet on their phones in front of store staff, “calculating precisely the benefits or the drawbacks of purchasing in the UK”. The “transit of purchases” to other countries undermines its local investment, he adds.

Hirsh says a 19 per cent year-on-year decrease in sales at Hirsh London is partly due to the loss of tax-free shopping, plus a drop in new UK-based clients because they can now shop tax-free in the EU.

Five per cent of tax-free spend in Europe on watches and jewellery between January and September 2024 was by UK shoppers, according to tax-free shopping specialist Global Blue. Customers from the US accounted for 27 per cent.

Global Blue’s Watches & Jewelry Study in October found the average tax-free spend per shopper on these items in Europe was up 38 per cent between January and September 2024, compared with the same period in 2019. The category’s recovery is being driven by the exclusive (average spend €28,200) and luxury (average €7,750) segments.

If there is no change in UK government policy this year, Hirsh says she “will have no choice but look at other options” to grow her business, including working with overseas stockists for the first time. She is also considering holding events abroad.

Watches of Switzerland has focused its efforts on its domestic market. Similarly, Pin says Tag Heuer has mitigated some of its missed sales opportunities by “talking more than ever” to local clients and offering experiences, from an in-store product presentation with a glass of champagne to a visit to the manufacture in Switzerland. These, he says, help build stronger relationships between staff and customers “so that, eventually, the price itself is not the major factor” in a purchase decision. Both companies have offered limited edition watches in the UK.

Breitling launched its Superocean Heritage B20 Automatic 42mm limited edition watch in the UK and Ireland last month, having released the limited edition Superocean 44mm and Chronomat 42mm exclusively in the UK earlier in 2024. “Local special editions have contributed to creating reasons for tourists to buy, while also appealing more broadly by being tailored to the market and produced in limited numbers, adding an element of scarcity,” Gavin Murphy, managing director of Breitling UK, explained in a statement.

While the lack of tax-free shopping presents “some obstacles in being competitive with the rest of Europe”, he said the brand, which has 23 regional boutiques, is not entirely reliant on trade from visitors to London.

Last year, the UK’s Office for Budget Responsibility estimated that the withdrawal of the VAT Retail Export Scheme would save the exchequer £540mn by 2025-26. However, the Centre for Economics and Business Research consultancy said that a fully operational scheme could have boosted UK GDP by £11.1bn in 2023.

International shoppers can still buy goods tax-free if they have them sent directly to their address outside the UK (and outside the EU if in Northern Ireland), but brands say few take up this option.

However, UK jeweller Boodles’ VAT-free export sales (excluding ecommerce) rose from £2mn for the whole of 2019 to £6mn for March-November 2024, according to chair Michael Wainwright, with marketing activity in the US key to the growth. Most of these sales were in store, with the jewels consigned by courier. The 2024 figure is, however, a little skewed by a high-price sale to Oman, says Wainwright.

He says Boodles has been less affected by the removal of tax-free shopping than some brands because it sells predominantly to UK-based clients, but admits sales “could be absolutely on fire now if there was no such thing as the ‘tourist tax’”.

He cannot see policy changing in the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, Duffy — who, like Wainwright, signed the letter to Reeves — is “hopeful” following last year’s change of UK government. “All we’re asking for, actually, is that the government be open to objectively looking at all the facts . . . we believe when they do, they can only come to the same conclusion,” he says. “We therefore think it’s inevitable that [tax-free shopping] comes back. But it’s a matter of when.”

A spokesperson for the Treasury said: “We have no plans to introduce a new tax-free shopping scheme in Great Britain. Visitors can continue to claim VAT relief where the items purchased are shipped directly to their home country as exports.”



UK consumer confidence fell sharply in January to the lowest level in more than a year as a rise in government borrowing costs and warnings of job cuts took a toll on economic sentiment.

The GfK consumer confidence index — a measure of how people view their personal finances and broader economic prospects — fell 5 points to minus 22, the lowest reading since the end of 2023, according to new data.

Consumer confidence provides a forward-looking measure of household spending — gloomier sentiment means people are more likely to save than make significant purchases. Households built up substantial savings last year, limiting the recovery in spending, despite wage growth outpacing inflation throughout 2024.

The month-on-month drop in the GfK consumer confidence index was the largest since September 2024, when consumers were concerned about potential tax rises in October’s Budget.

Neil Bellamy, consumer insights director at NIQ GfK, noted particularly steep falls in confidence about the wider UK economy. “These figures underline that consumers are losing confidence in the UK’s economic prospects,” he said.

The survey was conducted in the first half of January, when the UK’s 10-year borrowing cost rose to the highest level since the financial crisis, threatening the government’s ability to meet its fiscal rule and raising the risk of more tax rises.

Borrowing costs have since eased following a surprise drop in December UK inflation but remain higher than in the autumn.

Business surveys in early January also highlighted reduced hiring forecasts, driven in part by the upcoming increase in employer national insurance contributions, set to take effect in April.

Confidence was lower than the minus 18 forecast by economists polled by Reuters but was in line with expectations by Ellie Henderson, economist at the investment bank Investec.

Henderson said news of rising borrowing costs and potential job losses “might well have taken a toll on perceptions and expectations for the economy and household finances”.

Consumers have become “increasingly worried about employment prospects”, said Tomasz Wieladek, chief European economist at investment company T Rowe Price.

The GfK saving index, which is not included in the calculation of the overall confidence index, leapt 9 points to plus 30. Bellamy called this increase “unwelcome” as it signalled households were bracing for tough economic times by prioritising savings over spending.

The UK household saving ratio, the proportion of disposable income that is not spent, was 10.1 per cent in the three months to September, well above the 5.5 average of the 2016-2019 period, according to official statistics. Despite real wages rising for more than one and a half years, household consumption per capita remained 2.2 per cent below its Q4 2019 levels, before the pandemic.

But Henderson argued that when confidence recovers, double-digit saving rates and healthy wage growth could turn consumption around.

“If confidence was to pick up, consumers in aggregate have the means to unleash a higher level of consumption,” said Henderson. “That confidence recovers soon though is less certain.”

Housing affordability has improved, according to separate data published on Friday by Nationwide. It showed that while remaining above long-term average, the price-to-earnings ratio for first-time buyers fell to 5 at the end of last year from a peak of 5.8 in 2022. Similarly, mortgage payments for first-time buyers fell to 36 per cent of their take-home pay, from a peak of 38 per cent at the end of 2023.



Energy secretary Ed Miliband says he will not resign if the UK government approves a third runway at Heathrow, making the scheme more likely to proceed after two decades of wrangling.

Miliband has long fought against expanding Britain’s biggest airport on climate and pollution grounds, threatening to resign from the cabinet 17 years ago and opposing the scheme when he was Labour leader.

As energy secretary, Miliband has a significant responsibility to help Britain hit its net zero climate targets. But when he was asked on Thursday if he would resign if the Labour government backed the scheme, he replied: “No, don’t be ridiculous.”

Miliband’s concession comes as chancellor Rachel Reeves prepares to use a “growth speech” next week to signal her economic priorities, including her support for the expansion of three London airports: Heathrow, Luton and Gatwick.

Gatwick and Luton are set to receive approval this spring for expansions from Heidi Alexander, the transport secretary.

But Heathrow Airport Holdings has not yet put forward a “development consent order” application for a third runway because of a lack of political support.

The company paused its planning for a third runway when the Covid pandemic struck in 2020, but has indicated it would make a decision on whether to go ahead this year.

Sadiq Khan, Labour mayor of London, is opposed to the scheme, telling the London Assembly on Thursday that his views had not changed.

Khan questioned whether Heathrow’s expansion could meet the government’s tests on noise and air pollution and climate change, adding: “We face a climate crisis and a climate emergency.”

Miliband told reporters that the government could realise its economic growth aims while also achieving its climate targets, despite environmentalists’ concerns about the impact of expanding Heathrow.

When Miliband voted against the project in the Commons in 2018 — along with now prime minister Sir Keir Starmer — he said “we owe it to future generations not just to have good environmental principles but to act on them”.

On Thursday the energy secretary said any airport expansion would have to take place within the UK’s “carbon budgets” through which the country aims to gradually cut net carbon emissions to zero by 2050.

The independent advisory Climate Change Committee has warned against airport expansion without a national plan to curb emissions and to manage passenger capacity.

“We believe that we can meet our growth mission — our number one priority — and keep within carbon budgets, and indeed that our clean energy mission is crucial and a central part of meeting our growth mission,” said Miliband.

“Far from them being in contradiction, they are absolutely complementary.”

Environmental groups believe that airport expansion is incompatible with cutting greenhouse gas emissions, as the aviation industry struggles to decarbonise its operations.

Airlines have pledged to reach net zero by 2050, chiefly through the use of “sustainable aviation fuels” produced from non-fossil materials — including used cooking oil and animal fats.

But these fuels are far more expensive than jet fuel and in short supply.

“Aviation has no short- to medium-term solutions for its carbon footprint,” said Alex Chapman, a senior economist at the New Economics Foundation, a think-tank that opposes airport expansion.

Reeves said last July that she wanted Heathrow to build a third runway.

On Wednesday at the World Economic Forum in Davos, she said a third runway would boost economic growth.

“We will look at all plans to bring infrastructure, to bring investment to Britain,” she said. “When there are decisions around infrastructure investment, the answer can’t always be ‘no’, and with this government the answer is ‘yes’”.



After weeks of sinking business confidence following her Budget tax increases, Rachel Reeves came to Davos with a clear goal: to re-set her relations with big investors.

Her charm offensive in the Swiss resort included meetings with business leaders and public appearances in which she upbraided regulators, promised to ease lending rules, prioritised growth over net zero goals, and pledged to tweak non-dom tax rules.

Many listening recognised the UK government’s efforts to change the grim narrative of the past months — but are not yet convinced that it will secure stronger growth. With the public finances under pressure, government borrowing costs up, and the UK economy flatlining in the second half of last year, the Labour government has a significant job ahead to bolster optimism.

“Rachel Reeves is thinking the right way but she’s in a difficult position,” said a senior UK bank executive in Davos. “Labour in the UK have made a lot of good decisions but it is very hard for them and the [bond market] challenges of last week reinforce that issue.”

The chancellor is leading an effort by Labour to pivot away from the gloomy messaging it adopted after winning power — focused on a dire fiscal inheritance from the Conservatives — to a regulation-slashing message that will be attractive to business.

Many investors feel a more upbeat pitch is long overdue. Mohammed Alardhi, executive chair of $53bn investment manager Investcorp, whose investments in the UK include real estate logistics and education, said: “When the government continues to talk about doom and gloom because they inherited bad things from the Conservatives, investors and businesses will believe you and go somewhere else.

“There needs to be better and more positive messaging for the future. Everyone knows there are problems with deficits and budgets.”

The meetings of the World Economic Forum in Davos gave Reeves an opportunity to woo investors rattled by the UK’s poor growth performance.

The chancellor repeatedly brandished her focus on easing regulatory burdens in areas such as technology, planning and financial services as she sought to make a virtue out of Britain’s room for manoeuvre following Brexit.

“We have that flexibility: we can be more nimble. We are taking advantage of that,” she said at an event during the summit.

“While the UK benefits from a stability bump, we would hope to see the appropriate reforms implemented to fuel growth,” said Jo Taylor, chief executive of Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan — one of the country’s largest investors with stakes in offshore wind projects, energy networks and airports.

Patrick Thomson, who leads JPMorgan Asset Management in Europe, said: “From an investor perspective, everything the government is saying makes sense.” He cited examples including consolidating pension funds, telling regulators to allow more risk-taking, reinvigorating the market for listings, reforming planning, and prioritising artificial intelligence.

But the UK’s biggest partner is driving harder, as global markets are buoyed by US President Donald Trump’s pledges to slash regulation and cut taxes and bolster economic growth. The mood among investors towards European countries — including the UK — remains relatively gloomy.

“The outlook is quite bleak for the UK in terms of growth,” said the chief executive of one of the world’s largest pension funds. “I’m not sure Europe is a lot better. It’s all about North America . . . everyone is fixated on the US: it’s the easy shout.”

Trump’s aggressive deregulation push — including appointing Elon Musk to lead the new waste-cutting Department of Government Efficiency, or Doge — has put added pressure on governments across Europe to convince businesses they are easing burdens and cutting red tape as they seek to prop up competitiveness.

“Everyone here at Davos is taking a page out of the Donald Trump playbook,” said Marc Benioff, chief executive of Salesforce, at Davos. “We’ve heard comments from [European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen] and Rachel Reeves and more. Countries are thinking that they need their own Doge — and that means less red tape, deregulation and a priority on growth.”

The UK is awaiting clarity on how Trump’s vows to slash regulation will affect Wall Street. This month the Bank of England delayed its final capital rules for a further year given the uncertainty in the US. Some bankers believe the UK could move faster than the EU in response to the emerging US regime given it is not bound by Brussels procedures.

“We have to respond to the agenda the US president has just set out with our own dynamism,” Jonathan Reynolds, business secretary, told the Financial Times in Davos. “Every country has to do it.”

The past week has shown that the UK government is willing to be aggressive in pursuing growth, with ministers intervening to remove the chair of the under-pressure monopoly regulator, the Competition and Markets Authority.

A big investor in the UK described the removal of Marcus Bokkerink, which was first reported by the FT, as “the most muscular action taken by a UK government to rein in a regulator for some time”.

They added: “It should hopefully put other regulators on notice that they could face similar consequences if the government’s growth agenda doesn’t receive serious attention and follow-through.” The investor name-checked the Financial Conduct Authority as another regulator that should pay “close attention” to the government’s move.

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, Reeves repeatedly insisted that growth was the government’s number-one mission.

She warned that “too many things are holding back the supply-side of the economy”, decrying “crazy” rules impeding infrastructure planning and alluding to the £100mn price tag on an arch to protect bats from the High Speed 2 rail line.

Areas where UK officials were eager to use the country’s flexibility include AI, she said, arguing that the country’s regulations were “much more permissive, much more pro-growth than what you see in many other countries around the world, including in the European Union”.

Yet the UK’s freedom of manoeuvre will be constrained by its parallel drive to obtain a “reset” in its relations with the EU in order to break down some of the barriers that have sprung up since Brexit. Uncertainty over how it will navigate between the two massive economies it trades with threatens to hang over the economy.

Allies of Reeves were clear that they had made progress during their frenetic round of meetings in Davos. “It’s going to be months and years of hard work, but we have shifted the dial in the last week and that is what businesses are telling us,” said one. “It’s not job done on growth but we have made a huge amount of progress. We’ve never been more focused and determined.”

“We need that fast and furious approach to delivery on the ground, and those actions need to match the ambition,” said Rain Newton-Smith, the director-general of the CBI.

“It does feel like the building blocks are there but it will take courage and doubling down on the things that really help to drive growth.”

Reporting by Sam Fleming, Harriet Agnew, Ortenca Aliaj, Arash Massoudi and Stephen Morris in Davos



Good morning. It seems that Israel’s negotiated ceasefires with Gaza and Lebanon are only holding on by a thread, and may fall apart soon. At the same time, the world is waiting to see how Trump will handle Iran. Still, markets, including the oil market, are indifferent. Wilful denial, or a rational response? Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

In his first week in office, Donald Trump ordered the government to suspend the asylum process, halted refugee admissions, put pressure on states to comply with future deportation efforts, and moved to end birthright citizenship. It may be that the goal of these early actions is simply to discourage further immigration, and encourage illegal immigrants to “deport themselves.” But it may be that Trump is serious about significantly reducing the US workforce.

Record numbers of migrants came into the US after the pandemic, growing US consumption and the American labour force. This, many argue, was the key reason the US continued to grow, even as inflation fell quickly. Graph from Torsten Slok at Apollo:

By the end of 2024, illegal migration had already slowed from its earlier peaks; according to US Customs and Border Protection, the number of encounters at the Southern border — a proxy for illegal migration — steadily fell from 301,000 in December 2023 to 102,000 by September 2024. Legal migration in 2024 was about 820,000, according to the Congressional Budget Office, around the 25-year average.

Trump has pledged to limit both legal and illegal immigration. But does he have both the will and the means to follow through on his most aggressive goal — completely stopping illegal immigration, and deporting the illegal immigrants who are already here?

According to the Pew Research Center, in 2022 there were around 11mn illegal aliens in the US, or 5 per cent of the US workforce. Pushing out even a significant fraction of that population would have big implications for the agriculture, hospitality, and construction industries (just the threat of deportations has led to reports of farmworker shortages). The inflationary implications, at least in the short term, are easy to imagine. Deprived of cheap labour, those industries and others will either have to raise wages to attract more workers, and raise prices to protect profits, or cut down on production, restricting supply.

There is a lot of uncertainty here. We don’t know how far Trump will go, and it is likely that some states and municipalities will push back. Wendy Edelberg at the Brookings Institution modelled out two scenarios: one where Trump is able to reshape the immigration system entirely, and one where he only has limited success. In the first scenario, the US sees outmigration, or a net loss of civilians, starting in 2025; in the second, immigration slows, but the population still grows (the model assumes some normalisation after the Trump term):

Edelberg and her colleagues estimate that both scenarios slow real economic growth in 2025: by .4 per cent in the severe scenario, and .1 per cent in the restrained. They also say that inflation could go up by as much as 1.5 per cent over three years, but will be partially offset by a reduction in demand. In the longer term, when the population growth impacts will be felt, the shifts will be more severe: the level of real GDP in 2034 will be lower by 2.1 per cent in scenario 1, and 1.5 in scenario 2, as compared to the current outlook.

But the point is all the same: the US economy is built around access to cheap migrant labour. Retooling it for low immigration will be disruptive.

(Reiter and Armstrong)

Stockpickers — to the degree there are any stockpickers left in a world of index, factor, and quant investors — face a dilemma this year. The US economy looks strong, especially relative to the rest of the world; US stocks have momentum; and business sentiment is effervescent. A good time to add risk, then. At the same time, however, there is a massive change in economic policy underfoot, with unknown implications. In particular, it is pretty clear that something tariff-y this way comes. This will come on top of asset prices that are expensive and Fed monetary policy that seems — presidential protests aside — likely to stay tight. All this counsels a degree of defensive posturing.

Those of you who — like Unhedged — will enter the FT stockpicking contest operate under even more constraints. Once you choose your five long or short positions (by midnight on the 31st of this month) you are locked in for 11 months. No changing your mind after a policy surprise. And dividends don’t count, which eliminates a bunch of stocks that return their profits that way.

Unhedged works under another constraint. As a US-focused column, we select from the S&P 500. We want to pick stocks our readers may know and have their own views about.

Unhedged works under another handicap, too: we don’t know much about individual stocks. We write about them when they demonstrate important market trends, such as Magnificent 7 leadership. Stockpicking (as Unhedged’s disastrous results in the last two contests have shown) is really for people who follow companies closely. So there is a (fun but dangerous) element of guesswork here.

With all that said, below are some stocks that interest us. We’re keen to hear your thoughts:

Readers will notice that most of these ideas are very boring. That is the point. What we are looking for is very boring US businesses we understand, that are also growing faster than the economy. If you have some other suggestions, for goodness sake, email us. And enter the contest!

The business of desperation.



Amid the blizzard of activity in the first few days of Donald Trump’s second presidency, one issue has stood out: the plans to implement his campaign promise of the largest deportation operation in US history.

In a flurry of announcements, Trump has already declared a national emergency at the US-Mexico border, which allows for a greater military presence on border areas, and implemented an indefinite pause to America’s refugee resettlement programme, choking off access to asylum.

“We will begin the process of returning millions and millions of criminal aliens back to the places from which they came,” Trump declared in his inauguration speech. “We will do it at a level that nobody has ever seen before.”

The border, he said later, was his “number-one issue”.

Given that there are approximately 11mn people in the US without permanent legal status, a genuine mass deportation would have a wrenching impact on American society, its economy and its sense of self as a nation.

Deportation on a Trumpian scale would also face enormous financial, legal and logistical hurdles at every step of the process: identification, apprehension, detention and expulsion. The federal government currently lacks the systems, the facilities and, in some cases, the legal authority to carry out the operations that Trump has described.

According to the American Immigration Council, a pro-immigration non-profit group, it would take more than 10 years and cost almost $1tn.

“It’s not like you just flip a switch and just immediately start rounding people up and sending them to the border,” says John Torres, a former Immigration and Customs Enforcement acting director during the George W Bush and Barack Obama administrations. ICE and its sister agency, Customs and Border Protection, are tasked with removing unauthorised migrants from the US — ICE from the country’s interior, and CBP at the border.

The deportation infrastructure is already stretched perilously thin. In the fiscal year 2024, under Joe Biden’s administration, ICE, which takes care of removals with court orders, deported 271,484 unauthorised immigrants, a 10-year high. The peak under Trump’s first term was 267,000 in fiscal year 2019.

“The idea of 1mn to 2mn [deportations] a year is . . . aspirational. It’s probably unrealistic, given the resources that are available to do it,” says Doris Meissner, a former commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, a predecessor agency to ICE, who is now at the Migration Policy Institute think-tank. “The numbers are not likely to be dramatically greater [than they are now], at least for a while.”

The Trump administration has demonstrated a willingness to take drastic steps to realise some version of its goal, for example threatening to use an arcane wartime law that allows the federal government to detain and deport citizens of enemy nations, and opening the way for private prison companies to add capacity for tens of thousands of detainees at speed.

Despite these extreme measures, however, some experts and former immigration officials told the Financial Times that Trump’s ambition simply could not be accomplished.

“In my opinion, it’s going to be impossible for them to achieve the goal that they set out — which is really getting rid of all the illegal immigrants in the United States,” says David Bier, director of immigration studies at the Cato Institute think-tank.

The first obstacle for the Trump team is to detain many of the people they say they want to deport.

Trump and his immigration tsar, Tom Homan, say they are prioritising the deportation of undocumented migrants with criminal histories. Going after people who have been convicted of crimes is likely to be a more politically palatable way of ramping up deportations.

ICE says that, as of July last year, there were 662,566 non-citizens with criminal convictions or pending charges, approximately 15,000 of whom have already been detained by the agency. About 148,000 have been convicted or charged with assault, murder, kidnapping or sexual assault.

But one problem is that the definition of “criminal” on this list is a broad one — more than 128,000 people are on it for traffic offences.

“What ICE is very good at is working off lists,” says John Sandweg, acting director of ICE during the Obama administration. Agents know who they are looking for and might have location information, he says.

Yet Sandweg says that it takes time to find and apprehend someone who is at large after committing serious crimes, something that consumes “traditional police work” like “building informant relationships in the immigrant communities”. As a result, it can often be easier for immigration officials to deport people accused of petty crimes.

The focus on expelling undocumented immigrants with criminal convictions or charges is not new. But the Trump administration says that it is bolstering the federal response to harness the defence, state and justice departments. The Pentagon said on Wednesday that it would deploy about 1,500 active-duty troops, plus helicopters, to the US-Mexico border, a 60 per cent increase in ground forces there.

Homan has also said there will be more so-called collateral arrests, in which immigrants who are not targeted for arrest are swept up during enforcement actions.

Lucas Guttentag, a professor at Stanford Law School, says that “huge numbers of people who don’t fit that profile [of criminals] are going to get swept in” to any mass deportation drive. He adds: “That’s going to be camouflaged, because they’re trying to manipulate public reaction by saying they’re only doing particular targets. The reality is going to be very different.”

Any push to expand arrests will also require co-operation from local law enforcement agencies.

Under the constitution, the federal government does not have authority over state enforcement bodies. Instead, it has set up so-called 287(g) agreements — voluntary programmes that allow ICE to delegate immigration enforcement to state and local agencies.

In one of the executive orders signed last Monday, Trump directed the government to pursue such agreements “to the maximum extent permitted by law”.

The administration seems to be building towards a political fight with so-called “sanctuary” jurisdictions, which refuse to co-operate with federal immigration enforcement efforts.

During his first term, Trump sought to deny federal funding to localities adopting “sanctuary” policies, efforts that were blocked by US courts. The president has resurfaced this strategy, asking the attorney-general and the secretary of homeland security to “ensure” that such jurisdictions, “which seek to interfere with the lawful exercise of federal law enforcement operations, do not receive access to federal funds”.

The Department of Justice has directed staff to investigate state and local officials who fail to comply with “immigration-related commands” for potential prosecutions, in what many observers view as a thinly veiled threat.

On Capitol Hill last week, both houses of Congress passed the Laken Riley Act with bipartisan votes. Named after a nursing student who was killed last year by an unauthorised immigrant, the bill broadens the number of offences that require mandatory detention of undocumented immigrants until they are deported to include theft, burglary, larceny or shoplifting. Trump is expected to sign the bill into law swiftly, which would make it the first legislative win of his second presidency.

Trump has also focused on broadening the power of arrest. He has rescinded guidance set by former president Joe Biden that barred ICE agents from making arrests at or near “sensitive locations” such as places of worship and schools — a move that legal experts warn might dent students’ attendance for fear of immigration enforcement actions.

“The Trump administration has already been successful in instilling fear in immigrant communities and making it more difficult . . . to do simple things like take their children to school, access medical care, pray in houses of worship,” says Elora Mukherjee, professor at Columbia Law School.

This raises the question about the political reaction to a large increase in arrests. During Trump’s first term, he faced a public relations catastrophe over the separation of migrant children from their parents. The risk for the White House is that distressing images of mass arrests make the rounds in the news and on social media, including people who are pillars of their communities, prompting a bipartisan backlash.

Sandweg says that when in the ICE director chair, “you get calls from Republican members of Congress [asking], ‘Why are you deporting this guy? . . . I’m getting these calls from the pastor and from the congregants.’”

Even if the administration is successful in detaining many more undocumented migrants, it would face the problem of having to house them. Tens of thousands of people will need to be held for months while they await trial in immigration courts.

ICE has capacity — measured in number of beds — to detain 41,500 people at any given time. Homan has indicated he will need “at least 100,000 beds” to carry out the administration’s aims.

“It’s an extraordinarily important piece of this puzzle, and dealing with capacity issues in detention will be a challenge,” says Bier at the Cato Institute.

The American Immigration Council reckons that, if the administration is to deport all the 11mn undocumented people living in the country, ICE will need to build 216 new facilities every year for more than a decade, each with a capacity of 500 people.

Housing detainees will fall largely to private prisons, which accounted for as much as 90 per cent of detentions in 2023, according to the American Civil Liberties Union.

The market values of the country’s two biggest private prison companies have surged since the election: GEO Group’s stock has doubled, while CoreCivic’s has risen more than 50 per cent.

The for-profit prison industry was a strong backer of Trump’s campaign, after he vowed to scrap a 2021 Biden order that began phasing out DoJ contracts with for-profit prisons — which he also did on his first day in office.

CoreCivic, which supplies about 10,000 beds, says it could almost quadruple this capacity in about 180 days.

“We could go tomorrow and incrementally staff up,” says chief executive Damon Hininger. “We’re having those conversations with ICE on how we could be helpful if they do raise the level of capacity.”

But expanding capacity comes at a high cost. The AIC estimates the government, if it were to deport all undocumented people, would need to spend $66bn a year just on building and operating detention facilities.

New holding facilities would cost about $36mn a piece to build and another $48mn a year to staff and operate. “The long-term costs of a mass deportation operation, while difficult to gauge, would undeniably be enormous,” the AIC concluded in a recent report.

Republicans have promised to allocate up to $100bn for border security and enforcement for an unspecified timeframe. But even if they can get that through Congress, in the near term the authorities will struggle to muster the necessary resources — even if other law enforcement agencies are roped in.

“There is no way . . . they have the staff, the money and the resources and the legal authority to turn and start doing immigration enforcement [and] immigration detention,” says Jason Houser, a former ICE chief of staff.

The final logistical challenge for the administration is deporting the people who have been detained.

Individuals with outstanding deportation orders may be removed immediately. “But that is a relatively small number,” says Stephen Yale-Loehr, retired immigration law professor at Cornell Law School. “Most people picked up will be put into deportation proceedings in immigration courts.”

That places the rest of the burden on underfunded and overburdened immigration courts, which could be a significant stumbling block to Trump’s plans. The courts’ backlog has swelled from 656,000 pending cases in the fiscal year 2017 to 3.6mn at the end of fiscal year 2024, according to MPI.

Trump is seeking to sidestep immigration courts altogether. The Department of Homeland Security on Tuesday issued a new rule that expanded the reach of “expedited removal”, under which undocumented immigrants who cannot prove they have been in the country for more than two years are deported with no court review. Trump pursued a similar measure during his first presidency.

The practice previously applied to individuals apprehended within around 115 miles of the country’s international land borders. Now, it may be used across the US.

“The effect of this change will be to enhance national security and public safety — while reducing government costs — by facilitating prompt immigration determinations,” said the DHS.

The Trump administration could also face opposition from some of the countries to which it wants to deport migrants. Colombia announced on Sunday that it had declined entry to US military flights carrying migrants, saying the individuals needed to be flown on civilian planes and treated with “dignity and respect”.

Trump immediately responded by placing 25 per cent tariffs on imports from Colombia, which were later paused after Bogotá agreed to grant entry to the military flights.

Trump’s flurry of immigration policies is set to face a wave of legal challenges, with some Democratic states and civil rights groups already suing his administration.

The ACLU and other groups on Wednesday sued to block the DHS rule broadening “expedited removal”.

“The Trump administration wants to use this illegal policy to fuel its mass deportation agenda and rip communities apart,” Anand Balakrishnan, an ACLU lawyer leading the case, said in a statement. “Expanding expedited removal would give Trump a cheat code to circumvent due process and the constitution.” The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Democratic state attorneys-general and civil rights groups have also filed several lawsuits to invalidate Trump’s new executive order that bans birthright citizenship, alleging that it violates the constitution’s 14th amendment, which says that all “persons born or naturalized in the United States . . . are citizens of the United States”. This ban has already been temporarily halted by a US federal judge. The White House said it would appeal.

Homan on Sunday said that his idea of success does not necessarily include deporting every unauthorised immigrant in the US, in what seemed like an attempt at managing expectations. “I’m being realistic,” he told ABC. “We can do what we can with the money we have”.

But Homan has also insisted the administration will accelerate arrests and detentions, even if there is political opposition. And he is willing to put heavy pressure on local politicians who try to stymie those efforts.

“Sanctuary cities are going to get exactly what they don’t want — more agents in the communities, more people arrested, more collaterals arrested,” he told Fox News on Wednesday. “So that’s a game they want to play? Game on.”

Additional reporting by Alex Rogers in Washington

Cartography by Cleve Jones

​Letter in response to this article:

In Trump era, politics is a game two can play / From Donald Conkey, Chicago, IL, US



As Christmas approached, lawyers at US firms across the City of London and Wall Street rushed to hit tough end-of-year targets for the number of hours billed to clients in 2024.

One mid-level litigation associate at a US law firm in London said he had billed more than 2,000 hours, spending at least 10 hours in the office every day and working some weekends, as he helped a client prepare for a big trial. This year looks set to be just as busy.

Many have predicted the demise of the billable hour as the legal profession’s main charging method. But the recent bumper payday for junior lawyers — many top US firms have handed out six-figure bonuses to associates for hitting 2,000-plus billable hour targets — is the latest sign of the staying power of the industry’s hallmark currency.

For years the metric, through which lawyers keep a precise log of the work they do and bill accordingly, has been a source of debate and tension between law firms and their clients. Companies have pushed back at perceived overcharging, with some arguing for the greater certainty of a fixed-fee model. Lawyers and clients have raised concerns over the well being of the armies of junior associates competing to hit high billing targets. Now, the advancement of generative artificial intelligence is fuelling fresh criticism that billing by the hour is an outdated model that encourages inefficiency.

“While some might have expected, and some predicted [the billable hour’s] use as an external measure would have fallen faster, it remains the main billing method used by law firms,” says Jeremy Black, a partner at Deloitte.

In the UK, the top 10 law firms are charging clients almost 40 per cent more per hour than they were five years ago and notched up more billable hours last year than the 12 months before, according to PwC.

Hourly rates for partners at top UK-headquartered firms have reached £1,500, with US firms’ rates as high as $2,000. Rates in the top American firms last year were up more than 8 per cent, according to the Thomson Reuters Institute.

Such growth means there is little incentive for law firms to move away from the metric towards more flat-fee or subscription-type models that industries from media to consumer goods have adopted.

The billable hour took off as a linchpin for the legal industry in the 1980s, according to academic and legal publications on its history. With the rise of trade magazines such as The American Lawyer and a greater emphasis on the business of law, such metrics, along with partner profits, became important benchmarks by which firms could measure their success.

The metric survives in part because of its “great symbolic value”, says Laura Empson, a professor at Bayes Business School. “It’s sending a signal to the client that professionals are dedicated to serving them.”

But the new threats — chiefly AI — are set to increasingly call into question the viability of the model. In recent years, experts have anticipated a profound impact from generative AI on law firms, particularly on junior jobs. As more mundane legal tasks become automated, there would be fewer working hours for lawyers to bill.

So far, efficiencies gained by AI assisting routine tasks, such as research and drafting documents, appear to have made little headway in displacing the billable metric. But lawyers surveyed by Thomson Reuters last year predicted AI would result in a reduction in the use of the billable hour over the next five years, saving each 12 hours of work a week.

A study by Deloitte last year found that “only 6 per cent of respondents report direct benefits, such as cost savings, from law firm use of the technology” — but 73 per cent anticipated AI would reduce costs in law firms in the future.

“We are seeing more experimentation of fixed-price models, and the increasing adoption of technology will lead to change of the billing model; we’re simply not there yet,” says Raghu Ramanathan, president of Legal Professionals at Thomson Reuters.

Fiona Muir, product manager at OneAdvanced, a software provider to law firms, anticipates technology will enhance the billable hour, increasing the speed and detail of billing, for example by automatically documenting a phone call. “The narrative that you create around the task [is] easier to do. The billing is less contentious if there’s more detail.”

The legal sector’s commitment to billable hours appears stronger than for other professional services firms. “Go back 20-30 years, [consultants] were like lawyers,” says Fiona Czerniawska, chief executive of Source Global Research, a consulting sector analyst, which moved away from charging by the hour after client pressure.

“A lot of the buyers of [legal services are] in-house lawyers,” says Ben Kent, founder of Meridian West, a consultancy. “They make a noise about it but put up with it. Part of the same club.”

One reason for its endurance is the inexact science of legal advice. While parts of a deal may be predictable and amenable to a fixed fee, areas such as big-ticket litigation can be harder to forecast and lawyers do not want to find themselves spending extra hours on a matter they are not getting paid for. Lawyers say clients largely accept its value even if they would like more flexibility and scrutiny of what is being billed.

Among the informal guidance given to young lawyers on billing clients is to keep the timer running if you pop to the kitchen to make a cup of tea but not if you stop to chat with a colleague. Mulling a client issue in the bath or on the train may also be billable, as long as you can properly justify it. Software enables lawyers to track their time, usually in six- or 15-minute increments.

Terra Potter, general counsel at aerospace company Hexcel Corporation until last year, describes the model as a “complex beast — it’s hard to abandon entirely . . . It shows the return on investment, helps monitor work and budgets . . . Some matters suit the billable hour, particularly smaller ones or those with high uncertainty. Others — litigation tranches, transactions, or document packages — lend themselves better to flat fees.”

Beyond its use for charging clients, the billable hour has become a key internal metric for law firms to measure and reward performance.

Despite greater discussion of staff wellbeing, junior lawyers are expected to put in long hours to justify their increasingly high salaries. In the UK’s top firms, newly qualified lawyers’ base pay rose to £150,000 last year. At many US firms, it is even higher, reaching almost £180,000.

Hitting 2,000 hours a year equates to eight billable hours a day across the working week — but this does not include the many non-billable hours worked or holidays. Some US firms pay associates extra bonuses for racking up billable hours beyond the 2,000 target. Many top UK firms deny having targets but will often only pay bonuses if certain hours are met, usually closer to 1,700 a year.

But as a measure of performance, the metric is flawed. Fulfilling targets is, in many ways, outside of a junior lawyer’s control. Associates compete for work from partners to fill their quota and for every quiet week or month there is an awareness they will have to work twice as hard when business picks up. This can lead to “huge peaks and troughs” in working hours, according to one litigation associate at a UK firm.

“If there’s not enough work coming in or teams are over-resourced then it creates a degree of anxiety because if you have a quiet month then you know you’re going to need to have some crazy months to make up for it,” the associate says.

This feast or famine approach has led to some lawyers leaving private practice. One former associate at a UK firm says they moved to an in-house role in part because of the billable hour and its use as “an outdated method of measuring value to a law firm”. The impact the high targets could have on family life was another factor.

It incentivises inefficiency, says Richard Martin, a former employment partner and now principal consultant of Byrne Dean, a wellbeing consultancy. “When people are tired and stressed, they work less effectively and take longer. It’s a vicious circle.” It also encourages “hoarding work”.

Rewards are given to those with the physical stamina to endure such working habits, according to Empson at Bayes.

“People who are capable of billing enormous amounts of hours become heroes in firms,” she says. “For all that is said about the intellect of professionals, big rewards go to people with phenomenal reserves of stamina and good health.”

Even if firms shift to a different fee model for clients, the billable hour will probably survive internally, according to Deloitte’s Black, as it is the simplest way of measuring output. “It is likely that it will be combined with other data to provide information on the value created related to the time spent,” Black suggests. “Over time it does seem the internal use may be of more relative importance.”



The outcome of the US election was supposed to be drawn out, hard to call, and heavily contested.

In the end, it was none of the above. Donald Trump’s victory at the beginning of November turned out to be emphatic, quickly decided, and accepted with little or no fuss. But that does not mean there were no immediate consequences.

Within moments of Trump beating Democrat vice-president Kamala Harris to retake the White House, the dollar had soared to a four-month high. Although the US currency recently dropped as the new president called for lower interest rates and a softer stance on China tariffs, its strength could wreak havoc for emerging market bonds.

The consensus is that Trump’s policies around curbing illegal immigration, enforcing trade tariffs and lowering taxes will trigger price rises — and ultimately hinder the US central bank’s ability to lower interest rates.

“Dollar-denominated debt will rise as a result, which will seriously impact many emerging markets,” says David Gibson-Moore, president of consultancy Gulf Analytica.

Jean-Charles Sambor, head of emerging market debt at investment company TT International, agrees. “Trump’s decisive victory has led to much doom-mongering among economists and emerging market investors alike,” he says. “The consensus seems to have settled around a simple narrative that tariff threats will lead to higher inflation, less monetary easing and a stronger dollar,” he adds.

“Amid a salvo of ‘America first’ rhetoric, EM equities have underperformed their US counterparts since the election, while outflows from EM bond funds have accelerated, taking total net withdrawals for 2024 to over $20bn,” Sambor points out.

Trade tariffs are clearly “very bad news” for emerging market debt, says Mike Riddell, portfolio manager at Fidelity International. But the key question for EM investors, he says, “is just how much of Trump’s tariff narrative is bark, and just how much is bite”.

If Trump does bite, then some emerging market economies will be hit harder than others. According to proprietary data from asset manager Ninety One, the likes of Malaysia, Czech Republic, Hungary, China and Mexico would be hardest hit, while Argentina, Israel, Kenya, Egypt and Uganda would suffer the least.

Market commentators suggest bond investors will need to focus on resilient markets with low external debt and strong domestic consumption.

“The form and timing of US tariffs is obviously very hard to predict and, ultimately, it is the detail that will matter,” says Grant Webster, co-head of emerging market sovereign debt at Ninety One. “But the economies most exposed are those in which trade forms a large part of their GDPs, and those that run large surpluses to the US.”

He predicts those likely to gain — or, at least, to lose out less — are the Latin American economies aside from Mexico, which are more closed off and have less exposure to Europe and China via their supply chains.

“Think of Argentina, for example, which has a low level of exports to the US and a relatively closed economy,” Webster says. “Another notable winner is India. India, given its enormous domestic economy, has low exports to the US relative to GDP, is relatively closed, runs a high services balance, and is not deeply integrated into global supply chains.”

Gibson-Moore concurs. “India will emerge as a safe haven,” he predicts. “Despite the very real risks of a Trump administration, there are opportunities. Emerging markets with strong domestic fundamentals are better positioned to weather the storm.”

Indeed, many commentators believe the naysayers are being overly pessimistic given that investors have more information on what to expect from Trump this time around compared with 2016.

And, even then, there were several positives from the first Trump administration for emerging markets, recalls Carlos Carranza, portfolio manager at asset manager Allianz Global Investors.

“First, despite the volatility seen in EM assets over the first Trump administration, the returns for EM bonds were solid,” he says. “Dollar-denominated sovereign bonds delivered close to 25 per cent over the 2016 to 2019 period and, in fact, outperformed US high yield and US investment grade bonds.”

Today, he believes the macroeconomic outlook remains constructive for emerging markets, with GDP growth in the US showing resiliency and the US Federal Reserve still committed to lowering interest rates.

Mark Mobius, chair of Mobius Emerging Opportunities Fund, agrees. “We expect there will be a revival of the US economy, which will be good for almost all nations, including emerging markets.”

Alan Siow, Ninety One’s co-head of emerging market corporate debt, adds that investors will be able to take comfort from the familiar and the fact “we have seen this movie before”.

“During the previous Trump administration, various tariffs and trade policy tools were threatened against China, for example,” he says. “And, in respect of China, despite a material increase in effective tariff rates, the economic impact was muted.”



The idea of “two Americas,” one rich and one poor, one blue and the other red, has been around for decades. But now, thanks to Donald Trump, there are about to be fifty Americas.

As fast as the new president can sign executive orders, individual state governments are stepping up to challenge them in court. The upshot will be a more confusing environment for business — and a richer one for lawyers — as blue states look for ways to shield themselves from immigration raids, weaker environmental regulations, Big Tech monopoly power and massive cuts in federal aid for everything from healthcare to emergency relief.

The lawsuits, which were rife during Trump’s first term, began again last week as Massachusetts, New Jersey and California led a group of 18 states in filing a challenge to the president’s executive order ending birthright citizenship. Four other states filed a similar suit. As Massachusetts attorney-general Andrea Joy Campbell put it, “birthright citizenship . . . is a guarantee of equality, born out of a collective fight against oppression . . . It is a settled right in our Constitution and recognised by the Supreme Court for more than a century.”

While one can only hope that today’s conservative court won’t approve a modern-day version of the 1857 Dred Scott decision that prohibited citizenship for enslaved people, the battle will be expensive and protracted. Ironically, a series of rulings made by the Supreme Court at the end of 2023 actually make it much easier for individuals, businesses and aggrieved states to take on the federal government.

Blue state governments are, for example, taking charge of many of the monopoly fights waged by the Biden administration. Minnesota’s progressive attorney-general Keith Ellison has replaced former Federal Trade Commission chair Lina Khan as the face of the war on predatory ticket prices, algorithmic manipulation of real estate markets, grocery monopolies and rent-seeking pharmaceutical companies.

States will also be ground zero for the rollback of climate legislation, including Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act, which Trump insists on calling the Green New Deal. While the president may seek to rebrand some of the provisions that benefited red states as his own, he’s dumping subsidies for things like electric vehicles.

California is preparing for the coming climate battle. Between 2017 and 2021, the state sued the Trump administration 123 times, racking up several wins against environmental deregulation, albeit mostly on administrative grounds. This time around, the Trump administration has experience and better bureaucratic chops. California has already withdrawn several requests that it had been granted under the Biden administration to enforce its own higher pollution restrictions. And Trump is threatening to withhold federal disaster relief for LA unless the state changes its water management, blaming conservation efforts for the city’s inability to get fires under control.

California Governor Gavin Newsom has requested $25mn from the state budget to cover expected litigation costs from battling Trump. The state will also use the power of its own enormous economy (the fifth largest in the world) to try and cut deals with big companies that meet its own clean energy standards, as it did with major global automakers during the first Trump tenure.

This is an important point. The blue states are home to most of the country’s biggest and richest consumers. They can create strong demand signals for the rest of the country, even if the president doesn’t like it. When the New York City Housing Authority, for example, decides to adopt a certain kind of window, it can set industry standards for years. When California or New York or Illinois or Massachusetts select a certain kind of technology platform for public education systems, or a particular food safety rule, or a certain approach to labour and AI, it can tip the balance of what companies do.

Of course, the economic pull of doing business in such places will also be balanced against the regulatory burdens they impose, particularly relative to red states that will be happy to adopt Trump’s deregulatory, laissez-faire agenda. A friend of mine with a small business recently spent a year and tens of thousands of dollars in legal fees trying to safely fire a lazy and potentially litigious person she’d hired in California who worked remotely. Her replacement is from business-friendly Tennessee.

Historically, US states tend to band together best when fighting against something, and this time is no different. Last November, Illinois governor JB Pritzker and Colorado governor Jared Polis created a new group called Governors Safeguarding Democracy, with the aim of pooling resources to combat the Trump agenda. Pritzker, for example, has said he won’t co-operate if Trump tries to use red state National Guard units for deportations in blue states. Would California send resources to help?

Here’s hoping such questions remain the stuff of dystopian films. The reality is that blue states, many of which have big deficits, will have to find ways to cope with less fiscal support from Washington. Conservatives are already calling for a new kind of fiscal federalism, blaming overgrown state budgets for the national debt problem. No prizes for guessing where the first cuts will be made.

rana.foroohar@ft.com



The sharp sell-off in US bonds may not yet be over, say fund managers and analysts, as they try to work out the longer-term impact of President Donald Trump and his policies on Treasury yields and prices.

Investors have already seen the yield on the 10-year Treasury rise from as little as 3.6 per cent in mid-September to about 4.8 per cent this month — its highest level since November 2023 — before falling back, slightly, to about 4.64 per cent. Bond yields move inversely to prices.

These moves have been driven, in part, by the so-called “Trump trade”, as investors started to price in an election victory for the Republican candidate and resulting policies that could add further fuel to an inflation rate already above target.

With yields of 5 per cent being talked about as a possibility by some commentators — and little clarity on how Trump will pursue his plans for trade tariffs, tax cuts and deportations of illegal immigrants — many see little reason to call an end to the rises just yet.

“We don’t want to get in the way of the rise in US Treasury yields right now as it could be based upon markets testing a shift to a new regime, as Trump [tariff] threats are taken more seriously,” explained TS Lombard chief economist Freya Beamish, in a recent note.

Strong jobs market data and above-target inflation have added to jitters among investors. US consumer price inflation was 2.4 per cent in September but ticked up to 2.9 per cent in December, although core inflation for that month unexpectedly fell. On the Federal Reserve’s preferred Personal Consumption Expenditure measure, inflation was 2.4 per cent in November — still above the central bank’s 2 per cent target.

These metrics means that, for many fund managers, Treasuries — traditionally seen as a haven asset — are a riskier, more volatile bet than in the past.

“Investors are demanding more compensation to hold an asset class that has more uncertainty,” says Matthew Morgan, head of fixed income at Jupiter Asset Management. “Inflation is not going away as quickly — that’s the primary problem. The starter of this move was as much [the inflation] data as Trump.”

Many investors remain concerned about the federal budget deficit, which grew under former president Joe Biden to $1.8tn in the year to September — or more than 6 per cent of US GDP. Last year, the Congressional Budget Office forecast it would hit $2.6tn by 2034.

Despite Trump’s plan to cut the deficit to 3 per cent, and his appointment of Elon Musk to head a project to slash the size of the state, many commentators expect the deficit to grow under the new president. This has raised concerns about the amount of bond issuance required.

“The US [deficit] is wide,” says Mitch Reznick, group head of fixed income in London at Federated Hermes. “It can generally operate wider than other jurisdictions, but there are limits to that.

“We’re still a little bit wary of the long end in bonds, [until] we see catalysts of growth and deficits under control,” he adds.

Greg Venizelos, fixed-income strategist at St James’s Place, cites “the uncertainty we’ve seen surrounding Trump 2.0” as a factor behind the surge in yields, and says the firm’s house view is to be neutral on government bonds.

However, some investors have been using the sell-off as an opportunity to buy. Jupiter’s Morgan says that the firm’s fund managers have, on balance, been increasing their positions in longer-term bonds more sensitive to moves in interest rates.

“Government bonds look attractively priced right now,” he suggests. “I think you’re going to make money on a 12- to 24-month view, but you’re going to take some volatility.”

Fund managers have also been trying to take advantage of the upheaval in the Treasury market by betting on the steepening of the yield curve, as yields on longer maturity debt have risen relative to those on shorter-term bonds. Traders can profit by betting on shorter-term debt prices rising while betting against longer-term bonds.

The so-called term premium — the extra return for investors for taking on interest rate risk over longer periods — has risen to its highest level since 2014, according to data from the Federal Reserve.

The recent move in 10-year bonds globally, which steepened yield curves around the world, has been “spectacular”, wrote Natixis, in a note to clients.

Federated Hermes’ Reznick and fund managers under Jupiter’s Morgan are among those to have run ‘steepener’ trades. Michael Krautzberger at Allianz Global Investors has also had such trades on, and has taken some profits.

But, while Treasury moves have been dramatic, some commentators believe certain threats to the market posed by Trump could prove to be overblown. For example, plans to introduce widespread tariffs may be scaled back, as indicated by some of the president’s comments since his inauguration.

“Ultimately, we see scope for a [trade] deal to be done avoiding materialisation of these threat[s] . . . providing opportunities for a reprieve,” said TS Lombard’s Beamish last week.



The Trump administration said it was pausing punitive tariffs against Colombia after its leader agreed to grant entry to US military flights deporting migrants.

The announcement appeared to head off a trade war between the two allies after Colombia denied entry to two US military aircraft carrying deportees on Sunday. Washington responded by imposing 25 per cent tariffs on the country’s imports.

Bogotá said it would apply reciprocal tariffs of its own, as President Donald Trump and Colombian counterpart Gustavo Petro, a leftist former guerrilla member, traded barbs on social media.

On Sunday night, the White House said Colombia had “agreed to all of President Trump’s terms”. But it said visa sanctions against Colombian government officials would remain in force “until the first planeload of Colombian deportees is successfully returned”.

“Today’s events make clear to the world that America is respected again,” said a White House statement.

“President Trump will continue to fiercely protect our nation’s sovereignty, and he expects all other nations of the world to fully co-operate in accepting the deportation of their citizens illegally present in the US.”

In a televised statement on Sunday night, Luis Gilberto Murillo, Colombia’s foreign minister, said: “We have overcome the impasse with the government of the United States.”

Murillo said he would travel to Washington in the coming days to “follow up on the agreements”, though he did not mention the substance of the accord. He also said the Colombian presidential plane would be made available to facilitate the arrival of the migrants denied entry on Sunday.

“We will continue to receive Colombian men and women who return as deportees, guaranteeing them dignified conditions as citizens with rights,” Murillo said.

The row erupted when Petro declared in a post on X that the deported migrants should be treated with “dignity and respect” and that Colombia had turned away US military aircraft carrying deportees.

Trump responded by accusing Petro in a post on Truth Social of jeopardising “the National Security and Public Safety of the United States”.

He announced emergency 25 per cent tariffs that would increase to 50 per cent in a week, alongside a travel ban and “immediate visa revocations” for Colombian government officials “and all allies and supporters”.

Will Freeman, a fellow for Latin American studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, noted that Colombia sends almost a third of its exports to the US “so this emergency tariff and the threat to raise it further is serious”.

Trump has promised to carry out the largest mass deportation of illegal migrants in US history, alarming the estimated 11mn undocumented immigrants in the US and countries in the region.

Brazil’s government has condemned as “degrading” the use of handcuffs on its nationals aboard a deportation flight from the US. Brasília said it stopped a flight from continuing to its final destination of Belo Horizonte because of the cuffs, the “poor condition” of the aircraft and the “anger” of the 88 Brazilian citizens over their “undignified treatment”.

Brazil’s justice minister said there had been “flagrant disrespect for the fundamental rights of Brazilian citizens”.

Though Colombia and the US have long been close allies — with Washington providing about $10bn in military and foreign aid to Bogotá to fight insurgents and drug traffickers between 1999 and 2016 — Trump and Petro are ideologically opposed.

“It’s important for Petro and a lot of Latin American leaders to show resistance to this policy on migration,” said Sergio Guzmán, director of Colombia Risk Analysis, a Bogotá-based consultancy. “Petro is trying to show force and to project an ideological difference with Trump.”

The flow of migrants north through the Darién Gap, a treacherous stretch of jungle that separates Colombia and Panama, has dropped 40 per cent in the past year to 302,000, according to Panama’s foreign ministry, following a crackdown by Panamanian authorities.

But many migrants used legal pathways opened by the Biden administration to cross into the US and the overall migrant numbers are still near recent record highs.

Mexico is negotiating with the US over immigration and drugs to try to avoid a 25 per cent tariff on its exports to the US from next week.

Mexican president Claudia Sheinbaum has stressed that while she does not agree with the deportations, Mexico will co-operate with the US and have a “good” relationship with the Trump administration.

Additional reporting by Steff Chávez in Washington



Dana Perino is clear about whether she will be getting a call to join the Trump administration. “No, I don’t think so,” she says firmly. She is behind her desk on the Manhattan set of America’s Newsroom, one of the Fox News shows she presents. Normally she is the one asking the questions but the cameras have stopped rolling and this morning is the FT’s turn to be interrogator.

Is she sure she won’t get a call? Three of Perino’s Fox News colleagues are in line for positions in Donald Trump’s new cabinet: Pete Hegseth, a former host at the channel, was confirmed as defence secretary at the weekend; Tulsi Gabbard, a Fox contributor and former Democratic congresswoman turned Republican, has been put forward as director of national intelligence; while Sean Duffy, a host on Fox Business, has received the nod for transportation secretary.

Fox News has had a rocky few years, settling a $787.5mn defamation lawsuit with Dominion Voting Systems in 2023, over on-air claims the company helped rig the 2020 election for Joe Biden (an additional $2.7bn defamation suit from another voting system group, Smartmatic, is pending). Yet the network beloved by conservatives remains the most watched cable news channel in the US, routinely trouncing rivals CNN and MSNBC in the ratings. Many of its presenters share a worldview with Trump: Tucker Carlson, a former Perino colleague and bogeyman of liberals everywhere, does not have an official role but is known to have regular conversations with the new US president. National Public Radio recently calculated that for his second term, Trump has given jobs to at least 19 past and present hosts, journalists and commentators from the network, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch’s Fox Corp.

Perino would be a natural choice to join them, given her experience as White House press secretary under George W Bush. In that role, which she held for two years, she sustained an injury to her eye in the melee that followed an Iraqi journalist throwing a shoe at the then president.

But the 52-year-old says there is only one position that would persuade her to return to government. “The only job I would want . . . would be ambassador to Tanzania,” she says, slightly unexpectedly. Africa holds a special place in her heart, she explains: she worked with Bush on the President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief (Pepfar) and, together with her husband, has spent time volunteering on its west coast since she left the White House in 2009.

Her internationalist view and belief in the importance of overseas aid is a far cry from Trump’s “America First” isolationism. “I’m not against investment in other places, where it makes sense, if you’re actually getting results and if you have national security interests that can be advanced. Because guess what? If we don’t, China [will].”

Perino, it seems, is cut from a different conservative cloth than the man who now sits in the Oval Office. “I just want everybody to get along,” the Colorado native says at one point (imagine Trump ever saying that). She is less shouty than some of her Fox News colleagues who present evening opinion shows, such as chief Trump cheerleader Sean Hannity.

Fox and Trump have had a turbulent relationship over the years. Despite the network’s biggest stars tending to share a hatred of the Democratic party — even though it now attracts a larger share of the Democrat audience than rivals such as CNN, according to Nielsen — the president has at various times accused the channel of being unfair to him or having an anti-Trump agenda. Which begs the question: given some of his more alarming policies (releasing convicted criminals who attacked the Capitol on January 6, being one) is Trump now to the right of Fox News? “It depends on what the right means now,” Perino says, diplomatically.

The US is in the midst of a “political realignment”, she adds, going on to mention previous eras, such as the 1970s, when southern Democrats drifted away from the party, eventually becoming Reagan Republicans. Today’s Democrats have “let the working class go”, while Trump “is a political phenomenon. I’m certainly a conservative. I’m a registered Republican. Would people that work for him consider me one of them? I don’t know.”

What is Trump’s relationship with Fox like these days? “It might depend on the day.” She adds that his second term certainly will not be boring. “I remember on a Saturday [in his first term] I took a nap for 20 minutes. That was it, and I woke up and three news stories had broken. During the Biden administration you could nap all day.”

Fox News was the first outlet to raise questions about Biden’s age affecting his mental acuity, which earned the channel the ire of Democrats. The great irony is that the Democrats are now beating themselves up over why he did not step down sooner, which would have allowed a proper primary to find the strongest candidate to run in his place.

“It was what you were seeing with your own eyes,” Perino says of Biden’s decline. “It wasn’t speculation. You could just see it when he would interact or when he would talk with the press. It was a problem.”

I wonder if Fox’s reporting on this issue failed to take off in other parts of the press (Fox commentators tend to lump all other outlets together as the “mainstream media”) precisely because it came from the Murdoch-controlled channel and could therefore be dismissed as politically motivated.

But Perino changes tack to the campaign itself. “The other thing that was happening was that every poll said inflation is the number one issue for people, followed by immigration, and then crime. The voters were telling them what was wrong.

“Climate change might be the number one issue for 7 per cent of your voters,” she adds. “If you focus on that solely and ignore these other things, ultimately you’re going to lose.”

Perino then brings up border security. “The White House [would be] saying the border is secure and [Fox would have a] split-screen of people just walking across it. They missed that too. That really affected people.”

The border is now the responsibility of the new administration, which continues to be assembled by Trump. At the time of publication only Marco Rubio’s Senate confirmation as secretary of state has been smooth. Hegseth’s nomination in particular sparked an outcry, with several news outlets publishing stories on alleged excessive drinking and aggressive behaviour: the Wall Street Journal, which, like Fox, is part of the Murdoch empire, recently reported he routinely passed out from alcohol abuse. (Hegseth has denied the allegations.)

Perino says she “never worked with him that closely”, adding the allegations “don’t ring true to anything that I’ve ever experienced. ‘Give Pete a chance’ is something I said that first day [he was nominated]. I know it’s been a lot on his family, just from afar.”

She went through a Senate confirmation process herself in 2010 when Barack Obama nominated her to join the Broadcasting Board of Governors. It was not “very controversial”, she says of the experience, “but it’s still a thing when your whole world is opened up to everybody”.

Since then, Perino’s Fox career has grown and evolved: alongside America’s Newsroom, which she co-anchors with Bill Hemmer, she is a co-host of the primetime show The Five, the most watched cable news show at 5pm. She has also developed Minute Mentoring, an organisation that helps women build leadership skills and advance their careers. She describes the approach as “like speed dating, but mentoring”.

She mentions a piece of advice she has given. “I tell people, you’re only allowed to have one drink at your office Christmas party. I don’t care if you think you can handle four, you can’t. One drink, that’s it.” Why? “You don’t want to make a fool of yourself. You want to have a good showing in front of your boss at all times.” Maybe Hegseth could have done with this advice, I suggest. “I don’t know,” she says sharply. “I’ve never seen him drinking.”

Our time is almost up and before we part I want to know again where an internationalist conservative, who believes we have more common ground than we might think, fits in the new Trump era. “I try to show people that we actually don’t disagree that much,” says Perino, referring again to the great political realignment wrought by the election result. There are some Trump policies that have merit, she adds, pointing to the need to drive more spending by Nato members and her view that the Department of Education needs reform to deliver better outcomes for children. But it does not sound like she has become a full-blown Maga member just yet.

She is ready for Trump 2.0 — and Fox News, she says, is the perfect perch. “I think the great thing for me is I can just be myself.”



US immigration authorities began making arrests in Chicago on Sunday that targeted undocumented residents living in the “sanctuary city”.

Immigration and Customs Enforcement confirmed on social media site X that its agents, along with several federal agencies including the FBI, had begun operations in the Midwestern city. Border tsar Tom Homan was in Chicago for the raid, as was acting deputy attorney-general Emil Bove.

The operation targeted about 270 “known criminals”, according to television personality Phil McGraw, who was accompanying ICE officials and agents at their command centre in Chicago and livestreaming events for his channel Merit TV.

Donald Trump made immigration the central issue of his campaign, promising “mass deportations”. Chicago has been on edge for more than a week after news outlets reported the administration’s plans for raids, with fewer people venturing outside in heavily immigrant neighbourhoods.

Just under a fifth of metro Chicago’s population was born outside the US, according to the US Census, a grouping that includes people with immigration statuses ranging from naturalised citizens to undocumented. Mexicans comprise the largest group born outside the US, followed by people from India and Poland.

About 52,000 immigrants have arrived in the city since August 2022, when Texas governor Greg Abbott began busing people from the border to Chicago, among other Democrat-controlled cities.

As a sanctuary city since the 1980s, Chicago has adopted policies that limit co-operation with federal authorities to enforce immigration law.

The City Council voted this month to reject a proposal that would have weakened those protections, and the Chicago Transit Authority is displaying ads at train and bus stations that direct riders to the city’s “Know Your Rights” website, which lays out how to interact with immigration authorities.

Homan has talked in recent months about “collateral” arrests, detaining undocumented people if they are in the presence of someone ICE has a warrant to arrest. That would violate a 2022 court settlement and could make residents of certain states who are detained in such warrantless arrests eligible for immediate release from custody.

On Sunday, Homan agreed when McGraw, also known as “Dr Phil”, suggested collateral arrests were the result of local authorities refusing to co-operate with ICE, prompting federal agents to make arrests in city neighbourhoods.

“That’s the game they want to play, game on, we’re going to do it,” said Homan.

Immigration advocates fear the executive orders Trump issued last week constitute a large-scale attempt to dismantle due process protections.

Expedited removal, which is the deportation of people without a judicial hearing or legal counsel, typically applies to people detained within 100 miles of the US border.

Trump is attempting to extend it throughout the country for anyone who cannot prove to an ICE agent’s satisfaction that they have resided in the US for at least two years.

Mary Meg McCarthy, executive director for the Chicago-based National Immigrant Justice Center, said many of the orders violated US law and the constitution.

Trump’s rhetoric of “familiar cruelty and dehumanisation . . . now paired with the full force of the executive branch and Congress, will unleash profound suffering on our longtime immigrant neighbours and people who have arrived more recently to seek refuge”, she said.



Donald Trump has urged Egypt and Jordan to take in most of the population of Gaza, saying it was time to “clean out” the territory in comments that are likely to outrage Palestinians and Arabs across the region.

“I’d like Egypt to take people. And I’d like Jordan to take people,” the US president told reporters aboard Air Force One. “You’re talking about a million and half people, and we just clean out that whole thing.”

Trump’s proposal would upend decades of US policy promoting the two-state solution based on the establishment of a Palestinian nation alongside Israel, in Gaza and parts of the occupied West Bank.

Trump said he has already discussed his proposal to relocate Gaza’s population with King Abdullah of Jordan on Saturday and will bring it up on Sunday in a phone call with Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s president.

With the ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas entering its second week, Trump said Gaza was “literally a demolition site, almost everything is demolished and people are dying there so I’d rather get involved with some of the Arab nations and build housing at a different location where they can maybe live in peace for a change”.

Trump said a population transfer “could be temporarily or could be long term”. The prewar population of Gaza was 2.2mn.

Amman and Cairo have since the start of the war in October 2023 repeatedly rejected any transfer of Palestinians to their territories, saying it would amount to the “liquidation of the Palestinian cause” at the expense of Israel’s neighbours.

Ayman Safadi, Jordan’s foreign minister, said in remarks cited by Reuters that the kingdom’s rejection of any displacement of the Palestinians was “firm and unwavering”. He said the priority was to ensure that Palestinians remained on their land.

Egypt also made clear its rejection of Trump’s Gaza proposal. The country’s foreign ministry said Egypt rejected any attempt to undermine Palestinians’ “inalienable rights . . . by annexation of land or by emptying this land of its owners through displacement or encouraging the transfer or uprooting of Palestinians from their land whether that was temporary or long term”.

Sisi has said previously that taking in Gazans would threaten Egypt’s peace agreement with Israel because of the risk that some of them would resume fighting the Jewish state from within his country’s borders.

Hamas said on Sunday that Palestinians “categorically reject any plans to deport or displace them from their land”, and called on Egypt and Jordan to stand firm against any such attempts.

HA Hellyer, senior fellow at Center for American Progress in Washington, said such a transfer “could be deeply destabilising particularly for Jordan [which already has a large Palestinian population] and potentially for Egypt to relocate Palestinians to the Sinai for example because it could mean conflict between Palestinian militants and Israel”.

The two countries have weak economies and need US support but their leaders would not want to be seen to be complicit in what Arab public opinion would consider a second “Nakba” or catastrophe — the exodus to neighbouring countries of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees in 1948 when the state of Israel was founded.

“It would outrage Arabs because the historical record is very clear; every time Palestinians have been forced to leave part of Palestine, they never went back,” said Hellyer. “Emptying Gaza of its inhabitants would not have any support from the Arabs, or even internationally, because it is the definition of ethnic cleansing.”

Such a move, he added, would undermine prospects of a normalisation of relations between Israel and Saudi Arabia — long a focus of US diplomatic efforts in the region. “It would make it even more unlikely the deal would take place in the immediate future,” said Hellyer.

Trump’s Gaza proposal nonetheless delighted leaders of Israel’s far right.

Finance minister Bezalel Smotrich described Trump’s suggestion as a “wonderful idea”, adding that “only outside-the-box thinking over new solutions will bring . . . peace and security”.

Itamar Ben-Gvir, the former Israeli national security minister who resigned in protest last week over the Gaza ceasefire deal, “praised” Trump for floating the idea.

Trump also confirmed that the Pentagon had lifted a hold on the delivery 2,000-pound bombs to Israel imposed by the Biden administration. “We released them today and they’ll have them,” he said.

The ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas was already under strain despite the successful release on Saturday of four female Israeli soldiers from captivity in Gaza and 200 Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails.

Israeli officials said over the weekend that Hamas had violated the US-brokered accord after it failed to release the last civilian woman hostage still believed to be alive — Arbel Yehud — before the soldiers.

Additional reporting by Sarah Dadouch and Malaika Kanaaneh Tapper



International investors have long flocked to the US as a country of clear laws, strong property rights and robust institutions. They may want to revise that view if the rollercoaster ride that is TikTok, now hurtling through the tunnel of the living dead, crashes into the buffers. Even big multinational companies, with 170mn enthusiastic users in the US, can become the plaything of politicians. And it is still far from clear how the saga is going to end.

Ironically, given his recent support for the company, Donald Trump was among the first to shout about the national security threat posed by TikTok during his first presidential term. In 2020, Trump issued an executive order threatening to ban the service. As the US offshoot of the Chinese-owned ByteDance, TikTok was seen by many politicians in Washington as a digital spy and potential Chinese Communist party propaganda tool. TikTok has since spent enormous time and resources on efforts to disprove these accusations, partnering with Oracle to ringfence the data of its US users and insisting on the impartiality of its algorithms.

Politicians on both sides of the congressional aisle have remained unimpressed. Last April, in a rare display of bipartisanship, the Senate voted, by a margin of 79 to 18, to approve legislation threatening to ban TikTok in the US unless ByteDance sold it. TikTok lobbied vigorously to overturn the law, arguing it would erode free speech and the business interests of millions of Americans.

This month, the Supreme Court unanimously dismissed the company’s pleas, backing Congress’s “well-supported national security concerns”. China has reacted with indignation, but Beijing itself firewalled most US platforms years ago, also ostensibly on national security grounds.

But TikTok had more success mobilising the support of its users and winning over the once-hostile Trump. Last June, the then presidential candidate launched his own TikTok account and now has more than 15mn followers. He has skilfully used the short-form video platform to target younger voters. TikTok’s chief executive, Shou Zi Chew, was even given a prominent seat at Trump’s inauguration.

Upon re-entering the White House, Trump issued an executive order seeking to delay enforcement of the ban-or-divest law against TikTok that came into effect on January 19. But this executive order does not overturn the law, leaving the company, and the US platforms that host it, in legal limbo. Meanwhile, Trump appears to be using TikTok as a valuable pawn in a far bigger game with China. The president has suggested that if Beijing were to sell 50 per cent of TikTok to the US — though China has previously refused to countenance any kind of sale — then Washington might go easier on trade tariffs.

It is possible that Trump may yet seal an improbable deal keeping all parties happy. But it is hard to see how that will happen given the demands of China hawks in Washington to nullify any national security threat and TikTok’s determination to keep its algorithms secret. The more likely outcome is that the president will try to strong-arm the business into the hands of an administration-friendly associate. Trump said this weekend that “numerous people” had talked to him about buying the app and a decision was likely in the next 30 days.

Last week, Trump urged global business leaders at Davos to step up investment in the US. But his history of highly transactional dealings will give them pause. Investors understandably prefer to operate within the bounds defined by laws, rights and institutions. The outcome of the TikTok dispute will show how far these still apply in the US.



FT readers are old enough to remember when Joe Biden committed hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies to green technology — and Europe panicked. In the past week, Donald Trump has undone Biden’s industrial policy, while promising huge investments in AI and fossil energy instead — and Europe is panicking again. No matter what a US president does, it seems, Europeans see an existential crisis.

This should give us some perspective on the “peak pessimism” expressed in Davos. Perhaps, just perhaps, it reflects European attitudes more than it does the EU’s objective prospects. That is not to deny that Trump’s second administration will pose huge challenges to the bloc’s economic and geopolitical model. But that model was already ripe for change. It would suit the EU to be more entrepreneurial about its fears, and use Trump’s arrival as a source of opportunities — both to make it easier to make the changes that are long overdue, and to benefit from the harm the US is about to inflict on itself.

Start with trade. Trump wants to shrink the US trade deficit with the EU. European leaders want to increase investment at home. These desires amount to the same thing. As EU leaders increasingly acknowledge, the EU’s trade surplus is also a huge savings surplus exported to finance investments abroad. The penny needs to drop: redirecting these savings to domestic investments means leaving behind a growth model driven by export surpluses.

The understandable European instinct is to placate Trump and hope to salvage their US market access. But this instinct is obsolete. Learn instead from the more clear-eyed (everything is relative) strategy towards China: de-risk, though not decouple. The probable next German chancellor, Friedrich Merz, rightly warns companies reliant on China that they have to face the risks of disruption on their own. The same mindset can be extended to the US.

Then there is defence. Europeans have to spend a lot more on this — not because the US president says so, but because Russian belligerence threatens their freedom. Trump’s demand to raise defence spending to 5 per cent of GDP can, however, be the prod needed to break through political inertia, by shifting the question from whether to spend substantially more to how.

In the short run, this means more weapons purchases from US manufacturers — an easy promise to trade for other favours in Washington. In the medium run, ironically, it could lead to the opposite, as European arms producers get the certainty of sustained and higher demand — especially if their governments finally manage to standardise specifications and procure jointly.

Energy is next. The EU struggles with high energy prices, and hasn’t managed to give up Russian pipeline oil and liquefied gas. Trump would like nothing more than boosting oil and gas sales to Europe. The quickest way to achieve this would be to complete the EU’s sanctions against buying Russian fossil fuels — but this requires unanimity, which Russia-friendly member states resist. The smart thing to do is request a helping hand from Trump by pointing out that it’s his own admirers, from Budapest to Bratislava, who stand in the way of a bigger order book.

In addition to a political springboard to realise existing European priorities, Trump’s disruption also offers new opportunities to exploit. If Biden’s subsidies for renewables and green tech sucked investment from Europe to the US, then today’s about-face must logically do the opposite. More likely, those fears were always overdone. But the Maga antipathy for anything green strengthens the case for doubling down on incentives to make more profitable in Europe the decarbonisation investments that have just become less profitable in the US.

Think about immigration, too. For a long time Europe has bled talent to the US, and the shortage of qualified staff is a common complaint from high-tech businesses. If Maga America proves too extreme for the world’s young well-educated workers (and the UK remains neuralgic about immigration), an EU that throws its doors open could become a global pole of attraction. High-skilled immigration schemes that allow movement between EU states, such as the Blue Card initiative, should be enhanced, perhaps in conjunction with the pan-European legal framework for innovative companies that European tech has asked for and Brussels has promised to deliver.

Europe should heed the words of an earlier US president: it has nothing to fear but fear itself. The best response to Trumpian aggression is to use it to make Europe great again.

martin.sandbu@ft.com



The Federal Reserve is not expected to cut interest rates on Wednesday but the US central bank’s policy is already under scrutiny from President Donald Trump.

Investors overwhelmingly expect the Fed to hold rates at their current level of 4.25-4.5 per cent, after three consecutive cuts since September.

Attention will focus on any shift in outlook from the accompanying statement, and on remarks from chair Jay Powell in the subsequent press conference.

In December the Fed signalled a likely pause in rate cuts and said it would consider the “extent and timing” of any further changes. Since then, data has shown slowing inflation and solid jobs growth — a combination that has sparked debate over the need for, and timing of, any further rate cuts.

“If the [Fed] wanted to send a further hawkish signal in January, this sentence could be modified again,” said HSBC US economist Ryan Wang. “We expect the Fed to refrain from sending such a signal, but this is a hawkish risk.”

But Powell is likely to face questions on early actions and comments from Trump, who this week said he would demand that interest rates drop. The president also called for lower oil prices, which could also affect inflation.

Trump has previously called for Powell’s exit but both have downplayed any friction since November’s election.

The Fed chair also made it clear in November he planned to serve out his current term and maintained too that the president could not remove him. Jennifer Hughes

After European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde last month came closer than ever to calling victory over inflation, investors are expecting another interest rate cut on Thursday.

Markets have fully priced in another 0.25 percentage point rate cut from policymakers in Frankfurt. If confirmed, that would be the fifth such reduction since June and would take the key deposit rate to 2.75 per cent, the lowest level in almost two years and 1.25 percentage points lower than at its peak in 2024.

In doing so, markets expect the ECB to discount December’s jump in annual inflation back to 2.4 per cent. It is confident that annual price increases this year will be close to its medium-term target of 2 per cent, while economic growth is likely to disappoint.

But almost half of the 72 participants in a Financial Times survey among European economists said that the ECB had been too slow in lowering rates.

“We do not see ourselves behind the curve,” Lagarde told CNBC in an interview in Davos this week where she attended the World Economic Forum.

Traders are expecting two or three further quarter-point cuts this year, according to levels implied by swaps markets.

With the US Fed becoming much more hawkish in December, a growing transatlantic gap in monetary policy appears to be opening up.

Lagarde told CNBC that the ECB was not “overly concerned” about potential repercussions for Europe from a potential uptick in inflation in the US. Olaf Storbeck

Traders are widely expecting the Bank of Canada to cut interest rates by a quarter point at Wednesday’s policy-setting meeting but a small question mark remains, given recent trends in economic data.

Swaps markets are pricing in a 90 per cent probability the central bank will cut its benchmark rate by 0.25 percentage points to 3 per cent from 3.25 per cent.

But when the Bank of Canada took half a percentage point off its overnight rate in December for the second meeting in a row, responding to weaker than expected economic growth, deliberations from its governing council showed that the decision between a quarter-point and half-point cut was a “close call” given mixed data and noted the “substantial” cumulation of recent reductions.

Members would be evaluating the need for further reductions in the policy rate “one meeting at a time”, the bank said in a summary of their deliberations, and “expected a more gradual approach to monetary policy going forward”.

Data since then show that Canada’s economy was growing “roughly in line” with the central bank’s forecast, according to Capital Economics. It also highlighted inflation data for December, that while including a decline to 1.8 per cent in the headline rate, indicated that a measure of underlying inflation trends was “uncomfortably high”.

Such pressures could give the central bank, which has also cited uncertainty created by the new US administration, the grounds to pause its rate cuts.

“With tariffs clouding the economic outlook, we judge that the governing council will opt for a [quarter-point] policy rate cut,” said Thomas Ryan, North America economist at Capital Economics. Ian Smith



US President Donald Trump has ridiculed Denmark’s attempts to defend Greenland with additional patrols including two extra dog sleds as he insisted America would take control of the strategically crucial Arctic island.

Denmark’s defence minister has conceded that the Nordic country has not done enough to protect its autonomous territory of Greenland, but revealed plans to spend $1.5bn on two new inspection ships, two drones and two dog sled patrols after Trump renewed his interest in the island.

“I do believe Greenland, we’ll get — because it really has to do with freedom of the world. It has nothing to do with the United States, other than we’re the one that can provide the freedom. They [Denmark] can’t. They put two dog sleds there two weeks ago, they thought that was protection,” Trump told reporters on Air Force One this weekend.

Trump held a 45-minute phone call with Denmark’s Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen last week, which five current and former senior European officials described to the Financial Times as fiery and confrontational.

The officials said the Danish government was in “crisis mode” after Trump took the unprecedented step of refusing to rule out military action to take territory from a Nato ally and threatened targeted tariffs against it. The US already has the sole military base in Greenland, in the north of the island.

Denmark’s military presence on Greenland is currently limited to an Arctic Command of just 75 people and equipment consisting of four ships, a surveillance plane and several dog sled patrols.

Both Danish and Greenlandic officials have said the US could increase its military presence on the island, and there have been periodic discussions about a second base or more personnel.

Troels Lund Poulsen, Denmark’s defence minister, said on Christmas Eve that as well as the new ships, drones and dog sled patrols Copenhagen would also upgrade the runway of one of Greenland’s main airports to allow F-35 fighter jets — operated both by the US and the Nordic country — to land there.

The US has repeatedly recognised Danish sovereignty over Greenland, not least when it bought what are now the US Virgin Islands from Denmark in 1917.

But Trump said on Air Force One: “I don’t really know what claim Denmark has to it, but it would be a very unfriendly act if they didn’t allow that to happen because it’s for the protection of the free world. It’s not for us, it’s for the free world. Right now, you have Russian ships, you have Chinese ships, you have ships from various countries. It’s not a good situation.”

He added: “I think Greenland will be worked out with us. I think we’re going to have it. I think the people want to be with us.”

European countries are scrambling to work out how to react to Trump’s threats against Denmark without ending up in his crosshairs themselves. Some have urged Frederiksen to “fight back” against the US president. So far, the Danish prime minister has insisted that Greenland is not for sale but has welcomed increasing US interest in the Arctic.

The Danish prime minister’s office said it did “not recognise the interpretation of the conversation” between Trump and Frederiksen, but refused to explain which details it disagreed with. US officials did not dispute the FT’s reporting.



Lina Khan has warned of “catastrophic consequences” for America if Donald Trump’s antitrust officials fail to scrutinise private equity groups that are buying up chunks of the US economy.

The recently departed chair of the US Federal Trade Commission told the Financial Times that private equity groups posed a threat to the country’s healthcare system.

Given “the stakes of our healthcare markets, it’s extraordinarily important that we are staying vigilant here”, said Khan.

“If enforcers want to decide that they want to look the other way, that’s going to have, I fear, catastrophic consequences for Americans.”

Wall St has cheered the departure of the aggressive trustbuster, a member of a new generation of progressive officials appointed by Joe Biden who cracked down on anti-competitive conduct across the US economy from Big Tech to private equity. After leaving as FTC chair on Monday, Khan warned against reverting to what she sees as lax antitrust enforcement that for decades let businesses grow unchecked.

Khan cautioned that “in our democracy right now there is an open question” on whether “monopolists in extraordinarily powerful firms are going to be able to corrupt the political process and interfere with legitimate law enforcement”.

Her comments echo the alarm sounded by Biden during his farewell address, in which he warned that an “oligarchy is taking shape in America” that risks damaging democracy. Biden railed against an emerging “tech industrial complex” for holding a “dangerous concentration” of wealth and power in the country.

His speech was broadly seen as a broadside against business magnates who have cozied up to US President Donald Trump, including Tesla boss Elon Musk and other Big Tech CEOs.

Tech chief executives, including Musk, Amazon executive chair and founder Jeff Bezos and Meta chief executive Mark Zuckerberg, sat in prominent seats in front of the president’s cabinet nominees at Trump’s inauguration this week.

Amazon and Meta, whose FTC trials will begin in October 2026 and April, respectively, each donated $1mn to Trump’s inaugural fund, alongside other tech groups.

Big Tech was a critical pillar of Khan’s agenda. She launched an investigation into Microsoft’s cloud business as well as an inquiry into the partnerships between cloud providers and generative AI companies.

In private equity, a key focus was roll-ups in the healthcare sector. She argued that these roll-ups — in which companies purchase and merge several businesses in the same sector — and “strip and flip” models — where the acquired groups’ assets are sold off — often leave those businesses indebted and weakened.

“I heard a flood of concern from healthcare workers, from ER doctors . . . about the private equity roll-ups that were resulting in worse quality care, higher prices,” Khan said.

“These are just market realities that are not going away,” she added.

Just days before Khan’s resignation, the FTC reached a settlement with Welsh, Carson, Anderson, and Stowe that limits the buyout group’s involvement with a business it created that has acquired more than a dozen anaesthesiology practices in Texas. The FTC alleged the deals were aimed at raising prices and quashing competition.

Welsh Carson said it reached the agreement — which includes no admission of wrongdoing or monetary penalties — after the FTC “threatened to re-litigate” in its in-house court claims that were dismissed by a federal judge last year.

Khan has also ordered JAB Holdings to divest vet clinics as a condition for two proposed acquisitions that the agency said could have created monopolies. JAB has said the outcome of discussions with the regulator “was in line with what we anticipated”.

But not all FTC cases have come to an end, and the new administration has the power to withdraw or soften challenges launched by Khan.

The ex-chair argued that companies facing FTC trials were trying to get a better deal from Trump’s administration.

“This type of jostling is something that we’re all seeing in clear display,” said Khan.



The opening days of Donald Trump’s second administration have sent businesses rushing to understand obscure provisions in historic laws, shore up their legal defences and find ways to shape the radically changing policy landscape.

Trump’s early moves have shown he plans to use a broader than expected toolkit to implement his agenda, even as he keeps trading partners guessing about how and when he will enact his threat of punitive tariffs.

At the end of a dizzying week that began with more than 100 executive orders and actions after Trump’s inauguration, corporate America’s advisers say a window is open to influence policy — but only for those able to keep up.

“The range of policy outcomes is probably as high as it has ever been,” said Chris Krueger, strategist at TD Cowen’s Washington research group. “The right and left tails are massive, and all roads lead to Trump.”

From promoting fossil fuels and expanding tariffs to deporting undocumented immigrants and challenging “woke” diversity initiatives, Trump’s agenda had been well telegraphed, but some details still caught companies off guard.

A promise to unpick a global minimum tax deal brokered through the OECD, for example, came with a threat to double US taxes on expats and companies from countries that continue to pursue it, under a never-before-used section of the tax code written before the second world war.

“On the one hand, the fact that there was a muscular response was received with broad acclaim” from US multinationals, who have long complained about the deal, said Pat Brown, partner in PwC’s tax practice. “But one of the questions we got immediately was: ‘My CEO is a citizen of a foreign country who happens to live and work here. Do I need to go tell my CEO his tax rate may double?’”

Trump advisers had promised to “flood the zone” with executive actions, partly to keep opponents on the back foot. Consultancies, law firms and investment banks built elaborate plans to monitor the orders and isolate salient points for clients.

“Where there’s a wealth of information, there’s often a poverty of attention,” said Kevin Madden, a Republican strategist at consultancy Penta Group, which set up a “war room” to follow the pronouncements. “The challenge for corporate leaders is prioritising all this information and activity.”

Nowhere was that more evident than in the energy sector, after Trump invoked emergency powers to clear regulatory obstacles to fossil fuel projects and rescinded many of his predecessor’s executive actions.

He also shocked the clean energy industry with a demonstration of how the executive branch could undermine funding apparently mandated by Congress. One order halted loans offered to developers and manufacturers under the Inflation Reduction Act and bipartisan infrastructure law. The means to unlock that money are now unclear and may get tangled up in broader congressional negotiations to revise the IRA.

William Oplinger, chief executive of US aluminium producer Alcoa, said his company’s two domestic smelters could be at risk if tax credits were cut.

The support “has allowed those facilities to continue operating in the current environment”, he said, adding that the company would determine their long-term viability when it was clear what any IRA changes would mean and if there were additional impacts from tariffs.

Wind power took a particularly heavy blow as a result of orders that froze leasing approvals and triggered immediate review of permitting practices, which cover existing projects.

Some companies are racing to appoint Republican-linked lobbying firms they hope have the ear of the administration. Federal disclosures show renewable energy developers EnergyRe and NextEra hired Polaris Government Relations last month.

Trump’s energy orders bore resemblance to a five-point road map proposed last summer by the American Petroleum Institute, the fossil fuel producers’ lobby group. Mike Sommers, API chief executive, said the institute was now moving to influence the implementation of policy.

“A lot of these executive orders are directing agencies to do things, but many of these agencies don’t even have secretaries now,” he said. “What we are trying to do is fill in the blanks for the new department heads, so they know precisely how to implement the president’s vision.”

While Trump did not fulfil a promise to impose new tariffs on US trading partners on “day one”, an executive memo ordered departmental reviews of existing trade practices, with a deadline of April 1. He also indicated at a press conference that he could hit Mexico, Canada and China with tariffs on February 1.

Evan Giesemann, an adviser on tax and trade at EY, told clients in a Wednesday webinar: “While nothing with President Trump is final until it is implemented . . . I can’t underscore enough how wide a net this memo casts, showing how serious he is about making structural changes to our trade policies and fairly quickly.”

In some quarters, the executive actions crystallised concern that new tariffs, along with the potential deportation of a portion of the US labour force, could stoke inflation and limit the Federal Reserve’s room to cut interest rates.

Carole Streicher, deal advisory leader for KPMG in the US, suspected that concern was behind the spike this week in incoming calls from private equity-owned companies about starting a sale process.

“Many are sitting on the starting line ready to have the gun go off,” she said. “The discussion now is whether there is a short window for the next three to six months where interest rates are going to be at their current level and we need to transact before that window closes.”

The executive actions also appear likely to accelerate companies’ recasting of diversity, equity and inclusion programmes. Trump ordered government agencies to draw up lists of “the most egregious and discriminatory DEI practitioners in each sector of concern” and propose “up to nine potential civil compliance investigations” of public companies and other organisations.

“They’re bullying American employers into backing away from what are otherwise fully lawful efforts,” said Jenny Yang, former commissioner at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, now partner at the consultancy Working Ideal.

Yang said many companies had examined their DEI policies to check they were watertight, but law firms were sending urgent bulletins to clients offering legal audits. The retailer Target on Friday became the latest company to row back previous DEI commitments.

TD Cowen’s Krueger said this week’s executive actions had come “at record speed and with record breadth”, with much still to digest and many questions unanswered. “But at least now pre-season is over,” he said. “Now you can start putting pen to paper on policy.”



The writer is chair of Rockefeller International. His latest book is ‘What Went Wrong With Capitalism’

While Donald Trump has yet to act on his multiple tariff threats, it’s likely he will. So the fear lingers that the US president’s aggressive trade posture will sow global disorder, depressing growth and roiling markets, particularly if targeted nations retaliate.

But retaliation is not the only or even the most likely response to Trump, no matter how broadly he finally delivers on his threats.

The US has wielded tariffs as a weapon for eight years now. Those imposed by Trump in his first term were mostly continued or — in the case of China — expanded by Joe Biden. Some nations retaliated; others offered concessions or challenged them before global trade arbiters. But most just quietly moved on, seeking trade with countries other than the US.

Since 2017, Trump’s first year in office, trade has held more or less steady at just under 60 per cent of global GDP. But there’s been a decline in the US share of trade flows offset by an increase in other regions, particularly the nations of Asia, Europe and the Middle East. Trump 2.0 seems likely to bring more of the same: trade without America.

Over the past eight years, more than four of every five nations — developed and developing — have seen trade rise as a share of their national GDP. Gains of more than 10 percentage points have been chalked up in more than a dozen major nations, from Japan, Italy and Sweden to Vietnam, Greece and Turkey. The big exception is the US, where it has dipped to around 25 per cent of GDP. The US has been growing faster than most of its peers — but with no boost from trade.

America may be increasingly dominant as a financial and economic superpower but not so much as a trading power. Its share of global equity indices has exploded to almost 70 per cent. Its share of global GDP has inched up to more than 25 per cent. Yet its share of global trade is under 15 per cent, and has declined significantly in the last eight years.

Many of the warnings about Trump’s impact focus on how new tariffs could hurt exporting nations that rely on the US as their main customer. But during Trump’s first term, before the pandemic and despite his tariff offensive, developed nations saw stable growth and developing ones saw a strong acceleration in exports of both goods (led by tech products and commodities) and services (led by transport and digital services).

Global trade talks had fallen apart after 2008, as tensions stirred up by the financial crisis that year made vast multi-nation deals too difficult to conclude. But many nations continued to pursue smaller deals. The number of bilateral and regional agreements rose steadily, with fresh impetus after Trump first took office, and soon styled himself “tariff man”.

The US became an outlier, looking on as others cultivated the art of the trade deal. Since 2017, the US has abandoned talks on partnerships with the EU and Asia, and cut not a single new trade deal. Meanwhile, the EU has negotiated eight agreements and China has concluded nine, including a landmark 15-nation partnership in Asia.

By late last year, dealmaking picked up anew as the start of Trump’s second presidency approached. The EU rushed to finish the outline of a difficult agreement — 25 years in the making — with members of the Mercosur alliance in South America, followed by one with Mexico. Now, Mexico is hurrying to widen trade ties with fellow nations in Latin America, in part as insurance against what Trump might do next.

The result: over the past eight years, as the locus of global trade shifted away from the US and towards the Middle East, Europe and Asia, nations registering big share gains included the United Arab Emirates, Poland and, above all, China. Of the 10 fastest-growing trade corridors, five have one terminus in China; only two have a terminus in the US.

Trump says tariffs will command respect, and help restore US power. But there’s another risk worth considering. The new president’s brand of populism vows to free the US from heavy government intervention through taxes and regulations, but tariffs are another form — and equally subject to the laws of unintended consequences.

To date, the “America first” tariff regime has done less to damage its prime target, China, than to compel US allies to look elsewhere for trade. So the risk of even broader tariffs may be less about triggering trade wars than undermining US relevance as a trading power, and eventually sapping its economic prowess.



The US must strengthen measures to control the country’s bird flu outbreak and curb the growing risk that the virus will evolve to spread more easily between humans, international health experts have warned.

Scientists have called for increased vaccination of farm workers and more efforts to stem the spread among farm animals as the H5N1 pathogen continues to infect cattle and chickens across the country.

The epidemic is an early test for President Donald Trump’s administration, which is already scaling back commitments to global efforts on disease control and prevention.

“It is arguably grossly irresponsible for the US authorities to allow such sustained high level of virus transmission in dairy cattle as this poses such a major threat to global human health,” said Professor James Wood, an infectious diseases expert at the UK’s Cambridge university.

He added that curbs such as stricter movement of cattle “would hugely reduce human exposure and would be expected in every other country”.

Experts have watched with growing alarm as H5N1 has circulated in the US for more than nine months. The outbreak has resulted in 67 confirmed human cases, mostly in people who work with cattle and chickens, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The first fatality was reported this month, although no cases of human to human transmission have yet been documented.

Virologists fear a reassortment of genetic material from the H5N1 pathogen with another animal or human flu, creating a new virus that is more likely to be transmitted between people. The possibility of this scenario rises as H5N1 circulates in the US during the winter flu season.

There were an estimated 12mn-22mn human flu cases between October 1 and January 11, according to the CDC. On January 16, it urged hospitals to analyse within 24 hours whether flu sufferers actually contracted bird flu, particularly if patients were in intensive care. The CDC said in November it had provided human flu vaccines to farm workers in 12 states.

It considered H5N1’s risk to the public to be low, but added that it was “closely monitoring this dynamic situation”.

The World Organisation for Animal Health, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization have said governments should step up several measures to combat the spread of bird flu. These include strengthening virus testing, sequencing and data sharing, improving farm biosecurity and protecting people who were exposed to infected animals, said Maria Van Kerkhove, a top WHO official.

“More can and should be done to reduce the spread of avian influenza in animals, between different animal species and to humans,” said Van Kerkhove, who is acting director of pandemic preparedness.

The WHO encourages work on developing animal vaccines and their potential use to reduce bird flu’s spread, Van Kerkhove added.

The three leading makers of bird flu vaccines for humans — CSL Seqirus, Sanofi and GSK — are well placed to respond if the outbreak becomes a pandemic. In October, the trio signed a $72mn agreement with the US government that included commitments to prepare to distribute doses quickly and sustain supply levels.

The US government on January 17 gave $590mn to Moderna, which is developing a flu vaccine using similar messenger RNA-based technology as its Covid jab.

The Seqirus jab has been ordered by many European governments but Finland is the only one to have confirmed it is using the vaccines to inoculate farmworkers. The vaccine maker said the Nordic country was also conducting its own independent study on the jab’s safety and efficacy.

The US response to bird flu has been further complicated by a “short pause” placed on “mass communications and public appearances that are not directly related to emergencies or critical to preserving health” by the health and human services department and other bodies.

The Trump administration initiated the pause to “set up a process for review and prioritisation”, the health department said.

Trump and his allies are critical of fundamental aspects of international disease control, while Robert F Kennedy Jr, his nominee for health and human services secretary, is a long-standing vaccine sceptic.

One of Trump’s first actions after his inauguration was to trigger the year-long process to pull the US out of the WHO. He took the same action in 2020 during his previous term, but president Joe Biden reversed the decision on taking office in January 2021.

Data visualisation by Bob Haslett

This piece has been updated to clarify the WHO’s position on animal vaccines for bird flu.



US diplomats have requested an urgent exemption for Ukraine-related programmes from a 90-day freeze on foreign aid and “stop work” orders issued by secretary of state Marco Rubio, according to documents seen by the Financial Times and people familiar with the matter.

Citing national security concerns, senior diplomats in the state department’s Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs have asked Rubio to grant a full waiver to exclude the work of the US Agency for International Development (USAID) in Ukraine from the sweeping directive that came into effect immediately after being issued on Friday.

“We do not know at this time whether this request will be approved — in whole or in part — but there are positive signals thus far out of Washington,” said an email sent to USAID staff in Ukraine on Saturday that was reviewed by the FT.

USAID in Ukraine has temporarily held off issuing “stop work” orders while the exemption request is being considered, according to the email and officials at some of those partner organisations.

The agency has also asked staff to assess programmes “and find ways for them to more clearly support the secretary of state’s directive to make the US safer, stronger and more prosperous”.

But by Saturday evening in Kyiv, some organisations began receiving “stop work” orders.

One such order shared by an organisation with the FT ordered “the contractor to immediately stop work under the USAID/Ukraine contract/task order” the organisation had been awarded.

The order said the contractor “shall not resume work . . . until notification has been received in writing from the Contracting Officer that this Stop Work Order has been cancelled”.

The state department, USAID and US embassy in Kyiv did not respond to requests for comment.

In an internal cable sent on Friday to the state department and USAID, obtained by the FT, Rubio instructed that all new foreign aid disbursements be suspended. Contracting and grant officers were directed to “immediately issue stop work orders . . . until such time as the secretary shall determine, following a review”.

The review, expected to take up to 85 days, leaves the fate of hundreds of US foreign aid contracts — valued at more than $70bn in the 2022 fiscal year — in limbo.

Officials and NGO staff in Ukraine, where Russia’s all-out war will enter a fourth year next month, have warned that, without a waiver from President Donald Trump’s new secretary of state, programmes such as support for schools and hospitals as well as economic and energy infrastructure development efforts are in jeopardy.

A programme director at an NGO working in Kyiv said the funding freeze could be a “disaster” for their group and Ukraine.

There are some exceptions to Rubio’s order, including “approved waivers” for military financing for Israel and Egypt, and foreign emergency food aid. But the cable does not mention such an exemption for Ukraine, which relies on Washington for military aid to fight Russia.

The state department and US embassy in Kyiv did not respond to requests to clarify Rubio’s directive as it pertains to new military aid for Ukraine.

However, a Ukrainian government official with knowledge of the matter confirmed to the FT that US military assistance did not fall under the freeze order. “Military aid to Ukraine is intact,” the official said. “At least as of now, and it is certainly not part of this 90-day freeze.”

Speaking at a press conference alongside visiting Moldovan President Maia Sandu in Kyiv on Saturday, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy confirmed that American arms had not stopped flowing to his country.

“I am focused on military aid; it has not been stopped, thank God,” he said.

The US has provided $65.9bn in military aid to Kyiv since Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022, according to state department statistics.

Trump has been sceptical of US military aid to Ukraine and derided Zelenskyy as “the greatest salesman on earth” for his efforts to secure billions of dollars' worth of arms and ammunition.

Trump said this week that he wanted to broker a “deal” between Kyiv and Moscow to end the war. He added that Zelenskyy had “had enough” and threatened President Vladimir Putin with more sanctions unless he negotiated a truce.



The US Senate has voted to install Kristi Noem as secretary of homeland security as Donald Trump moves quickly to implement his promised clampdown on illegal immigration.

The upper chamber of Congress voted 59-34 to confirm the governor of South Dakota to lead the Department of Homeland Security, with a mandate to tackle the US border crisis.

In his first week back in the White House the president signed a flurry of executive orders that declared a national emergency at the US-Mexico border and ended America’s refugee resettlement programme.

He also restricted birthright citizenship, but the measure has been temporarily halted by a federal court that deemed it unconstitutional. Trump has vowed to appeal against the order.

“Border security must remain a top priority,” Noem said last week during her confirmation hearing. “As a nation, we have the right and responsibility to secure our borders against those who would do us harm.”

Noem’s confirmation comes after the Senate approved Marco Rubio as secretary of state and Pete Hegseth as secretary of defence, one of the president’s most controversial selections.

As secretary of homeland security, Noem will also oversee the Secret Service, which came under scrutiny after two assassination attempts against Trump last year, one of which injured his ear.

During her confirmation hearing, Noem said the Secret Service was “in serious need of reform”.

“We all saw the threats to [president] Trump last year — and the consequences of failure,” she added.

Noem’s autobiography, which recounted how she shot her puppy Cricket for misbehaviour, became a national talking point last year.



A tale as old as time and yet insistently of the present. A young woman — as far away as India — feels the pull of Lady Liberty’s lifted torch in New York Harbour and crosses the globe to make a new life. She knows her path won’t be straightforward — but also that the Big Apple is the place to support and nurture her dreams.

Kay Sohini’s graphic memoir This Beautiful, Ridiculous City, is a praise-song to her adopted home. Raised in the suburbs of Kolkata and given an English education, the young Sohini read Jack Kerouac, Joan Didion and Alison Bechdel and dreamt always of New York. When she finally moved to the city, leaving behind an abusive relationship, she felt she already belonged. At the same time however, Sohini refuses to look away from the city’s flaws, from the damage its ruthless metamorphoses can inflict.

In the days before the inauguration of the 47th President of the United States some of the hundreds of thousands of migrants who have made their way to the city — which has a legal obligation to provide shelter to anyone who asks — have begun to flee, fearing Donald Trump’s threatened deportations. The city, undoubtedly, has creaked under the weight of open-palmed welcome; Mayor Eric Adams’ chaotic administration (with the mayor himself under federal indictment and with many of his top officials having resigned amid a torrent of investigations) hasn’t helped matters.

Yet the city that never sleeps has survived plenty worse, and Sohini’s book, with its glorious, candy-coloured drawings of the Empire State Building, Grand Central Station and the Gimbels Skybridge, presents its allure in a fresh, enchanting way, while also offering a reminder that Sohini is one of a long line of women who have found themselves in the city, made their mark, remade themselves. She loves New York for “the stories it is home to, the creativity it lends to passers-by when the mind is desolate. It is about drawing pleasure from proximity. To possibilities, to art, architecture, culture, history, luxury.”

In this she is not so far removed from the writer and raconteur Fran Lebowitz — the professional New Yorker whose fame increased exponentially with the release of Martin Scorsese’s 2021 documentary Pretend It’s a City. As she has it in her author biography: “Lebowitz lives in New York City, as she does not believe she would be allowed to live anywhere else.” Lebowitz is of course herself an immigrant to New York, albeit one from just across the river in New Jersey. But to New Yorkers, that’s far enough.

The struggle to be a New Yorker is real. Although Sohini is captivated by Manhattan, she finds a place to live in Queens, a fair few subway stops from the landmarks she draws with such care and affection. This moving, optimistic book doesn’t shrink from economic reality, as she watches local residents being displaced from her neighbourhood as the outer boroughs gentrify too.

“With the median house price hovering around $700,000, homeownership is a pipedream to many. Nearly 70% of the city’s eight and a quarter million people are renters.” She draws the facade of a red-brick apartment building, beautifully restored and for that very reason forbidding: “New York is increasingly a city for the very moneyed,” reads the text that runs across the brick. “It makes less and less space for those with little or modest means.”

Not long ago, the city seemed — just — somewhat more accommodating to those who would see in Lady Liberty not just as a beacon but a mirror too. I read Sohini’s memoir alongside Vivian Gornick’s striking memoir, The Odd Woman and the City — first published in the US a decade ago, but only now appearing in Britain — and Elaine Kraf’s eccentric, compelling novel The Princess of 72nd Street. Put all these alongside Virago’s new edition of The Fran Lebowitz Reader and you have a shelf of works that offer a multi-faceted portrait of what it means to be a woman in New York.

Gornick, long a writer for the storied Village Voice and the author of Fierce Attachments (lauded as the best memoir of the past 50 years by the New York Times Book Review) takes her title from George Gissing’s 1893 novel The Odd Women — a proto-feminist text, if you like, considering as it does the costs of “respectability” for women’s lives. Gornick sets her sights on the three elements defining her existence: her reach for friendship, her desire for romantic love and, most powerful of all, the rhythms of the city she calls home.

She is “a walker in the city”, one of those who feeds “the never-ending stream of the never-ending crowd that is certainly imprinting on someone’s creativity”. Gornick treks the length of the island with her friend Leonard; along the way she records her encounters and recalls her failed love affairs.

The streets and avenues sustain her, the risks and possibilities of the place never permitting the finality of despair. At the end of this brief, peculiarly arresting book she sits down to a solitary dinner and recalls all the New Yorkers who have crossed her path that day. “I hear their voices, I see their gestures, I start filling in lives for them. Soon they are company, great company.” In New York, phantom companionship is companionship all the same.

Gornick quotes a letter by the poet and critic Louise Bogan that describes the West 70s in Manhattan as “that area which absorbs the queer, the old, the failures, into furnished or hotel rooms, and adds gloom to their decay”. Like so much of Manhattan, this part of the Upper West Side has been ruthlessly gentrified; there’s very little room for failures there these days. That raffish neighbourhood was at the tail-end of its existence in 1979, when Elaine Kraf’s cult classic The Princess of 72nd Street first appeared.

Kraf was a writer and painter; the author of four published works of fiction, as well as much work that never made it into the public sphere, she died in 2013. The Princess of 72nd Street is narrated by Ellen, an artist gifted with episodes she calls “radiances”. “I am glad I have the radiance,” the novel begins.

It is these radiances that enable her to become Esmerelda, the Princess of 72nd Street, glorious in a long skirt, patterned with “cascades of color”, a great amulet hung from her neck — sometimes a cross, sometimes a Star of David, sometimes an Egyptian ankh — and her “glittering eyes” painted Cleopatra-style.

Ellen/Esmerelda fights to preserve her independence against the tides of control: the men who want to sleep with her, the doctors who want to medicate her. Her radiances are perhaps bipolar episodes, if we’re going to try clinical language: but this slender novel immerses us in the brilliance of its world so we feel as far from madness as its protagonist does.

Comparisons have been made to the work of Jean Rhys; I thought too of Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar and Leonora Carrington’s The Hearing Trumpet. In the Princess’s consciousness, the ecosystem of the Upper West Side depends on her magnanimous rule: “If I should move away it would fall apart.” She describes with loving care its tattered, accessible charm. “Tomatoes and radishes grow in boxes placed on dirty windowsills. A tan can be gotten free in Riverside Park, and there are always places open for late night wanderers.”

The women in these books seem irrefutably modern: yet this is a modernity that New York has long offered, even in an unlikely way. For there sits Catherine Sloper, settled on “the chaste upholstery of a New York drawing-room” in Henry James’s brief, intimate novel Washington Square, first published in 1880. In those days, her widower father’s grand mansion was “up town”, away from the hustle and bustle of lower Manhattan. The same year the book came out, construction began on an apartment building so far uptown it was seen to be in a veritable wilderness — and nicknamed the Dakota as a result.

In Washington Square poor Catherine is pitied by Dr Sloper, mired in grief after the loss of his wife; she appears at first to be the victim of her father’s disregard and her aunt’s romantic machinations. Catherine’s Washington Square mansion might seem to be a prison; certainly, she is trapped by the morals and mores of her time. But the novel’s end finds Catherine serene in her solitude, a mistress of the city in her own quiet way.

New York’s constant reinvention should make it feel precarious; instead, it delivers a unique sense of permanence, allowing those who find a foothold — not least women on their own — to discover a sense of permission unavailable elsewhere. This beautiful, ridiculous city, indeed.

Each of these books demonstrates that no matter the cost of living, no matter how broken the subway or how much garbage is piled in the street, New York still exerts its glorious pull — somehow makes room for those who would hear its siren jazz. A hell of a town, just like the song says.

This Beautiful, Ridiculous City: A Graphic Memoir by Kay Sohini Jonathan Cape £20, 128 pages

The Odd Woman and the City: A Memoir by Vivian Gornick Daunt Books £10.99, 184 pages

The Princess of 72nd Street by Elaine Kraf Penguin Modern Classics £9.99, 160 pages

The Fran Lebowitz Reader by Fran Lebowitz Virago £10.99, 336 pages

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X



Cecile Richards first noticed that something fundamental had shifted in America’s politics more than 30 years ago. After her mother, the progressive Texas governor Ann Richards, was defeated in her 1994 bid for re-election by future president George W Bush, the younger Richards was troubled by what she had seen on the campaign trail.

The longtime community and union organiser, who has died aged 67, told The Dallas Morning News in 1996: “The whole tone and feeling about politics had changed, just in four years.” She said: “I was really concerned that people were feeling very hateful. They were on a mission to eradicate these ‘godless, anti-family officials’ they thought were ruining the country.”

Alarmed by the rising political influence of the religious right in Texas, Richards formed the advocacy organisation Texas Freedom Network. She told the paper that she realised that to do nothing would be worse than failure.

That would become a constant refrain throughout her life as she became one of the most recognisable progressive figures in America. “It’s not hard to imagine future generations one day asking, ‘When there was so much at stake for our country, what did you do?’” she often repeated. “The only acceptable answer is: ‘Everything we could.’”

Born in Waco, Texas, in 1957, the eldest of four children, Richards grew up steeped in progressive values. Still, her parents, a teacher who later entered politics, and a civil rights lawyer, were surprised when aged 13 she was sent home from school for wearing a black armband to protest against the Vietnam war. In college she helped organise the school’s janitorial staff and later worked with garment workers in Guatemala.

Richards moved deeper into politics, campaigning for her mother while heavily pregnant with twins, and later gaining a reputation as a highly effective political operative when deputy chief of staff to Nancy Pelosi. She became a household name in the US for her work as the leader of Planned Parenthood, which provides affordable family planning and birth control, cancer screenings, STD testing and, in some clinics, abortion services. During 12 years at the helm she turned the healthcare provider into a political powerhouse. When she left in 2018, supporters and volunteers had more than tripled to 11mn people, and unintended pregnancies in the US hit a 30-year low.

Planned Parenthood, a flashpoint since its founding more than 100 years ago, has been increasingly embattled in recent decades. Richards’ 2006 appointment was a tacit acknowledgment that reproductive healthcare, bodily autonomy and abortion access in the US had entered a new era of politicisation. The organisation became a political firebrand for the conservative right, a proxy for women’s bodily autonomy and reproductive freedom. “The goal here is they want to end access to safe and legal abortion in America,” Richards told The New York Times in 2017, “and the way they do that is by going after Planned Parenthood.”

Richards was beloved by progressives, a highly charismatic, energetic leader who never compromised her values for political expediency. She was also a firm believer in the power of personal narratives to destigmatise abortion. The mother of three was open about her own decision to undergo the procedure but often declined to elaborate further, emphasising the crucial difference between giving women the freedom to share their experience and forcing them to justify their decision.

In a 2022 article for The New York Times, Richards reflected on her leadership at the organisation. She regretted believing that providing quality healthcare and having the majority of America’s support would be enough. “I wasn’t cynical enough to fully comprehend the extent of the Republican Party’s willingness to trade away people’s lives for political power,” she said.

When Roe vs Wade was overturned by the Supreme Court in June 2022 and abortion access in much of the US crumbled overnight, Richards helped launch a chatbot to provide Americans with accurate, confidential information about accessing abortion care.

She continued to fight for progressive causes even after her diagnosis of brain cancer in 2023, knowing she had no time to waste. She drew on her mother’s wisdom often during this time, she said. Although it was a mantra she had repeated innumerable times, Richards would phrase it as a question, as if she could have forgotten: “What was Mom’s line? Why should your life only be about you?”



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to Hong Kong

While Hong Kong has seen momentous changes since the handover in 1997, the blend of British and Chinese cultures is ingrained in the city’s DNA. The local identity is neither British nor Chinese, difficult to substitute or erase, and distinctively of its place.

Few things symbolise Hong Kong’s fusion of flavours more than the local diners known as cha chaan tengs, or “tea restaurants”. These humble cafés serve a mix of western imports — French toast is popular — alongside Chinese dishes such as salted fish and chicken fried rice, and a wide array of local inventions combining the two that you would be hard pressed to find anywhere else, such as the ubiquitous macaroni and ham soup. They are also characterised by their efficient, no-frills service and frenetic, chaotic atmosphere — typical attributes of Hong Kong life, where every minute is precious and counted.

The predecessor of the cha chaan teng is the bing sutt, or ice room. Originally from Guangzhou in the 1880s, they were places to enjoy chilled refreshments, their popularity largely attributed to the influx of western expats. The cha chaan teng was a product of that growing demand, offering an affordable alternative to the more opulent cuisine of the British colonial rulers. Today, the cha chaan teng is where blue-collar workers share tables with bankers and lawyers. Its fare has become what a full English is in England or a hamburger in the US: comfort food for the masses.

On a recent return to Hong Kong, my birthplace, I revisited a few of my favourite cha chaan tengs. Some were iconic eateries and old haunts when I was growing up, and others more recent discoveries. All are unique and delicious in their own ways.

It’s hard to talk about cha chaan tengs without mentioning what is arguably the most famous of them all: Lan Fong Yuen. Situated on one of the steep hillside lanes in Central, it opened in 1952 and is the oldest tea restaurant around today. Due to its history, long queues are to be expected at almost any time of day, and the crowds can be overwhelming.

The first thing you see is a rather dilapidated shack blocking the entrance, where waiters are busy pouring cans of evaporated and condensed milk into cups of black tea. What sets Hong Kong-style milk tea apart is its unique brewing method: black tea is repeatedly filtered through a stocking-like cloth bag up to eight times, creating an extra-strong brew, optimal for sweetening. As the owner Lam Chun-chung says: “Making milk tea is a profession.”

I visited on a swelteringly hot April day but could not resist ordering the French toast: a cha chaan teng classic, deep fried and covered with a fat slab of melting butter. Soft on the inside and crispy on the outside, it’s the epitome of indulgence. I suggest washing it down with yuen yeung, another much-loved Canto-western beverage, which Lan Fong Yuen claims to have invented. This mix of brewed coffee with black tea, milk and sugar is a perfect breakfast pick-me-up.

I grew up in the Tai Hang district, so naturally it holds a very dear place in my heart. Every time I return to the city, I walk along the neighbourhood’s narrow streets, looking for a hearty meal that brings me a feeling of home. I find it at Bing Kee. While the area is experiencing a gentrification-led resurgence, with new construction under way and the arrival of independent cafés and wine bars, Bing Kee has withstood the test of time for some 70 years.

Here, food is prepared in a tin shack and brought out to tables that fill the alleyways, lined up against old and sometimes decaying buildings. Diners sit on plastic stools, slurping down Bing Kee’s signature pork ramen and drinking lemon or milk tea (among the best in town). On my visit, I ordered ramen with pork blood, curry squid and red sausage, a distinctly Cantonese delicacy that was a pungent and savoury reminder of home. I paired the noodles with a peanut butter and condensed-milk toast, another cha chaan teng staple and a personal favourite.

Not far from Tai Hang is Causeway Bay, the premier shopping district in Hong Kong. Hidden between colossal malls and towering skyscrapers is Soul Kitchen, a modern-style cha chaan teng that opened just a few years ago. This is as local as it gets — well liked by Hongkongers in the know. It has become a regular stop for me whenever I am in the city.

Soul Kitchen has won acclaim for its dish of scrambled eggs with XO sauce rice. It’s an ingenious combination of a Chinese way of preparing protein with a western topping. To the rich and creamy scrambled egg the chefs add prawns, an ample dose of sweet soy sauce and a scoop of XO sauce, umami-flavoured chilli paste made from dried shrimps, scallops and peppers. Poured on steamy rice, it’s a delight to behold and a sensation to savour.

Another highlight is the red bean ice, a dessert drink made of adzuki beans, light rock-sugar syrup and evaporated milk. Cool, sweet and very refreshing, it’s another must-try. But Soul Kitchen is also an excellent place to observe a cross-section of Hong Kong society. Attracting diners from all walks of life, it is where class converges, status dissolves and, for a brief moment, all that is relevant is the food before us that we grew up loving.

Waso Cafe is a popular stop for cha chaan teng enthusiasts in the bustling neighbourhood of Wan Chai, where there is a high concentration of similar venues. Locals descend here for its star offering: pineapple buns. Inspired by Mexican concha, Japan’s melonpan and Portuguese pastries, they are soft on the bottom but crunchy on top, with a thick outer layer of sugar dough. Diners love to slather them with cold butter, which the bread’s warmth slowly melts away. Adding a pork chop or ham is another option.

But it’s not all about the buns. Waso also does tasty rice and noodle dishes, including pork barbecue with sunny-side-up rice, beef brisket rice with white radish, and beef and pork-liver rice noodles. All of them are great examples of hearty, authentic Hong Kong cuisine.

Frenetic, dynamic and full of life, Waso is a good representation of Hong Kong at its most unvarnished. In a city constantly evolving and adapting, it perhaps most typifies the Hong Kong that I call home.

Do you have a favourite cha chaan teng in Hong Kong? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



The world, it was confirmed last week, breached 1.5C of warming last year for the first time. Climate change is happening even faster than expected. In determining what happens next, China will play a pivotal role. It is now by far the largest greenhouse gas emitter. But it is far ahead, too, in the race for supremacy in green technology. The International Energy Agency expects a striking 60 per cent of all renewable energy capacity installed worldwide between now and 2030 to come from China. It is the leading manufacturer of wind turbines, solar panels, electric vehicles and lithium-ion batteries. It dominates the downstream supply chain, too, with its control of critical minerals.

For western democracies, Beijing’s green ascendance sparks two big concerns. One is that its price advantage — achieved with hefty state support — will drive western rivals out of business and leave governments dependent on a strategic competitor for key technology. The other is that “smart” tech embedded in everything from EVs to turbines could pose security risks. The debate around UK chancellor Rachel Reeves’ visit to Beijing this weekend, over green energy and broader business links, highlights the dilemmas for Europe and the US.

China’s green advantage has deep roots. It was an early investor in critical minerals. As the energy transition gained steam, it stepped up green subsidies, tax credits and investments. Its annual clean energy investment rose by 40 per cent in 2023 to $890bn, becoming its main growth driver. Its green tech is being heavily deployed at home. Beijing achieved its target of having 1,200 gigawatts of installed solar and wind capacity — enough to power hundreds of millions of homes — six years early. EVs are expected to outsell petrol and diesel cars in China this year, 10 years ahead of its target.

Since China accounts for 30 per cent of global carbon emissions, the rest of the world clearly needs it to be ploughing ahead. But with global 2050 emission targets looking shaky — and the impact of warming becoming more evident, most recently in the devastating fires in Los Angeles — the rest of the world has little choice but to take advantage of low-cost Chinese wind and solar technologies. Limited access to critical minerals and a high cost of capital mean advanced economies cannot now meet their green goals without Beijing.

Given the risks of over-dependency, it makes sense for the US and Europe to continue developing and diversifying their own green supply chains. But trying to usurp China from behind protectionist walls is expensive and at odds with the urgency of climate change.

China has a surplus of green tech, so urging Beijing to share more intellectual property in exchange for market access is one approach. Rather than blocking Beijing’s green imports outright, national security concerns could be addressed by more robust tech inspections, ensuring local control over plants using Chinese products, and assessing whether vulnerable “smart” components can be isolated or removed.

Remaining open to Chinese low-cost green tech would allow countries to allocate more resources to areas where they still have comparative advantages. America leads in carbon capture and storage, and has unrivalled climate financing infrastructure. The EU is competitive in high-end climate research and development; in 2020, it issued more patents for green tech than the US or China. Britain is ahead in offshore wind, and Brazil is an expert in biofuels. Trade in these will also expedite the global transition.

China may be the leader in green tech, but the more important race is the one the planet is running, against the clock, to curb climate change. If it is to win it, countries will need to find strategies to work with Beijing in green tech, while minimising the risks.



Global logistics groups are rushing to relocate Chinese staff as more manufacturers in the country prepare to expand overseas in anticipation of tougher trading conditions with the US under a second Donald Trump presidency.

France’s CMA CGM, Switzerland’s Kuehne+Nagel and Germany’s DHL said they were redeploying Chinese staff to Europe, south-east Asia and Latin America, destinations that have been chosen for a “China-plus-one” diversification strategy, in order to better serve Chinese customers abroad.

The groups, who help clients manage their imports and exports, are responding to manufacturers’ moves to other low-cost production hubs as western buyers and politicians seek to cut imports from China amid rising trade tensions with the US.

CEVA, the logistics arm of CMA CGM, said it recently set up “China desks” in Europe with Mandarin-speaking staff, including sales and customer service specialists. It planned to add more over the next few years.

Kuehne+Nagel said it had deployed Chinese staff to Hungary and Slovenia in recent years, mainly to support technology group Huawei with its European operations.

The logistics provider, which has also relocated staff from China to Vietnam, Malaysia and Brazil, added that it was arranging a “local abroad” event in Shanghai in the spring, bringing in managers from various countries to enable further relocations of Chinese employees and meetings with Chinese customers.

DHL said it had been redeploying more Mandarin-speaking staff over the past few months, including salespeople. They had been sent to south-east Asian countries including Vietnam and Indonesia, with plans on the way to expand the programme to markets such as Hungary, Germany and Mexico.

“We have . . . [identified] a number of countries in the world that benefit from supply chain diversity, China plus one or nervousness about Trump,” said John Pearson, global CEO at DHL Express, adding that employing more Chinese staff overseas would “make sure we are getting our fair share of the [business] in these countries”.

Joanna Zhu, greater China managing director at CEVA Logistics, said employing such staff overseas could help Chinese clients in better “communicating and understanding local politics”.

Kuehne+Nagel added that Chinese companies operating abroad “need logistics specialists [who] speak the same language, who have a more proficient understanding of doing business with Chinese customers”.

The moves by logistics groups come as emerging production hubs such as Vietnam and Thailand are attracting a significant number of Chinese manufacturers, especially those with labour-intensive businesses, according to Kun Cao, deputy chief executive at consulting firm Reddal.

In the first 10 months of 2024, China was the second-largest foreign investor in Vietnam, with investments worth about $3.6bn, according to Reddal.

Despite Trump’s intention to target goods from China with tariffs, logistics executives said they expected Chinese manufacturers to continue exporting products but from a wider range of countries.

CEVA’s Zhu said Chinese companies and brands would account for an increasingly larger share of business for logistics groups as their operations spread.

“This is a transformation that we will have to undergo,” she said. “And this will happen very quickly . . . so our reaction will also have to be quick.”



Chinese chipmakers and technology companies are heading to Malaysia in droves, its economy minister Rafizi Ramli said, as Beijing prepares to face more tariffs when Donald Trump returns as US president this month.

The moves by Chinese companies, which are expected to result in billions of dollars of investment in Malaysia in the coming years, would rival the US companies that have dominated the country’s market, he said.

“Chinese [companies] are very keen to go outside and expand beyond their domestic market,” Rafizi told the Financial Times in an interview. “Those companies are now looking at relocating or expanding into Malaysia.”

Trump has threatened to impose 60 per cent tariffs on Chinese imports when he re-enters the White House on January 20, rattling investors and putting companies on alert to restructure their supply chains.

Malaysia has been a big beneficiary over the past decade of such “China-plus-one” strategies, where multinational companies complement their Chinese operations with investments in regional countries to diversify risk and lower costs.

It has also positioned itself as a crucial player in global supply chains for high-tech industries such as artificial intelligence, with long-standing semiconductor manufacturing operations in Penang in the north and a burgeoning hub for data centres in the southern state of Johor.

US companies have dominated these sectors in Malaysia, but Rafizi said he expected a wave of Chinese investment on the back of initiatives his government was putting in place to develop the industries further.

Joe Biden’s administration has restricted sales of advanced chips by US companies to China, posing a potential threat to their investments in Malaysia, where many of the products are manufactured, and opening the door for Chinese competitors.

Rafizi said he made a 10-day trip in June to China, where he met 100 AI, tech and biomedical companies to assess their appetite for investing in Malaysia. He added that these efforts had resulted in two investment delegations from China in the past few months.

“Chinese investments usually come with their own ecosystem,” he said. “We will be seeing more and more, especially if we can secure the first two or three anchor investors from China.”

He added that many companies were also seeking to increase exposure to the fast-growing south-east Asian market as China’s economic momentum slows and trade with the US faces additional barriers.

This week, Malaysia signed an agreement with Singapore to create a vast special economic zone between the two countries. Malaysia hopes the initiative will add $26bn a year to its economy by 2030, bringing in 20,000 skilled jobs and 50 new projects.

Between 2019 and 2023, Malaysia attracted $21bn of investment into its semiconductor industry and $10bn into data centres — the storage facilities that enable fast-growing technologies such as AI, cloud computing and cryptocurrency mining. In the past year alone, US tech companies Amazon, Nvidia, Google and Microsoft committed nearly $16bn, mostly for data centres in Johor.

TikTok owner ByteDance is the largest Chinese group to invest in Johor, with a $2bn commitment last year.

Rafizi said that while historically, Malaysia had been happy to accept any foreign investment, it was becoming more selective as it sought to contribute more value to the products and services it produced.

He added that while increasing US-China tensions would harm global trade, it could prompt Chinese companies to give Malaysia a bigger role in chip design, rather than just manufacturing, which would generate more income as the country climbed the value chain.

“The unintended consequence of some tariff measures targeted at Chinese companies basically helps countries like Malaysia to weed out the more genuine and long-term investments from China compared to the ones that just look to use Malaysia as a manufacturing outpost,” he said.



Rachel Reeves wants to breathe fresh life into a scheme linking the London and Shanghai stock exchanges, as she touts financial services as the “highlight” of Britain’s economic relations with China during a visit starting on Saturday.

The chancellor will argue for greater co-operation between Britain and China in bonds, pensions and capital markets as well as asset management as she seeks to restart dialogue after a hiatus of more than five years in top-level UK visits to the country.

The UK government senses an opening to boost financial services ties with China as Donald Trump prepares to become US president after he promised to adopt a tougher stance with Beijing, according to financiers briefed on the trip.

However, Reeves’ preparations for the three-day visit to Beijing and Shanghai have been overshadowed by a sell-off in bond markets that this week pushed British borrowing costs to their highest level since the 2008 financial crisis. Opposition Conservative politicians called for her to cancel the trip.

“We are witnessing an economic mess of Rachel Reeves’ own making, with the impacts of her disastrous Budget continuing to bite. Yet astonishingly she made the choice to get on a jet rather than stay and try to get a grip,” said shadow chancellor Mel Stride.

“The chancellor should turn right back around, and return to the UK urgently,” he added.

Reeves said on Saturday after arriving in Beijing that the fiscal rules set out in her Budget in October were “non-negotiable”.

The chancellor, who visited the Beijing store of UK bicycle maker Brompton, said in comments reported by Reuters that she was in China “to unlock tangible benefits for British businesses exporting and trading around the world to ensure that we have greater access to the second-largest economy in the world”.

Speaking ahead of the trip, Reeves said she would find “common ground on trade and investment while being candid about our differences and upholding national security as the first duty of this government”.

She added: “We can build a long-term economic relationship with China that works in the national interest.”

The City of London is suffering from a dearth of initial public offerings amid a steady flow of UK-listed companies moving their listings to other countries or going private.

Bank executives hope Chinese companies that previously would have sought to list in the US may choose instead to sell shares in London if relations between Washington and Beijing worsen.

Shein, the Chinese online fast-fashion retailer, filed confidential documents with UK and Chinese regulators last year for a London IPO with a planned market valuation of £50bn.

This has sparked hopes among financiers that other Chinese companies could follow, despite controversy over allegations that Shein uses forced labour as part of its cotton supply from China’s north-western Xinjiang region.

Financial Conduct Authority chief executive Nikhil Rathi is accompanying Reeves on the three-day trip and could discuss the Shein listing plans with his counterparts in Beijing. David Schwimmer, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange, is also part of the delegation.

Reeves saw the meetings as an opportunity to bolster financial services exports to China, given they are currently a fraction of those to the US and EU, officials said.

The Shanghai-London stock connect was launched with great fanfare in 2019 but has struggled to gain traction since then. It was meant to encourage Chinese and British companies to list their shares in each others’ countries.

But this has been done by only six Chinese companies, raising $6.6bn, with trading being muted. No UK companies have done so. The chancellor hopes to make such dual listings between the UK and China easier.

The visit marks a revival of the China-UK Economic and Financial Dialogue, an annual set of bilateral talks that has been suspended since 2019 due to both the Covid-19 pandemic and worsening diplomatic relations.

During her visit, Reeves will also meet executives from other British companies present in China, including Jaguar Land Rover, Unilever and Diageo.

HSBC chair Mark Tucker, leading the business delegation, and Standard Chartered chair José Viñals are among the senior City of London bankers with sizeable Chinese operations accompanying her this week.

Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey is also on the trip, along with Baroness Shriti Vadera, chair of insurer Prudential, Sir Douglas Flint, chair of fund manager Abrdn, and Richard Oldfield, head of asset manager Schroders.

​Letter in response to this article:

British business naivety on China is nothing new / From Sir John Rose, Former Chief Executive, Rolls-Royce PLC, London SW11, UK



After years of turmoil — marked by overcapacity, plunging prices and declining investor confidence — China’s solar sector is showing faint but discernible signs of recovery.

In 2010, Europe’s dominance in the global solar panel market had appeared unassailable. The region accounted for about three-quarters of global solar photovoltaic installations, with Germany leading by a wide margin. Then China decided to break into the market. Its plan worked, perhaps too well.

While the People’s Republic managed to snatch market share from Germany, the cost has been a plague of overcapacity and falling prices. Investors have avoided the sector for its unappealing outlook and bleak growth prospects. But there are now signs that the sector may be approaching a bottom.

It is hard to overstate the extent of slack in the solar industry. China’s solar cell production capacity reached about 1,000 gigawatts last year — not only exceeding current global demand but enough, at the rate of last year’s growth, to exceed total projected demand through to 2035.

As a result, in the decade through to 2020, the cost of solar panels fell about 85 per cent. Earnings have deteriorated: about a third of China’s listed solar companies reported a loss last year and several went bankrupt.

Potential policy shifts in important markets outside China, notably the US, add to the uncertainty. Subsidies offered under President Joe Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act could come up for debate under president-elect Donald Trump.

But there are some signs of recovery. Prices of polysilicon, a vital material for solar cells, rose 2.2 per cent this week compared with the previous week to its highest level since last May, continuing a trend that started in December. Production cuts and declining inventories are starting to yield results. The rapid growth of renewables in important markets such as south-east Asia and India could start to redefine the sector.

China can help itself, somewhat. As the world’s largest consumer of solar panels, it has been ramping up installation plans through new large-scale projects in the region. This includes China’s “Solar Great Wall” in Inner Mongolia, which is set to transform deserts into renewable energy hubs at an unprecedented scale, adding demand for solar panels. An over-dependence on government-driven demand is no real solution, but eases some pressure as the industry works through its glut of solar panels.

Investors adjusted to the gloom long ago. Shares of JA Solar Technology and JinkoSolar Holding, two large manufacturers, have sagged by about two-thirds since their 2022 peak. But they are up more than a fifth over the past six months. With the sector seemingly nearing a bottom, it might finally be time to lighten up.

june.yoon@ft.com



Shares in Bloks Group, a maker of Transformers and other toy figurines, as much as doubled on their Hong Kong debut on Friday, making a billionaire of their founder and underlining the surge in ‘kidult’ culture despite falling birth rates in the world’s second-largest economy.

Shares in the Chinese toymaker rose as much as 82 per cent on their secondary listing debut in Hong Kong, before closing up 41 per cent, valuing founder Weisong Zhu’s stake at more than US$1bn. The listing, priced at HK$60.35, raised US$215mn for the Shanghai-based company.

The successful offering represents a boost for Hong Kong’s IP0 market and another example of mainland Chinese companies seeking to raise capital in the territory following secondary listings by groups, including appliance maker Midea and delivery service SF Holding.

Analysts said Bloks’ achievement highlighted a ‘kidult’ cultural moment where young adults were seeking to rediscover their childhood and toymakers increasingly sought to cater to older demographics.

Retailers that sell pop-culture toys, including collectibles from toymaker Pop Mart, have become high-flying stocks in the market, as “a proxy for Chinese consumption growth, especially among the younger generations”, said Wang Qi, chief investment officer for wealth management at UOB Kay Hian in Hong Kong.

“Retail demand was hot because it’s a consumer deal and a known name, just like Maogeping [a Chinese cosmetics company that went public in Hong Kong last December],” said Jean Thio, capital markets partner at Clifford Chance, which advised on the IPO.

The listing was heavily oversubscribed for its Hong Kong allocation, as well as its international portion, according to documents filed with the Hong Kong stock exchange.

Yet Bloks Group has made a loss since at least 2021, according to its unaudited financial information in its IPO prospectus, with a pre-tax loss of Rmb203,000 in its 2024 fiscal year.

China’s toy market was worth Rmb159.8bn ($21.8bn) in 2023, according to a recent report from Daxue Consulting, which highlighted the rise of so-called “pop toys” inspired by popular culture. The consultancy pointed to growing demand from Gen Z consumers, including young adults, as a driver for the sector.

Market research group IMARC expects the market to grow 9.3 per cent a year to hit $47.4bn in 2032.

Enthusiasm for the toy market comes amid a demographic slowdown in China which has seen the number of newborns fall sharply, as well as a wider loss of consumer confidence against the backdrop of a weak property sector. Xi Jinping last month said “vigorous” efforts would be made to boost domestic demand.

Hong Kong shares of Pop Mart were up 328 per cent over the past 12 months, beating most members of the MSCI China Index. It also easily outperformed China’s benchmark CSI 300 index, which posted a 14 per cent gain over the same period.

Mainland China has seen the number of IPOs plummet in the past year, though a host of new listings from the mainland are expected for Hong Kong, which last year saw its IPO tally increase.

Battery maker CATL plans to launch a secondary listing in Hong Kong, although its inclusion on a Pentagon watch list for its links to the Chinese military may be a setback for its US backers.



Shares in Chinese developer Sunac plummeted on Friday after the company revealed it was the subject of a petition in Hong Kong seeking to wind it up, the latest in a series of legal moves against heavily indebted mainland property groups.

The company said in a filing that the petition was issued by a Hong Kong unit of Cinda Asset Management, a state-owned bad-debt manager, and that a hearing was scheduled for March 19.

Sunac’s Hong Kong-listed shares fell 26 per cent to HK$1.30 (US$0.17) on Friday.

Sunac, formerly one of China’s largest developers, defaulted after the 2021 failure of its peer Evergrande sparked a sector-wide cash crunch. The fallout, which paralysed construction projects across China, continues to weigh heavily on economic confidence.

Evergrande, the world’s most indebted real estate company at the time of its failure, with liabilities in excess of $300bn, was the subject of a similar liquidation petition approved by a Hong Kong judge last year, though the vast majority of its assets are within mainland China’s distinct legal regime.

Country Garden, previously the biggest Chinese developer by sales and initially seen as well-shielded from the crisis, also faces a winding-up petition, with a hearing due this month. The company defaulted on its international debts in 2023.

It said on Thursday it had proposed a deal to cut $11.6bn from its debt pile, which stood at $16.4bn as of the end of 2023.

Dozens of Chinese property developers listed in Hong Kong and issued bonds to finance their activities, though issuance has dried up following the wave of defaults in 2021 and 2022. They also amassed large debts within mainland China.

Sunac said in late 2023 that it had received court approval for a $10bn offshore restructuring plan, one of the few of its kind to proceed. It is also in the process of attempting to restructure onshore debts.

Most petitions to wind up indebted developers have been presented by private creditors, although state-owned China Construction Bank last April filed a winding-up petition against Shanghai property developer Shimao.

Chinese authorities have taken various measures to boost the property market, including cutting mortgage rates and launching a scheme for state-owned enterprises to buy unsold properties.



Tesla has taken the unprecedented step of debuting a major model update in China as the US electric-car maker counters intense local competition with a long-awaited facelift of its Model Y.

The refreshed version of the model that outsells its S, 3 and X siblings will start at Rmb263,500 ($35,900), 5.4 per cent more than the previous version, according to prices on Tesla’s China website on Friday.

The Elon Musk-led company expects deliveries of the revamped sport utility vehicle to begin in March, pending regulatory approval from Chinese officials. The company also offered zero-interest financing for up to five years in a presales campaign until the end of February.

Tesla China confirmed this was the first time it had chosen the mainland Chinese market to debut a major model update, although other smaller markets including Hong Kong and Malaysia also saw the new Model Y, produced in the company’s Shanghai factory, made available on Friday.

The facelift features a sleeker headlight and tail light, a shorter zero-to 100km/h acceleration time of 4.3 seconds and a longer range of up to 719km on a single charge.

“It has everything to do with the competitive landscape and maintaining appearances of innovation in China,” said Daniel Kollar, an automotive analyst at consultancy Intralink.

“A new viable [car] like the [rumoured] Model 2 would probably be better. But an upgrade to an existing model is the bare minimum they should be doing for the time being.”

Last week, Tesla reported its first annual vehicle sales drop in more than a decade, with analysts saying its ageing line-up was partly to blame. In October, Musk said developing a much-anticipated affordable Model 2 would be “pointless”. The Tesla Model 3 and Model Y, its most popular models, are almost eight and five years old, respectively.

Tesla’s failure to bring out new models beyond the so-called S3XY line-up is seen as a weakness, especially in the cut-throat Chinese market. HSBC estimated about 90 new car models had been planned for release by manufacturers in China in the fourth quarter of 2024 — about one a day — and nearly 90 per cent were EVs.

“This is making Tesla look stagnant in comparison,” said Intralink’s Kollar. “So Tesla really needs to show that they are advancing to stay fresh in Chinese consumers’ minds. Other major markets don’t have the same demand for new and improved products when it comes to their vehicles.”

Tesla delivered 36.7 per cent of its cars to consumers in China, its second-largest market, in 2024. Its share of Chinese EV sales, where pure-battery cars and plug-in hybrids are included, fell to 6.4 per cent in December from 8 per cent a year earlier, according to data from the China Passenger Car Association.



Zijin Mining is in talks to acquire a controlling stake in lithium producer Zangge Mining as one of China’s most globally expansive miners seeks to expand its push into the critical metal.

The company has been in discussions with Tibet Zangge Venture Capital, a major shareholder in Zangge, according to a Hong Kong stock exchange filing on Friday.

It said the “potential acquisition is still subject to the approval of the board of directors” as well as the “formal signing of an acquisition agreement”.

Zangge, which has a market capitalisation of Rmb46.6bn ($6.4bn), is based in the western province of Qinghai, where salt lakes allow for low-cost extraction of minerals. It also produces potash, a potassium compound used as fertiliser.

State-backed Zijin, one of China’s biggest gold and copper miners, is well-known to international investors on the back of a wave of global acquisitions and aims to start producing lithium from a mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo next year.

Its domestic and international explorations for the metal, which plays a crucial role in batteries for electric vehicles but has recently fallen sharply in price, comes as Chinese businesses continue to establish a dominant foothold across supply chains related to the fast-growing EV battery sector.

Carmakers such as BYD and Nio have accelerated their international plans, with outbound investment surging last year on the back of the clean energy sector’s growing overseas presence.

Investment has extended from South America to Europe, where Chinese battery producer CATL last month said it would build a €4.1bn lithium battery factory in Spain alongside carmaker Stellantis.

Prices of lithium carbonate surged in 2021 and 2022 but have since fallen to about $10,000 a tonne, close to levels prior to the boom, amid concerns around excessive capacity.

Albemarle, the world’s largest lithium producer, said in November it was not economically viable to pivot supply of lithium to the west because of low prices and high operating costs.

In a separate statement to the Shenzhen stock exchange, where it is listed, Zangge pointed to a potential “change in control”. Trading in its shares were suspended on Friday. Shares of Zijin rose 3.4 per cent in early trading.

In November, Zijin acquired a gold mine in Peru and in 2019 bought Canadian miner Continental for $1bn as part of industry consolidation. A year earlier, it bought Canadian copper miner Nevsun Resources for $1.4bn and has expanded its copper operations in Africa.

Additional reporting by Wang Xueqiao in Shanghai



China’s government bond market has opened 2025 with a clear warning for policymakers: without more determined stimulus, investors expect deflationary pressures to become even more entrenched in the world’s second-largest economy.

China’s 10-year bond yield, a benchmark for economic growth and inflation expectations, fell to a record low of less than 1.6 per cent during trading last week and has since hovered close to that level.

Crucially, the whole yield curve has shifted downwards rather than steepening, suggesting investors are alarmed about the long-term outlook and not just anticipating short-term cuts to interest rates.

“For the long-term [bonds], yields have been trending down and I think that’s more about longer-term growth expectations and inflation expectations becoming more pessimistic. And I think that trend is likely to continue,” said Hui Shan, chief China economist at Goldman Sachs.

Falling yields offer a stark contrast to volatile and rising yields in Europe and the US. For Beijing, the fall represents an ignominious start to the year after policymakers in September launched a stimulus drive designed to revive the Chinese economy’s animal spirits.

But data released on Thursday showed consumer prices remained close to flat in December, eking out growth of just 0.1 per cent on a year earlier, while factory prices declined 2.3 per cent, remaining in deflationary territory for more than two years.

China’s central bank last year unveiled policies to stimulate investment by institutions in equity markets and announced for the first time since the 2008 financial crisis that it was adopting a “moderately loose” monetary policy.

On Friday, it announced a “shortage of supply” meant it would pause its programme that has seen it purchase a net Rmb1tn of government bonds on the open market.

An important Communist party meeting on the economy in December, presided over by President Xi Jinping, emphasised consumption for the first time over other previously more important strategic priorities such as building high-tech industries.

The change of emphasis reflects concern over household sentiment weakened by a three-year property crisis that has left the economy more dependent on a manufacturing and export boom for growth. Investors worry this run of strong exports will slow abruptly after US president-elect Donald Trump takes office on January 20 with promises to levy up to 60 per cent tariffs on Chinese goods.

Citi economists estimated in a research note that a 15 percentage point increase in US tariffs would reduce China’s exports by 6 per cent, knocking a percentage point off GDP growth. Growth in China was estimated to be 5 per cent last year.

More insidious than the slower growth, however, are the deflationary pressures in China’s economy, said analysts. The Citi economists noted that the final quarter of last year was expected to be the seventh in a row in which the GDP deflator, a broad measure of price changes, was negative.

“This is unprecedented for China, with a similar episode only in 1998-99,” they said, pointing out that only Japan, parts of Europe and some commodity producers had experienced such an extended period of deflation.

Chinese regulators are aware of the parallels with Japan on deflation, said Robert Gilhooly, senior emerging markets economist at Abrdn, but “they don’t seem to act like it, and one thing that contributed to the Japan example was going small with piecemeal easing”.

Goldman’s Shan said the central bank had promised to ease monetary policy this year, but just as important would be a large increase in China’s fiscal deficit at the central and local government levels.

How that deficit is spent will also be important. Channelling it directly to low-income households, for example, might have a higher “multiplier effect” than giving it to other sectors, such as to banks for recapitalisation, she said.

Frederic Neumann, chief Asia economist at HSBC, said another reason government bond yields were at record lows was that the economy was awash with liquidity. High household savings and low demand for corporate and individual loans have left banks flush with cash that is finding its way into bond markets.

“It’s a little bit of a liquidity trap in the sense that there is money, it is available, it can be borrowed cheaply, but there’s just no demand for that,” said Neumann. “Monetary easing at the margin is becoming less and less of an effective driver of economic growth.”

Without a strong fiscal spending package, the deflationary cycle might continue, with interest rates dropping, wages and investment falling and consumers deferring purchases while they wait for prices to fall further.

“Some investors have lost a little bit of patience here in the past week,” he said, referring to the rush into bonds. “It’s still likely we’re going to get more stimulus coming through. But after all the fits and starts of the past couple of years, investors really want to see concrete numbers.”

Some economists warned that the slide in Chinese bond yields could have further to fall. Analysts at Standard Chartered said the 10-year yield could fall another 0.2 percentage points to 1.4 per cent by the end of 2025, especially if the market has to absorb higher net central government bond issuance for stimulus purposes.



China’s President Xi Jinping will send a high-level envoy to Donald Trump’s inauguration, in an unprecedented move designed to reduce friction between the countries at the start of the new US administration.

Beijing told Trump’s transition team that the top official would attend instead of Xi, according to several people familiar with the talks. The envoy would also hold talks with Trump’s team, several people said.

Trump extended an unusual invitation to Xi to attend his inauguration on January 20 in a sign that he intended to resume the kind of high-level engagement with the Chinese leader that he conducted during his first term in the White House.

Beijing is desperate to ease friction with Washington as it braces for a possible serious escalation in trade tensions. Chinese officials struggled to meet Trump advisers in the run-up to November’s US election, raising concern in Beijing that they would be unprepared for any shift on China.

Several people said Xi could send Han Zheng, a vice-president who sometimes stands in for him in ceremonial roles. Another option is foreign minister Wang Yi.

One person familiar with the situation said some Trump advisers wanted Cai Qi, a member of the Politburo Standing Committee who wields much more power than Han or Wang in his capacity as Xi’s right-hand man.

Another person familiar with the views inside the transition team said there was some concern that Trump would be unhappy if the envoy was only at the level of Wang or Han given that he had invited the Chinese leader.

“The Chinese need to send the appropriate level of official to start the relationship off on the right foot,” the person said.

Wang would not be viewed as sufficiently high-level because he ranked below Cai and Han and was a career diplomat, said one China expert.

The Chinese embassy in Washington did not comment. The Trump team did not respond to requests for comment.

The attendance of any of the officials would be unprecedented, given China has previously been represented by its ambassador in Washington.

“Trump is probably deemed too unpredictable for Xi to take the domestic risk of attending in person,” said Dennis Wilder, a former top White House China adviser. “By sending a special envoy of significant stature to get meetings with Trump and his cabinet, Xi can demonstrate that he wishes to get off on the right foot with the Trump administration without risking that he could return home empty-handed or publicly embarrassed.”

Several people said that beyond the ceremonial element, the Chinese envoy would also hold substantive discussions with the new Trump team.

Beijing is bracing for turbulence with Washington, particularly after Trump named a series of China hawks to top national security positions.

Mike Waltz, Trump’s incoming national security adviser, and his deputy Alex Wong are both viewed as being very tough on China. Trump has also named Republican US Senator Marco Rubio, one of Congress’s most vocal China hawks, to be his secretary of state.

Trump said this week that his team was already in contact with Beijing. “We’ve been talking through their representatives,” Trump said in an interview with the Hugh Hewitt radio show, when he also blamed China for the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020.



Xi Jinping might be able to muzzle Chinese economists, but the message of the bond market is harder to silence. And right now it’s howling that China is sliding towards a Japanese-style deflationary spiral.

The Chinese 10-year government bond yield has steadied a little in recent days, but it has still dropped ca 42 basis points since the beginning of December, and the long term chart is pretty stark:

However, what really hammers home the Chinese economic predicament is seeing its bond market moves in relation to what is going on in other major bond markets.

The most common comparison is with Japanese government bond yields — naturally, given fears that China is falling into something similar to Japan’s long-run deflationary miasma even as Japan finally emerges from it.

But bond yields everywhere are volatile and rising sharply, even as China’s keep slowly grinding lower and lower and lower and lower.

We didn’t include Japan on this chart as its 10-year government bond yield is still a fair bit lower than China’s, but it too is heading northwards. And Chinese 30-year bond yields are now comfortably lower than Japan’s.

It basically looks like investors (including local ones that dominate the onshore government bond market) in practice have little faith that the various measures that Beijing has announced will be enough.

As Capital Economics’ James Reilly noted earlier this week, with FT Alphaville’s emphasis in bold below:

Reilly predicts that the 10-year Chinese government bond yield will slip further to 1.5 per cent by the end of the year. But this seems a bit hopeful at this stage.

Given that China has now been flirting with deflation since 2023 — and the producer price index is already deeply negative) it means that yields are still comfortably positive in real terms. Barring an economic miracle they can and probably should have a lot to fall?

Further reading:— China’s Japanification (FTAV)— Chinese leverage has crept up to a new record (FTAV)— Is deflation really China’s next big export? (FTAV)



China is to launch its largest sale of offshore bills in a move to support the renminbi, as Wall Street boosts its bets against the currency over weakness in the world’s second-largest economy and Donald Trump’s threat of tariffs.

The People’s Bank of China on Thursday said it would sell Rmb60bn ($8.2bn) of bills in Hong Kong in January, its largest single sale since auctions began in the territory in 2018.

The bill sale will have the effect of soaking up renminbi liquidity and making it more expensive for traders to bet against the currency in markets outside China.

The renminbi has weakened past Rmb7.33 a dollar in the opening trading days of 2025, reaching its lowest level since September 2023 in a challenge to Chinese authorities, which have vowed to maintain the currency at a stable level.

Investors, however, believe the central bank will tolerate a gradual weakening of the currency. Global banks anticipate the renminbi will hit Rmb7.5 a dollar or beyond by the end of the year, a level last seen in 2007, with serious implications for global trade.

If it hits that level, China has $3.2tn in official reserves and an estimated $1tn more in unofficial support from state banks and exporters that it could deploy to protect the currency.

With the announcement of the bill sale on Thursday, “they are sending a sign that even with the tariff situation they are trying their best to protect the currency”, said Ju Wang, head of China rates and foreign exchange strategy at BNP Paribas.

The renminbi has weakened despite the PBoC keeping its currency fix — an official daily exchange rate around which renminbi traded in mainland China can deviate by 2 per cent — stable at about Rmb7.19 a dollar for the past month.

Outside mainland China, the renminbi is freely traded and not subject to the trading band. China’s central bank has tried to manage depreciation in offshore markets with unofficial guidance and discreet interventions.

In one sign of the latter, the overnight rate on Tuesday to borrow offshore renminbi in Hong Kong spiked above 8 per cent, the highest level in three years, making it more expensive for investors to bet against the currency.

The central bank is able to engineer spikes in these rates by draining the market of offshore renminbi with, for example, bill issuance.

Still, several investors told the Financial Times they were opting to short the renminbi offshore, believing the currency will weaken further.

Recent moves in the currency “are all indicative of a trade with legs and a direction in policy where the authorities are pretty comfortable with a slow, managed weakening versus the dollar and some sense of stability versus a broader basket of currencies”, said a hedge fund manager.

Most investors expect the biggest weakening to occur once the new Trump administration’s tariff policies are better known. Trump is set to be inaugurated on January 20.

JPMorgan, Barclays and BNP Paribas all forecast the renminbi dropping to Rmb7.5 a dollar towards the end of 2025. Nomura forecasts it hitting Rmb7.6 by May, while Bank of America anticipates it will hit Rmb7.4 by the end of the year.

Some anticipate it could weaken past Rmb7.5. “Our working assumption is that the currency falls to between Rmb8 and Rmb8.1 by the middle of [2025], conditioned on this relatively large tariff shock,” said Robert Gilhooly, senior emerging markets economist at Abrdn.

Compared with the previous round of Trump tariffs in 2017, “the risks are skewed towards a bigger depreciation this time round”, he added. That “will allow a fairly sizeable [currency] adjustment to take the pressure off tariffs; this is what we saw last time round”.

A cheaper renminbi would help Chinese exporters remain competitive in the face of higher tariffs in the US, but it could also leave China open to the accusation of currency manipulation, a charge levelled by the previous Trump administration.



EU leaders warn Donald Trump not to meddle with the continent’s territories, and Wall Street analysts are betting Citigroup will miss a critical long-term target next week. Indonesia is maintaining its ban on iPhone 16 sales despite Apple's $1bn investment proposal, and China is signing growing numbers of Taiwanese people up for local IDs in a drive to incorporate them into its society.

Mentioned in this podcast:

EU leaders warn Donald Trump not to meddle with Europe’s borders

Indonesia says $1bn offer from Apple not enough to lift iPhone 16 ban

Wall Street doubts Citi chief Jane Fraser can hit crucial target

China’s drive to give Taiwanese visitors local IDs alarms Taipei

Mexico’s president calls for parts of US to be renamed ‘Mexican America’



The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



China’s consumer prices barely rose in December, underlining deflationary pressures that have pushed bond yields to record lows in the world’s second-largest economy.

Consumer price growth was 0.1 per cent against a year earlier last month, according to official figures released on Thursday by the National Bureau of Statistics, in line with an average analyst forecast from Reuters and the slowest in nine months. The reading was lower than 0.2 per cent growth in the previous month.

The weak inflation reading came despite months of effort by policymakers to stimulate demand. China’s leaders announced in December that the country would officially adopt a “moderately loose” monetary policy for the first time in 14 years and work to “vigorously boost consumption”.

The producer price index, which measures factory gate prices, declined 2.3 per cent, slightly better than analyst estimates of a 2.4 per cent fall and a 2.5 per cent contraction in November but leaving the metric in deflationary territory for the 27th month.

China’s economy has been flirting with outright deflation as a three-year property downturn has undermined consumer demand, pushing industry into oversupply.

Beijing is expected to meet its economic growth target of 5 per cent for 2024 thanks to a combination of government stimulus measures and booming exports, whose price competitiveness in overseas markets has been supercharged by deflation at home.

But analysts warn the formula is wearing thin, with incoming US president Donald Trump threatening damaging tariffs that could prompt a sharp deceleration in China’s exports growth.

Beijing has announced numerous stimulus measures, including a monetary policy pivot in September that largely targeted the stock market and sought to boost household wealth through higher equity prices.

China’s state planner on Wednesday also expanded a subsidy programme to encourage consumers to trade in old appliances such as microwaves, rice cookers and dishwashers for newer models.

Economists have raised doubts that such measures will be enough to reflate the economy, forecasting consumer prices to remain virtually flat this year and factory prices to continue a more than two-year run of deflation.

Standard Chartered analysts noted “downside risks” to consensus forecasts of 0.9 per cent inflation this year.

“Headline CPI inflation could turn negative and stay below 0.5 per cent for most of 2025,” they wrote in a research note, adding that producer prices could decline by 2.5 per cent.

The yield on the benchmark 10-year China government bond has been hovering around record lows since the start of the year, which analysts said reflected investor expectations of a low-growth, deflationary outlook for the economy.

Chinese equities and yields on 10-year and 30-year sovereign bonds were flat on Thursday.

In currency markets, the renminbi was flat against the dollar at Rmb7.33 after the People’s Bank of China fixed the daily trading rate at Rmb7.19.

China’s currency is allowed to trade within 2 per cent of the daily rate set by the central bank.



China’s currency has weakened to a 16-month low following strong US economic data overnight and as the potential for sharp tariff increases from the incoming Trump administration fuels concern over growth prospects for the world’s second-largest economy.

The onshore renminbi fell 0.1 per cent to Rmb7.33 against the dollar on Wednesday, its weakest since September 2023, in spite of the People’s Bank of China’s maintenance of a steady fixing rate ahead of Donald Trump’s inauguration on January 20.

China’s currency is allowed to trade within 2 per cent of the daily rate set by the central bank, and the exchange rate is nearing the lower limit of that trading band.

The selling pressure partly reflects fears that the steep tariffs on Chinese products proposed by Trump would force the PBoC to weaken the renminbi to offset their impact on exports, which have helped the country maintain economic growth amid weak domestic consumer demand.

Strong jobs and services data in the US on Tuesday also strengthened expectations the Federal Reserve would cut rates more slowly than previously expected, in contrast to China, which is easing monetary policy to battle deflationary pressures. The US dollar index has rallied 0.5 per cent since Tuesday’s data.

“The market is impatient and wants a blow-up in the renminbi,” said Wee Khoon Chong, a senior markets strategist at BNY.

The PBoC has declared its determination to maintain the “basic stability” of the renminbi and not allow “overshooting” of the exchange rate in markets.

Beijing, which is grappling with deepening deflationary pressures in the economy stemming from low household and investor confidence, has gradually pivoted towards more stimulus measures to boost growth. On Wednesday, it expanded a programme to subsidise consumers who trade in old appliances such as air conditioners and washing machines.

But many economists believe it is holding off on announcing more spending plans while it awaits Trump’s inauguration to get more clarity on potential tariffs. The president-elect has said he would impose tariffs as high as 60 per cent on China.

The PBoC on Wednesday announced a daily fixing rate of Rmb7.1887 against the dollar, almost unchanged from Tuesday’s fixing of Rmb7.1879. But pressure on the exchange rate mounted after the strong US economic data drove up the dollar on Tuesday.

The selling pressure on the renminbi is “essentially a reflection of the Trump trade”, said Ju Wang, head of greater China foreign exchange and rates strategy at BNP Paribas. “The market’s been doing this since the US election . . . we feel a lot has been priced in, but the market doesn’t want to give up.”

Wang said the PBoC appeared to be “in a wait-and-see mode”.

The PBoC “doesn’t really have any good options here”, said Julian Evans-Pritchard, head of China economics at Capital Economics. “It will have to embrace some exchange rate weakness as the least bad option. The question then becomes: where does the PBoC draw the line?”

Analysts note that although the renminbi is under selling pressure against the dollar, it has strengthened relative to other currencies. “It’s not just a China story. It’s a story of US dollar strength,” said Evans-Pritchard.

The Thai baht, Indonesian rupiah, Philippine peso, Taiwan dollar, Korean won all weakened 0.4 per cent against the dollar on Wednesday.

The central bank wants to maintain a steady exchange rate as it waits for more clarity on Trump’s trade policies, analysts said.

In Hong Kong, funding costs for the offshore renminbi have risen in recent days in a sign the PBoC is trying to defend the exchange rate against speculators.

While the onshore renminbi cannot be traded outside the 2 per cent band set by the PBoC, no such constraint exists for the offshore renminbi.

Chinese equities also fell on Wednesday, with mainland China’s CSI 300 index shedding 0.2 per cent and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng benchmark declining 0.9 per cent.



China has expanded a programme to subsidise consumers who trade in old appliances such as air conditioners and washing machines as policymakers strive to counter weak consumption in the world’s second-largest economy.

The policy initiative, which was launched last year to encourage purchases of cars and home appliances, will now also include microwaves, rice cookers, dishwashers and water purifiers as well as smartphones and tablets costing less than Rmb6,000.

Consumers who trade in old goods will receive subsidies of 15-20 per cent, the National Development and Reform Commission, China’s state planner, said at a press conference on Wednesday in Beijing, where a finance ministry official said Rmb81bn ($11bn) would be allocated towards the programme in 2025.

The scheme’s expansion follows calls for Beijing to do more to support consumer spending as growth momentum has slowed and a weak property sector continues to weigh on consumer and investor confidence.

The government is “thinking about consumption and boosting consumption”, said Hui Shan, chief China economist at Goldman Sachs, who added the scheme was having a “pretty clear impact” on sale volumes.

“The downside of such a policy is you are just pulling forward future demand,” she added. “If I’m going to replace my air conditioner once every 10 years, [you’re] pulling the next few years of demand into now.”

The trade-in scheme was initially launched last March with echoes of former US president Barack Obama’s “cash for clunkers” initiative, which allowed consumers to trade in old cars for new ones in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. Officials said a 2024 budget of Rmb150bn, funded through special government bonds, was used up by the end of the year.

The commerce ministry said 36mn consumers used the scheme last year to buy Rmb240bn worth of home appliances, and that it drove Rmb920bn of car sales.

In addition to home appliances and automobiles, the programme also aimed to incentivise companies to upgrade industrial equipment and agricultural machinery.

Last month, the National Bureau of Statistics said November retail sales were boosted by the programme, citing a 22 per cent year-on-year rise in sales of household appliances and audiovisual products such as televisions. Sales of building and decoration materials, also covered by the scheme, turned positive for the first time since April.

But overall retail sales rose just 3 per cent in November, missing expectations and reigniting concerns about the pace of consumption growth, while real estate data showed the largest year-on-year fall in new home prices since 2015 and a deepening decline in property investment.

China last September launched measures to support equities and the housing market, where sales have struggled to gain traction against the backdrop of a yearlong property slowdown. Authorities have also launched comparable “replacing old with new” schemes for housing.

Last month, President Xi Jinping promised “vigorous” efforts to strengthen consumer demand this year.

Frederic Neumann, chief Asia economist at HSBC, said most analysts saw trade-in programmes as helpful for short-term confidence-building, but suggested China needed more policies that promoted consumption on a more sustainable basis.

Additional reporting by Wang Xueqiao in Shanghai



For Wall Street banks hoping to play a role in one of Hong Kong’s biggest listings in years, the US defence department’s decision this week to add CATL to a list of companies deemed to have links to China’s military could not have come at a worse time.

The world’s biggest maker of electric-vehicle batteries and a supplier to Tesla has been meeting banks in recent weeks as it draws up plans for a secondary listing in Hong Kong. The initial public offering would give it access to offshore funds as it seeks to expand overseas, and Morgan Stanley has estimated it could raise up to $7.7bn.

Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, JPMorgan and Morgan Stanley have all expressed interest in working on the listing, according to two people with knowledge of the process. The Shenzhen-listed company is expected to pick the underwriters ahead of a shareholder meeting on January 17, one of the people said, where the date and size of the offering are due to be discussed.

But the move by the Pentagon — which also added tech giant Tencent and Cosco, one of China’s largest shipping companies, to the list — threatens to change the banks’ risk-reward calculus.

Although it does not directly introduce legal restrictions on the banks’ ability to work for the companies listed, it will force them to confront a difficult reputational question: can a bank underwrite shares for a company the US has said is linked to China’s military?

“Unfortunately, client names randomly appearing on blacklists is becoming a more common feature of banking these days, and that adds risk,” said Han Shen Lin, China country director for US consultancy The Asia Group. “The most banks can do is reposition their business and client mix accordingly.”

Inclusion on the list “doesn’t carry the same weight as a sanction, but it’s close enough that banks [may] preemptively cut exposure to the names just to avoid negative headlines,” Lin said.

It is not clear whether the US banks will continue their involvement in the wake of the Pentagon’s move. Goldman Sachs, Bank of America and JPMorgan declined to comment, and Morgan Stanley did not respond to a request for comment.

The action is the latest sign of how US-China tensions are increasingly throwing deals into uncertainty — a marked change from previous years when global banks made huge profits in Hong Kong by helping fast-growing Chinese companies list overseas, many in the US.

Any move to cut ties with companies on the list could be costly for the banks. Tencent in particular has been among US institutions’ most important Chinese clients.

The tech giant’s parent company paid $524mn in investment banking fees between 2004, the year of its initial public offering, and 2023, according to figures from the London Stock Exchange Group. Morgan Stanley, BofA, Goldman and Citi were the top beneficiaries.

CATL has made less use of foreign banks, with the lion’s share of its fees going to China Securities and CICC, although Goldman is the third-largest fee earner from its investment banking activities, according to the LSEG data.

CATL and Tencent have said they are planning legal action to challenge being placed on the Pentagon list if talks with the US defence department fail.

Pony Ma, Tencent founder and chair, said the company was “neither a Chinese military company nor a military-civil fusion contributor to the Chinese defence industrial base”. CATL said it had “never engaged in any military-related business or activities”, and Cosco said none of the companies listed were “Chinese military companies” and that it would engage with US authorities “to clarify this matter”.

The move echoes the banks’ dilemma in 2023 when Syngenta, a Swiss agricultural chemicals company, sought to hire them for a planned $9bn initial public offering on the Shanghai exchange.

Banks agonised over whether they could work on the deal because the US defence department had placed Syngenta’s owner, state-owned ChemChina, on a “Chinese military companies” list.

Bankers at Goldman, JPMorgan, Morgan Stanley, UBS and HSBC had lobbied for roles on the listing, though Syngenta eventually called off the plan.

CATL has told investors that access to dollars is an important part of the rationale for its listing. It had Rmb289bn ($40bn) of cash as of March 31, but China’s strict system of capital controls means it must get government approval for overseas direct investment above a certain threshold, which can be an arduous process.

Pointing to CATL’s use by global carmakers might help bankers justify working on the deal, especially if they add a “major disclaimer” to documents about the listing, according to one adviser not directly involved.

“I mean, their batteries are in the Ford Mustang,” said the adviser.



It is nearly impossible to go a day in China without touching some part of Huawei’s empire. The Chinese technology giant sells a variety of consumer electronics, from TVs and smart home systems to smartphones. Its telecommunications networks and data centres keep the population online; its autonomous driving solutions are embedded in a growing number of electric cars. It designs semiconductors, builds solar panels and even has hotels. And it also operates surveillance systems for local governments, while harnessing its vast purchasing and distribution power to pressure suppliers and competitors.

It is no exaggeration to call it “China’s most powerful company,” as Eva Dou does in her new book, House of Huawei. The Washington Post journalist and former China correspondent has written an authoritative account of a company that has become both a byword for China’s rising technological supremacy and a flashpoint in US-China relations.

Huawei is a hugely ambitious company. Since its founding in 1987 in Shenzhen it has come to dominate global telecommunication networks through strategic technology bets. Along the way it has attracted increasing scrutiny from governments outside China who fear that Huawei’s network equipment enables Beijing’s spying.

Yet, little is known about the inner workings of this mysterious company. It was thrust into the global spotlight in 2018 following the arrest of its chief financial officer, Meng Wanzhou, in Canada. The US sought to extradite Meng, also the daughter of Huawei’s enigmatic founder Ren Zhengfei, over her role in the company’s business in sanctioned Iran. The book narrates the drama in detail and explains why Huawei found itself at the centre of so much controversy.

It is a tale that sits at the heart of the most significant geopolitical relationship today and takes the reader a long way in understanding why Washington and Beijing are at loggerheads over the fate of a company that has done so much to bolster China’s technological ecosystem and extend its influence overseas. Washington pressured allies to stop using Huawei’s 5G equipment, which the UK initially resisted before relenting, ordering the equipment to be stripped from public networks.

Donald Trump first imposed sanctions on Huawei in 2019 during his first presidency, restricting some US companies from doing business with it over national security concerns. The action turned Huawei into a martyr in China. The assault from Washington continued under President Joe Biden, who further tightened restrictions on the company. Beijing has gone to great lengths to support Huawei through its turmoil after it was cut off from critical foreign technology that it used in products. The government lavished it with subsidies, pressured customers to buy its products over imported alternatives, and spared it from any action during a tech crackdown that tamed the power of China’s other tech giants, Tencent and Alibaba.

Now, Marco Rubio, Trump’s choice for secretary of state in the incoming US administration, points to another turbulent four years for Huawei. Rubio recently penned an op-ed for the Miami Herald saying Huawei’s goal is “global domination”, calling it “less a telecom company than it is a geopolitical asset of the Chinese Communist party”. Huawei insists that it is a private company and that the government does not interfere with its business or the security of its products.

Meng’s arrest forced Huawei to open up to the outside world. The media-shy Ren gave interviews to foreign media as part of a charm offensive to aid his daughter’s case. Dou chronicles Ren’s life — from his childhood growing up in poverty in Guizhou, a mountainous province in south-west China, to running the world’s largest telecommunications equipment maker — in a way that helps the reader understand what motivates this notoriously ruthless engineer.

Huawei’s first business was importing telephone switches before building its own, cheaper versions, copying foreign designs in the process. It later benefited from a government policy to rip out foreign technology in China’s communications network. Huawei developed a reputation for generosity towards government officials and telecoms executives, paying for international travel and hosting lavish banquets at its campus. Dou portrays Ren as an expert networker, including sending birthday cakes to retired telecoms experts who had helped Huawei.

There are many unanswered questions about Huawei that are the root of its troubles with the US. What is its relationship with the Chinese Communist party? Does its technology facilitate Beijing’s spying overseas? What is Ren’s relationship with the People’s Liberation Army, where he used to be an engineer? Did Huawei’s early technological innovations in router technology come, as its critics say, off the back of rampant intellectual property theft from western rivals that it then went on to annihilate?

Dou does not give a definitive answer to these questions but eloquently lays out the available facts and allows readers to draw their own conclusions. She is also transparent about reporting limits in understanding this purposefully opaque company. The reader is left with the impression that political support has been instrumental to Huawei’s rise and that Beijing has a strong vested interest to see it succeed.

House of Huawei is at its best when describing how the company won the fight to dominate global network communication systems. Chinese tech companies are renowned for their brutally long hours and dedicated work culture. But none so much as the “wolf warrior” Huawei, which dispatched workers through the Sars pandemic in 2003 to win contracts over foreign companies that pulled back their workforce during the health crisis, and defied official warnings to exit countries in turmoil during the Arab Spring, sending engineers to fix equipment broken by protesters.

Huawei reflects the rise of many other Chinese companies that have ventured into sectors dominated by the west. Initially, rivals dismissed the company, saying it could not innovate. That proved to be a fatal error, as Huawei came to dominate the rollout of 5G technology and has set its eyes on ever more ambitious projects.

While the book provides a neat account of Huawei’s growing dominance in network communications, it does not cover its newer businesses that it sees as the company’s future, including data centres, generative AI and autonomous driving. But it does give the reader a balanced and detailed account of a company that has weathered multiple existential crises and emerged more powerful than ever.

Following Meng’s return to China in late 2021, the brief period of openness ended. It stopped courting foreign journalists and providing detailed financial breakdowns in annual reports. It did not co-operate with Dou on the book. As Huawei retreats from the limelight and reporting on this company has grown more difficult, a book describing its origins and place in Chinese corporate history is more needed than ever.

House of Huawei: Inside the Secret World of China’s Most Powerful Company by Eva Dou Abacus £25/Portfolio $34, 448 pages

Eleanor Olcott is the FT’s China Technology Correspondent in Beijing

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café and follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X



China’s three biggest state-owned airlines are rapidly expanding routes and capacity to Europe as their ability to fly over Russian airspace gives them a cost advantage over regional rivals.

Western carriers have slashed direct flights to China, with Scandinavian Airlines, Lufthansa, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic all suspending some routes to the mainland in 2024, citing cost pressures from avoiding Russia.

Moscow banned most European airlines from Russian airspace in 2022 in response to western sanctions imposed in the wake of President Vladimir Putin’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, adding hours to flights to Asian destinations, including China, and driving up fuel bills.

Chinese airlines, which are unaffected by the Russian airspace ban, have rushed to fill the gap, increasing capacity and offering cheaper tickets despite persistently reporting losses.

“European carriers are just not competitive,” said David Yu, an aviation industry expert at New York University Shanghai.

Passenger seat capacity, measured in available seat kilometres, between China and western Europe by the three main Chinese intercontinental carriers — Air China, China Eastern and China Southern — was 18 per cent higher in October than in the same month in 2019, according to DBS equity research analyst Jason Sum.

The three airlines’ scheduled flights to the UK, Spain and Italy have risen sharply, according to aviation consultancy Ishka, up between 25 per cent and 45 per cent in the first nine months of 2024 compared with 2019.

They are also able to offer more competitive prices given the cost advantage of flying over Russia. The big three airlines’ fares are roughly 5 per cent to 35 per cent cheaper than those of European airlines for direct round-trip flights between China and western Europe, according to UBS analyst Eric Lin.

European airlines have complained that Chinese carriers have an unfair advantage and are establishing a stranglehold on routes between the two regions.

US airlines have successfully lobbied the US government to keep a tight cap on the number of direct round-trip flights to China to stop further inroads from the big Chinese carriers.

In a statement, Lufthansa said European airlines were “in an extremely unequal competitive position with China”, where it said carriers benefited from lower costs and greater government support, as well as the ability to overfly Russia.

“The fact that Lufthansa now must remove one of its oldest routes, Frankfurt-Beijing, from its flight schedule shows how much the balance of international competition is shifting,” the airline said.

Western industry executives privately question the level of demand for the Chinese airlines’ flights, which some say could be lossmaking. Analysts say political motivation is also at work as Beijing expands its visa-free plans to bring back tourists.

“The economy is coming down in China, tourism is not [fully] back yet and business is still recovering,” said one China-based aviation industry executive. “You need to increase connectivity in order to increase the flow of people to China.”

But while some western carriers have pointed to weak demand for flights out of China, UBS said international passenger demand for the big Chinese airlines was close to pre-pandemic levels.

Large Chinese carriers have also boosted direct flights to the Middle East in recent months amid an expansion in business activity between Asia’s biggest economy and the Gulf region as well as a deepening of economic ties, particularly between China and Saudi Arabia.

Scheduled flights in the first nine months of 2024 for the big three airlines to Saudi Arabia jumped more than seven-fold compared with the same period in 2019, according to Ishka, while flights to the United Arab Emirates rose 40 per cent.

The big three carriers are important to the government in Beijing given aviation was “seen as a critical engine towards ongoing economic growth”, said Ishka’s analysts, adding that the carriers were helped by route subsidies and that state ownership meant they had significant credit facilities available.

Beijing-based Air China, Shanghai’s China Eastern and Guangzhou’s China Southern came into existence in the 1980s when the state airline monopoly was broken up and the industry underwent consolidation. All three are dual listed in Hong Kong and in mainland China.

While the Chinese airlines are taking advantage of their cost advantage over European rivals, the country’s mixed economic recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic means they are still losing money overall.

In stark contrast to the booming profits reported in 2023 by flagship carriers in Europe and in other Asian nations, China’s three big airlines recorded combined losses of Rmb13.3bn ($1.8bn). HSBC and DBS believe Air China and China Eastern could report losses again in 2024.

Analysts said the top Chinese carriers had taken a particular hit from slowing consumption in China as well as growing competition from low-cost carriers on domestic routes. Fares in 2024 for flights departing from Chinese airports are down more than 20 per cent from 2023 for domestic and international flights, according to aviation data provider ForwardKeys.

The big Chinese airlines’ outlook for 2025 “continues to be dim”, according to Sum at DBS, who said domestic competition would continue to exert “strong pressure” on profits per passenger while China’s economic slowdown was likely to weigh on premium travel demand.

A subdued recovery in flights to the airlines’ crucial market of North America will also add to profitability pressures, according to Lin at UBS. While Canada in October lifted restrictions on flights to China, flights in early November between China and the US only reached about 30 per cent of 2019 levels, compared with more than 90 per cent for China-Europe flights, according to UBS.

Additional reporting by Haohsiang Ko in Hong Kong



Guangzhou FC, once China’s leading professional football club and a symbol of the country’s aspirations in the sport, has been dropped from the national league after a drawn-out saga related to the collapse of property developer China Evergrande, which bought the team in 2010.

The club — which won eight national league titles from 2011-2019, topped Asia’s Champions League twice and drew in names such as Brazil’s Robinho and Italian coach Marcello Lippi — failed to meet financial entry requirements.

In a statement that referred to Guangzhou and two other ineligible clubs — the Cangzhou Mighty Lions and the Hunan Billows — the Chinese Football Association cited wage arrears and debt issues.

Guangzhou’s ineligibility is the latest blow to Chinese football, which President Xi Jinping sought to develop when he came to power in 2012. In recent years, the sport has grappled with corruption scandals and financial issues at the companies backing the teams.

Guangzhou FC, formerly named Guangzhou Evergrande, on Monday blamed its “historical debt burden” and the “insufficient funds” to address it. “To all those who cared about and supported the club, we express our sincere apologies,” it said in a statement.

After its purchase by property developer Evergrande in 2010, the club embarked on a spending spree that included a host of big-name signings, echoing the boom years of China’s vast and heavily indebted real estate sector. A host of other top developers also owned teams named after them.

But the failure of its majority owner in late 2021 derailed the club’s plans for a new Rmb12bn ($1.6bn) stadium in southern China’s Guangzhou, mooted to be one of the largest in the world, and relegated the club to the Chinese league’s second tier.

In early 2021, the club removed Evergrande from its name under a new rule prohibiting company names to be used in football teams. In its most recent annual report, for the year 2022, Evergrande did not mention the club except to state it had returned land use rights for the stadium to Guangzhou authorities.

Evergrande, with more than $300bn of liabilities as of 2022, frantically sought to dispose of non-core assets following its default on international debts in late 2021. Chinese authorities have focused on getting the company to complete unfinished housing projects.

The football club was a big focus for Evergrande founder Hui Ka Yan, formerly China’s richest man, who is under investigation in the wake of his company’s collapse.

Evergrande invested Rmb1.9bn to build Evergrande Football School, one of the world’s biggest residential football academies, with the help of coaches from Real Madrid in 2012, state media reported at the time.

Guangzhou FC’s struggles follow the dissolution of Jiangsu FC in 2021 by its owner Suning Appliance Group, also owing to financial issues. Suning, which until last May controlled Inter Milan, was hit by an investment in an Evergrande subsidiary that failed to list.

Corruption issues also plague the country’s football league. Last September, the Chinese Football Association banned 43 people for life after an investigation uncovered match-fixing.

Additional reporting by Wang Xueqiao in Shanghai



The inclusion of Chinese companies on US blacklists is hardly new. But in recent years, the growing dominance of Chinese firms in sectors such as electric vehicle batteries and shipbuilding has attracted both significant foreign investment and attention that makes them particularly susceptible to US regulatory actions.

On Tuesday, the US Defense Department added CATL, the world’s largest EV battery maker, and Tencent, the largest game maker, to a blacklist for alleged links to the Chinese military. Shares in both dropped in response — in the case of Tencent more than 7 per cent in Hong Kong, highlighting investors’ sensitivity to rising geopolitical tensions and regulatory risks. But the sell-off should be shortlived.

Other companies on the Chinese military blacklist include chipmaker Changxin Memory Technologies and China’s largest shipping company Cosco Shipping Holdings, plus two local shipbuilders. Tencent and CATL have denied military ties and called the designation a mistake.

Investors’ concerns about the potential impact of the latest blacklisting are understandable given the global market share and investor base of the affected companies. Chinese shipbuilders, for example, accounted for nearly three-quarters of all global new orders last year.

But not all blacklists are equal. There are certain types of blacklists that can cause much financial damage to affected companies. For example, the entity list maintained by the Department of Commerce — which restricts US exports of goods and technology to listed entities without a licence — is one. An investment ban on certain Chinese companies is another, as this gives US investors a deadline to divest, resulting in a lasting sell-off.

But being placed on the Chinese military blacklist is a designation that carries no specific penalties and does not involve immediate bans for companies. For Tencent, which gets most of its revenue outside of the US, the financial impact should be limited. While CATL supplies US companies including Tesla, analysts estimate that US revenue constitutes less than a tenth of the group total for both companies.

There is also a precedent for challenging such designations. Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi successfully contested its inclusion on the US Department of Defense’s military blacklist in 2021 through a lawsuit. Within months it reached an agreement with the US government to be removed. Shares of Xiaomi rose about 30 per cent in the months following.

Tuesday’s market reaction serves as a reminder of the inherent risks posed by escalating geopolitical rivalry between China and the US. But the material impact on the affected companies should be minimal.

june.yoon@ft.com



Tencent and CATL are planning legal action to challenge being placed on a Pentagon list as “Chinese military companies”, if talks with the US defence department fail to get their new designations dropped.

The social media and gaming giant and the world’s largest electric vehicle battery maker both announced on Tuesday they would contest their inclusion on an annually updated list of companies determined to have links with China’s military machine.

Pony Ma, Tencent founder and chair, said in a statement that the company would “engage in discussions with the US Department of Defense” to be removed from Monday’s list, adding that “if necessary, [Tencent] will undertake legal proceedings”.

He said Tencent was “neither a Chinese military company nor a military-civil fusion contributor to the Chinese defence industrial base”.

CATL said in a statement it had “never engaged in any military-related business or activities”, the move was a “mistake” and was “expected to have no substantially adverse impact on our business”.

It also said it would “proactively engage” with the defence department “to address the false designation, including legal action if necessary, to protect the interests of our company and shareholders as a whole”.

Analysts said there was a strong precedent for Chinese consumer tech companies being removed from the list if they could prove wrongful designation.

In 2021, consumer electronics group Xiaomi successfully removed itself from the Pentagon list when a federal court determined there was insufficient evidence for the designation.

“We believe [Tencent] has a good chance to secure exclusion through US courts,” wrote Ivan Su, senior equity analyst at Morningstar, in a note to clients. On Monday, the Department of Defense also removed artificial intelligence group Megvii from the list.

Tencent’s announcement comes after investors dumped shares in the country’s largest company by market capitalisation, with shares falling by 7 per cent in Hong Kong on Tuesday.

The Pentagon listing will not have any immediate impact on Tencent’s business, but could presage tougher action from the incoming Trump administration.

A trade lawyer in Hong Kong who represents Chinese tech clients said the US move against Tencent marked an “escalation” in the US-China tech war “given that it is such a widely known company and one that is not clearly associated with the Chinese military”.

They added that the move “raises the risk that the companies could be added to other more biting lists, such as the Entity List, which would bar them from procuring certain US technology”.

Tencent has nearly 1.4bn monthly active users for the domestic and international versions of WeChat, the dominant messaging platform in China that also acts as a portal for users to read the news, book travel and play online games.

The first Trump administration tried to ban WeChat from operating in the US in 2020, arguing that the app provided a channel for the Chinese government to access information about Americans, to surveil Chinese citizens living overseas and carry out misinformation campaigns. A federal judge issued an injunction against Trump’s executive order, saying it violated the constitution.

Cosco, one of China’s largest shipping companies, chip manufacturer ChangXin Memory Technologies, drone maker Autel Robotics and IT equipment maker Quectel Wireless Solutions were also among fresh names on the Pentagon’s list.



Of all the relationships Donald Trump will have to manage as US president, none may be more consequential than that with Xi Jinping. As prep, the next occupant of the White House could do worse than read two incisive new books on the man who wants to make China great again.

During his election campaign, Trump — who is set to be inaugurated on January 20 — had a fair amount to say about Xi. He boasted that Xi respects him because “I’m fucking crazy”. After he was shot at an election rally in July, he said that Xi “wrote me a beautiful note”. On a separate occasion, he called Xi “fierce” and “very smart”.

There is, however, a lot more to be learned about Xi, the only world leader whose power could be said to rival that of the US president. The impression that emerges from these two deeply researched books is of a surprisingly complex, multi-layered personality. Xi is a strongman who nevertheless suffered deep childhood trauma. He is a pragmatist who yet retains respect for ideology. Both he and his father were cruelly persecuted by communist authorities but he remains a party loyalist.

The early part of The Red Emperor by Michael Sheridan has even a reader unschooled in psychoanalysis wondering about the sort of life-long imprint that trauma can inflict. During the Cultural Revolution (1966-76), a teenage Xi went through more than a dozen “struggle sessions”, which were violent public humiliations of people held to be “class enemies”. At some points he was also incarcerated, hungry and infested with fleas.

“One night a desperate Xi [escaped],” Sheridan writes. “He ran through the rainswept alleys of Beijing to his home. He banged on the door, hoping to get food and dry clothes. But his mother was so terrified for her own safety — and that of Jinping’s siblings — that she not only turned him away but reported his flight to the authorities.”

His mother did not act out of callousness, Sheridan explains. “These were the actions of an insider. Knowing that her house was watched, she also knew that punishment for helping her son would be certain. He fled into the rain, crying.”

This episode is one of several ordeals recounted in Sheridan’s excellent work, the most vivid and compelling biography of Xi published to date. A veteran journalist with extensive experience in Hong Kong and China, Sheridan acknowledges his debt to Howard Zhang, a former head of the BBC News Chinese Service, who acted as lead researcher on Chinese sources for the book.

While Sheridan’s book recounts the seminal chapters in Xi’s life and career, Kevin Rudd traces the transformation in China’s ideological worldview since he came to power in 2012. These shifts have turned much of Chinese politics, economics and foreign policy on its head, says Rudd in On Xi Jinping.

In a nutshell, Xi’s ideological beliefs could be described as “Marxist Nationalism”, argues Rudd, a former Australian prime minister, the current Australian ambassador to the US and a long-standing China expert.

In detail this means three big things. Xi has taken Chinese politics to the “Leninist left” by stressing centralisation in decision making. He has taken economics to the “Marxist left”, emphasising the role of state-owned enterprises and regulation. Lastly, foreign policy under Xi has moved to the “nationalist right”, making Beijing more confrontational and assertive.

But what experiences have moulded Xi’s cast of mind? Sheridan devotes attention to his father, Xi Zhongxun. The elder Xi had been an associate of Chairman Mao Zedong and rose to the rank of vice-premier before he was purged in 1962. He was jailed, forced to perform self-criticism and assigned work in a tractor factory. All told, he spent 16 years in the political wilderness.

Following his father’s ostracism, Xi found himself banished to an impoverished village in the countryside for seven years of hard labour alongside peasant farmers.

This meant that by the time he reached the age of 21, Xi had known great privilege as the “princeling” son of a senior official. He had also tasted public humiliation, persecution and years of poverty in rural exile, estranged from parental love. When his father finally won political rehabilitation in 1978, Xi was re-embraced by the party that had shunned him.

Sheridan wisely avoids the diagnoses of cod psychology. But the rest of The Red Emperor leaves no doubt that Xi is a leader obsessed by both the capricious nature of power and the insurance it affords those who control it.

The most dramatic chapter concerns Xi’s purge in 2014 of Zhou Yongkang, the highest ranking official to be brought down by a corruption case since the founding of the People’s Republic in 1949. As the man in charge of China’s sprawling security agency, Zhou was a member of the politburo, the pinnacle of Chinese power.

After his downfall, an official newspaper described Zhou, at the age of 71, as a “crazy erotomaniac” with a string of mistresses who once had sex in an underground parking lot with an “exceptionally beautiful” TV presenter. But such prurience deflected from more systemic questions: how could the Chinese Communist party harbour a man at its highest echelon who was so grotesquely corrupt?

When Zhou was sentenced to life in prison, details of his affairs emerged. Assets worth more than $10bn were seized from his estate, including 300 apartments and houses, 60 cars, hoards of gold, vintage alcohol, silver, jewellery, antiques, paintings and wads of cash in foreign currency. Zhou’s case stunned China and showed that Xi was not a leader to be underestimated.

Rudd’s book adds a wealth of context to what animates Xi’s grim determination. The former Australian PM is one of the few westerners to have met him on a number of occasions. A fluent Chinese speaker who worked at Australia’s embassy in Beijing, Rudd completed a DPhil on Xi Jinping’s ideological worldview in 2022 at the University of Oxford.

According to his analysis, one of Xi’s formative experiences was the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, a historical moment that resounded through the corridors of power in Beijing as a tragedy (a view incidentally shared by Vladimir Putin). To Xi’s mind, the reasons why China’s huge communist neighbour foundered had a lot to do with lapses in the respect it accorded Marxist ideology.

“An important reason was that the struggle in the field of ideology was extremely intense, completely negating the history of the Soviet Union, negating the history of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, negating Lenin, negating Stalin, creating historical nihilism and confused thinking,” according to official Chinese documents attributed to Xi.

“This is a cautionary tale!” Xi adds.

Thus, a mini vogue among Sinologists in recent years to characterise Xi as a transactional pragmatist with few (if any) ideological convictions is erroneous, Rudd’s book makes clear. This should be a useful insight for the new US administration to bear in mind.

“Marxist nationalism”, as Rudd styles it, is set to be the animating philosophy of Xi’s remaining time in office. But what is this likely to mean, in practical terms?

The answer is that Xi sees himself as on a historical mission to create a “new era” of Chinese pre-eminence. He will use his all-powerful Leninist party to reinforce his purpose. If he encounters resistance at home or abroad, “relentless struggle” will be deployed to overcome it. Trump’s new team has been warned.

On Xi Jinping: How Xi’s Marxist Nationalism Is Shaping China and the World by Kevin Rudd, OUP £26.99/ $34.99, 624 pages

The Red Emperor: Xi Jinping and His New China by Michael Sheridan, Headline Press £25, 368 pages

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning



Hello everyone, this is Akito in Singapore.

As the impact of US-China decoupling spreads, the presence of leading companies from both countries has grown exceptionally here in Singapore. The city-state is home to the Asia-Pacific headquarters of many American tech giants, while their Chinese counterparts have significant operations here, too.

For global companies, Singapore seems to have it all: English and Chinese are both widely used as official languages here, the crime rate is one of the lowest in the world, and Changi Airport, one of the most efficient and connected in Asia, is less than 30 minutes from the city centre. And most importantly, Singapore has a highly educated talent pool.

As tensions between the world’s two biggest economies worsen, Singapore provides a space where companies from both sides can launch their Asia-Pacific and global expansions.

But geopolitical concerns are never far away. That can be seen in the case of Chinese fast fashion brand Shein, which has an operating company based in Singapore but is facing increasing pressure in the US.

Shein, the fast-growing and low-priced apparel brand popular among young shoppers, is eyeing an initial public offering in the US. However, a bipartisan group of American lawmakers has sent a letter to the Securities and Exchange Commission urging it to block the IPO until the company can prove it is not using forced labour in China’s Xinjiang region, write Nikkei’s Rintaro Tobita and Tomoko Wakasugi.

The Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which took effect in the US last June, essentially bans imports of products made in Xinjiang.

Although Shein has said it requires suppliers to buy cotton from approved regions to comply with the legislation, the bipartisan US-China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC) recently released a report detailing allegations about forced labour as well as violation of intellectual property rights.

Temu, an ecommerce platform run by PDD Holdings, operator of China’s popular Pinduoduo, has also come under American scrutiny. The company announced in a recent filing that PDD has relocated its headquarters from Shanghai to Dublin as it plans to ramp up its expansion outside China.

But regardless of where their headquarters may be located, US scrutiny of Chinese companies is unlikely to let up anytime soon.

A top Chinese memory chipmaker is going forward with a listing in Shanghai that will fund significant expansion, after receiving confirmation from US chip toolmakers they can supply its new production lines, write the Financial Times’ Qianer Liu, Cheng Leng, Eleanor Olcott and Demetri Sevastopulo.

Months after Washington imposed a sweeping export ban over advanced chipmaking tools, ChangXin Memory Technologies has been told the equipment it needs will not be subject to US controls, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter.

CXMT, one of China’s biggest makers of DRam memory chips, has resumed expansion plans for foundries that it previously put on hold due to the US export controls. The new plants will manufacture less sophisticated chips for phones, servers and electric vehicles, bypassing the tightened restrictions over procuring advanced chip tools.

To fund this expansion, it plans an IPO on Shanghai’s tech-focused Star board and is in consultation with at least two possible underwriters for the listing, including Chinese bank CICC, according to three people with knowledge of the matter. CXMT and CICC did not respond to requests for comment.

Drivers in China have been quick to embrace electric vehicles, helped along by government incentives and plenty of models to choose from. But a crowded market has set the stage for a brutal price war, writes Nikkei Asia’s CK Tan.

From around 200 EV makers today, some in the industry predict that less than a dozen will be left in a few years’ time as intense price pressure forces smaller players and those without deep-pocketed backers out of business.

Consumer expectations of further price cuts risk exacerbating the pain for automakers. Shenzhen property agent Amy Liu, who is looking to trade in her five-year-old electric SUV, says she will shop around for a bit longer. “I will wait it out for the best deal.”

Warren Buffett, chair and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, was full of enthusiasm for Japan at his investment company’s recent annual meeting in Omaha, Nebraska, writes Nikkei Asia chief business news correspondent Kenji Kawase.

At the event, Buffett was joined on stage by his longtime business partner, Charlie Munger, for a five-hour discussion covering investing, economics and geopolitics. The 92-year-old billionaire, known as the “Oracle of Omaha,” also touched on the move that surprised many observers late last year: selling the bulk of Berkshire’s stake in Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co, the world’s largest contract chipmaker.

TSMC is “one of the best managed and most important companies in the world,” Buffett said, but the abrupt about-face was made “in light of the situation”, likely a reference to tensions across the Taiwan Strait.

Buffett had much more to say about Berkshire’s holdings in Japan’s five trading houses: Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, Mitsui and Co, Itochu and Marubeni. He lauded all five companies “really wonderful partners”, pointing to their “very, very substantial” operations, handsome dividend payments and share buybacks.

His appetite for Japan, it appears, is not yet sated. “We’re not done,” he told his audience in Omaha.

While Buffett talked up Japan, the 99-year-old Munger had strong words for the world’s two biggest economies, saying he blames both the US and China for the current economic tensions. The situation was “wrongly created on both sides”, he said. “We are equally guilty of being stupid.”

#techAsia is co-ordinated by Nikkei Asia’s Katherine Creel in Tokyo, with assistance from the FT tech desk in London.

Sign up here at Nikkei Asia to receive #techAsia each week. The editorial team can be reached at techasia@nex.nikkei.co.jp



Singapore banks have reported falling wealth management fees despite posting record inflows of money and earnings, as a recent influx of wealthy individuals including Chinese family offices hold back from investing in capital markets.

Income from managing billions of dollars owned by rich clients has fallen among Singapore’s biggest lenders DBS, OCBC and UOB in the past year. While wealth management fees have fallen, the banks have posted higher than expected profits off the back of rising interest rates.

OCBC, the city’s second-biggest lender, reported on Wednesday that non-interest income was down 11 per cent year on year to S$1bn ($753mn) owing to a drop in wealth management fees. That was even as the bank reported a 39 per cent rise in net profit year on year to deliver a record first quarter result of S$1.88bn.

Singapore, known for its stability and low taxes, has been a haven for the ultra-wealthy during rising global geopolitical and financial uncertainty. Individuals from mainland China and Hong Kong and Taiwan have contributed to record capital inflows into the city-state in the past two years.

“The wealthy Chinese and others that have come to Singapore since the pandemic are spending their money on Rolls-Royces or a luxury waterfront apartment — not with us,” said one investment manager based in the city-state.

Fund managers, private banks and other money managers say the boom in family offices and growth in the number of wealthy individuals parking their cash in Singapore have not translated into investment activity in private equity, hedge funds and equities.

“A lot of wealth management fees come through trades that clients place with banks. In times of volatility they are a lot more cautious. Many are not increasing leverage and are instead paying down the amount they borrowed,” said Pramod Shenoi, head of financial research for Asia Pacific at CreditSights.

“There was initially an expectation of double-digit fee income growth led by wealth management . . . But a lot of the money coming in is not going to the banks. Many family offices have their own infrastructure and hire their own investment advisers,” he added.

UOB, one of Singapore’s top three banks, said in April that net fee and commission income slipped 4 per cent to S$552mn compared with a year earlier as a result of softer loan-related and wealth management fees.

DBS last week said its wealth management fees, the largest component of fee income, plunged 11 per cent in the first three months of year.

DBS also posted a record first-quarter profit of S$2.6bn thanks to high interest rates. Chief executive Piyush Gupta said there had been strong inflows of new money.

“We delivered a record performance and benefited from safe-haven deposit inflows during a quarter marked by increased market volatility,” he said in a statement last week.

UOB reported a record S$1.6bn in core net profit for the first quarter of 2023, an increase of 74 per cent over the same period.

Both DBS and UOB said at their results presentation in April that wealth management fees were starting to rebound as investor sentiment improved.



Singapore’s big lenders have been breaking record after record. Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation is the latest to join the trend for earnings leaps, reporting its best-ever quarterly profits. Billionaires are seeking a haven in the city-state amid geopolitical uncertainty. That will be a lasting trend.

With Hong Kong on the wane, Singapore is strengthening its credentials as an offshore centre. That means plentiful inflows for Singapore banks. Property is the preferred investment for incomers.

Singapore has long been a favourite for wealthy mainland Chinese, who accounted for 31 per cent of all property purchases by foreigners last year. They like the city-state’s independence, the widespread use of Mandarin Chinese and the strong record of capital appreciation of local real estate.

In recent years, Singapore has also lured more investors from the US, Malaysia and India. Nearly 30 per cent of Singapore’s population are foreigners without permanent residency.

OCBC, which is south-east Asia’s second-biggest bank, lifted profits 39 per cent to S$1.9bn ($1.4bn), beating expectations. Net interest income jumped 56 per cent. The net interest margin was an impressive 2.3 per cent, up from 1.55 per cent the previous year. OCBC has upgraded NIM guidance. Return on equity rose more than 4 percentage points to 14.7 per cent.

Last week, larger rival DBS Group reported a 43 per cent jump in first-quarter profits. Last month, smaller peer United Overseas Bank posted a 74 per cent earnings surge.

Rents have risen nearly a third last year at the fastest rate in 15 years. The government recently increased the tax foreigners pay on residential purchases from 30 per cent to 60 per cent in an attempt to check rising prices.

Inflows of new money should benefit wealth management services which sprawl from the banks into niche funds and family offices. Local lenders already trade above tangible book value. They have scope to go higher, given Singapore’s financial momentum.

The Lex team is interested in hearing more from readers. Please tell us what you think of Singapore’s financial prospects in the comments section below



Singapore’s prime minister Lee Hsien Loong recently managed what few other global leaders would be able or willing to do: travel to China and publicly praise a US-led Asian initiative.

“Asia should always remain an open region,” Lee said at the Boao Forum for Asia in Hainan. “As Asian countries develop co-operation among ourselves, we should also cultivate our relations with the US, Europe and other parts of the world.”

That Lee commended the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework — a trade initiative intended to reassert US engagement in the region with an alternative to Beijing’s economic statecraft — at one of China’s largest annual international conferences pleased many American policymakers, said one US official based in Singapore who asked to remain anonymous.

The event underscored the level of comfort that Singapore, one of Washington’s most important non-treaty allies in Asia, has attained with its long-term partner in a new phase of heightened Sino-US competition. The city-state carefully balances its economic relationship with China and its reliance on the US for security.

But Singapore has become more active in deepening its defence ties with the US over the past several years, one of the only south-east Asian countries to do so aside from the Philippines, despite its friendly relations with Beijing and a recent influx of people and wealth from mainland China, risking tensions with its largest trading partner.

In March, the US Air Force-operated RQ-4 Global Hawk, a stealth aircraft known for its surveillance capabilities and capacity to transmit time-sensitive targeting details, was revealed to have been deployed on a short-term basis from Singapore’s Changi airport.

The previous month, Singapore announced that it would exercise an option to acquire eight more F-35 fighter jets from the US, increasing its order to 12.

“Both of these actions sent a strong signal about how Singapore feels right now about its strong relationship with the US,” said a former diplomat in Singapore familiar with the government’s thinking. “Deploying Global Hawk in the backyard of the South China Sea? The optics of that send a message.”

For Singapore, which allows US forces to access its air and naval facilities on a rotational basis as part of a 1990 agreement, the strategic logic is straightforward. It believes an American presence in Asia — especially its military presence — is beneficial to its own interests and regional security.

The F-35 deal was particularly important, said experts, because other US allies in the region, including Japan, South Korea and Australia, had also purchased the stealth fighters. This would enable interoperability — where one country’s air force flies missions with partners that are similarly equipped.

“By 2035, there will be an estimated 300 F-35s in the Indo-Pacific region, with the majority in Australia, Japan and South Korea,” said Nicholas Fang, director of security and global affairs at the Singapore Institute of International Affairs. “In the event of a conflict, there is the possibility of a unified network of such aircraft from US allies operating in concert, and Singapore could potentially be a part of that.”

Ja Ian Chong, associate professor of political science at the National University of Singapore, said the strengthened ties meant that Singapore would be dependent on US military equipment and technology. “This is Singapore investing in the US system for a good decade or two,” he added. “It really locks [them] into that defence relationship.”

Research published this month by Australia’s Lowy Institute think-tank traced how the US-Singapore defence partnership has been upgraded since 2019, with increased arms procurements, more joint training and deployments of personnel and equipment.

The US Indo-Pacific Command boosted its personnel in Singapore by 12 per cent between 2018 and 2021, according to the report’s authors, while the city-state buys more arms equipment from the US than any other country in south-east Asia.

Last year, Singapore, along with Japan and Australia, for the first time took part in Garuda Shield, an annual joint exercise between the US and Indonesia. In June, the US will send its largest delegation to attend the annual Shangri-La Dialogue — billed as Asia’s leading defence summit — since before the pandemic.

“Unlike the rest of south-east Asia, Singapore is more active in its balancing,” said Susannah Patton, director of the south-east Asia programme for the Lowy Institute. “Rather than withholding its support or endorsement from a partner, it looks to actively make itself indispensable.”

For now, China has not challenged Singapore’s delicate balancing act. But Beijing is also seeking to boost its security relationship with Singapore and south-east Asia, including greater military engagement, raising the prospect of another front for tensions, according to policymakers and officials. This week, China held its first military drills with Singapore since 2021.

“This potentially creates problems down the track if you rely heavily on US systems and equipment,” said one defence expert who has advised several Asian governments.

Singapore is also grappling with ever-closer cultural ties to China. The city-state’s resident population is more than 70 per cent ethnic Chinese. These connections have grown with inflows of people and capital, with the financial hub a top destination for mainland citizens fleeing restrictive Covid-19 policies and President Xi Jinping’s regulatory crackdown on business.

Singapore’s position has become more difficult as hostility between the US and China escalates, particularly over Taiwan and the South China Sea.

“There are several points of stress approaching . . . especially as [Singapore’s] economic dependence and cultural ties to China have grown considerably in the past few years,” said Chong.

“The neutral approach works until it doesn’t. It is unclear what Singapore’s fallback position is when it doesn’t.”



Singapore has doubled its tax on private property purchases by foreigners to 60 per cent in an unexpected move to cool a housing boom that has in part been driven by buyers from mainland China.

Foreigners who have secured permanent residency in Singapore will only pay a stamp duty of 5 per cent, but they will pay 30 per cent — up from 25 per cent — if they buy a second residential property. Entities or trusts purchasing any residential property will now pay a rate of 65 per cent, up from 35 per cent.

Singapore’s minister for national development Desmond Lee called the increases “pre-emptive measures” to damp local and foreign investment demand during a renewed spike in interest. Singaporean citizens, who pay minimal stamp duty on house purchases, will now be prioritised, he said.

Foreign buyers account for a small proportion of overall property sales. Thursday’s move is the latest attempt by Singapore’s government to rein in property prices amid growing concern that locals are being priced out of the housing market and high prices could make Singapore less attractive as an international financial centre.

The demand for property in the Asian city-state, which attracts investors for its stability and low taxes, has made it an outlier compared with other global cities including London and New York, where house prices have fallen on the back of rising interest rates.

The government’s move comes ahead of first-quarter property data due to be released on Friday. Early estimates forecast foreign buyers comprised 7 per cent of purchases in the first three months of this year, up from 4.7 per cent in 2022.

Prices of private homes in Singapore increased by 3.2 per cent in the first quarter of this year, up from a 0.4 per cent increase in the previous quarter, according to the Urban Redevelopment Authority’s flash estimates released this month. Last year, prices rose 8.6 per cent, on top of a 10.6 per cent rise in 2021.

Chinese buyers accounted for 25 per cent of foreign purchases of condos in Singapore in 2022, according to government data. People from mainland China have been the biggest group of foreign buyers in Singapore for more than a decade, though they still make up a small fraction of total private property sales.

Shares in Singapore property developers, including City Developments and UOL, were set for their worst trading day in more than two years on Thursday. Citigroup in a note called the latest measures “draconian” and said there would be a temporary “knee-jerk negative impact on residential developers”.

Property experts said the move might not have an immediate effect on the very wealthy.

“I am not sure even this will affect the very top end of buyers, especially those that have become permanent residents from places like mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan,” said one luxury real estate agent with clients from China, who asked to remain anonymous because of sensitivities involved.

“I was definitely caught off guard,” said Christine Sun, head of research and consultancy for real estate group OrangeTee & Tie, adding it felt like “more a freezing than a cooling” measure.

Additional reporting by William Langley in Hong Kong

Letter in response to this report:

Singapore doubles property stamp duty for foreigners to 60% / From Khaw Wei Kang, Macau



At least 80 Credit Suisse investors in Singapore are in talks to sue the Swiss government over its decision to write down $17bn of Credit Suisse bonds on the grounds it violated a free trade agreement.

The bondholders are preparing to argue that the move breached protections against unfair state actions under the Singapore-European Free Trade Association signed with Switzerland in 2003, according to law firm Wilmer Hale, which is in talks with investors.

The potential lawsuit in Singapore would open a new front in the legal battles against Switzerland for its decision to wipe out the bonds as part of the bank’s state-sponsored takeover by UBS.

Law firms WilmerHale and Engelin Teh Practice are in talks with a group of family offices and wealthy retail investors in the Asian city state whose additional tier 1 or AT1 bonds were written off as part of the deal.

Risky AT1 debt is popular in the region among retail investors. AT1s are a class of debt designed to take losses when institutions run into trouble but are generally believed to rank ahead of equity on the balance sheet.

The investors so far had collectively invested close to $70mn in AT1s, enough to attract the interest of four global litigation funds, said two people familiar with the discussions, adding that the number of investors was likely to grow.

The Singapore discussions could also lead to similar actions by investors in other parts of Asia, where a large number of wealth managers, private banks and rich individuals had bought the Credit Suisse debt instruments.

At least $750mn of the bonds were denominated in Singapore dollars, 91 per cent of which came from Singapore and another 7 per cent from elsewhere in Asia.

Switzerland angered bond investors when the government used an emergency ordinance to write down the bonds to zero, even as it orchestrated a deal where UBS will pay $3.25bn to shareholders. Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan and Pallas Partners are among the law firms representing US bondholders who intend to fight the decision.

Unlike the US, Asian countries including Singapore, China, India, South Korea and Japan have unique protections under multilateral treaties designed to protect foreign investment, according to WilmerHale.

“There are arguments that the Swiss government breached these protections by acting contrary to the investors’ legitimate expectations regarding the hierarchy of claims — that bond holders will rank higher than shareholders,” said Jonathan Lim, a partner at WilmerHale focusing on international arbitration.

In contrast with the US, where big funds such as Pimco and Legg Mason were long-term holders of AT1s, Asian investors are typically smaller individuals and enterprises. The Singapore investors’ holdings ranged from $200,000 to $12mn for some of the family offices.

Other lawyers cautioned that a Singapore lawsuit was an “uphill battle” and played down the chances of the investors getting their money back.

“I haven’t closely assessed the merits of this approach but I would say it will be a difficult argument to win,” said one international arbitration expert.

One investor, who runs a family healthcare business in Singapore, invested $500,000 of his savings in Credit Suisse AT1 bonds at the beginning of the year.

He wants the lawsuit to go ahead. “I’m not optimistic but it is better than doing nothing. I want a front-row seat to this debacle and hopefully I can learn something,” he said.

A retired entrepreneur in Singapore said they wanted to participate in the potential legal action because they felt “completely misled” over the bonds after investing $700,000 in the AT1s.

“I invested because this was a household brand name. Now I have nothing.”



One thing to start: Rupert Murdoch’s Fox has agreed to pay $787.5mn to settle a landmark defamation case in which it was accused of broadcasting false accusations of US election fraud, according to a lawyer for voting machine maker Dominion.

In today’s newsletter:

When the Federal Reserve increased interest rates from 0 per cent to nearly 5 per cent, the move began to eat up the cash that leveraged companies and commercial property groups loaded up with floating rate debt generated.

But for many on Wall Street, the big surprise of 2023 is that higher base rates have caused a slow-motion banking crisis well before an expected wave of corporate distress emerged.

Big banks have been steadily losing deposits for the past year as customers rerouted their cash to higher-yielding products such as money market funds. It has led to an existential issue for some large US regional lenders.

After the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank exposed the pressure banks face as rates normalise, billions more in deposits fled smaller lenders, kicking off a high-stakes race on Wall Street to hoover up the extra liquidity. JPMorgan Chase led the pack with $37bn in new deposits in the first quarter, bringing total deposits to $2.38tn.

“The number one, two or three things to watch this quarter are deposits, deposits, deposits,” Jason Goldberg, a research analyst at Barclays, told the FT earlier this month.

It’s not just regional lenders that have bled deposits. America’s largest brokerage Charles Schwab has been hit by a strategy of investing customer deposits in secure, long-dated bonds and mortgage-backed securities that have since lost billions in value.

GQG, one of Schwab’s biggest investors disclosed this week that it had sold its entire $1.4bn stake as concerns over paper losses on its bond portfolios spiked last month.

Though JPMorgan is pulling in cash during yet another crisis, its longtime boss Jamie Dimon isn’t getting too comfortable, warning investors on Friday that potential “storm clouds” are gathering as inflation threatens to tip the US into a recession.

Still, he has more to celebrate than his Wall Street counterpart David Solomon, head of Goldman Sachs, who must unwind strategic mistakes and navigate the economic turmoil.

Solomon has followed up an aggressive cost-cutting campaign with lacklustre earnings punctuated by an 18 per cent slump in the bank’s first-quarter profits because of poor fixed-income trading results.

Solomon has also slapped a “for sale” sign on home improvement lender GreenSky just 13 months after he steered its purchase for $2.2bn. It’s another step in paring back Goldman’s consumer banking ambitions.

Goldman’s latest collaboration with Apple has come at an opportune time, though, as US depositors explore greener pastures. On Monday, the duo launched a new savings account yielding 4.15 per cent a year, more than 10 times the national average rate.

Goldman has a chance to succeed in its newest push for deposits, but it will be a zero sum outcome. The money will have fled a bank or brokerage elsewhere in the financial system, underscoring that the havoc of rising rates still hasn’t fully filtered through Wall Street.

In the latest sign that the pharmaceutical market is warming up, GSK has agreed to buy Canadian biotech Bellus Health for $2bn.

Bankers have been hoping that the diving valuations in the biotech sector, after a sell-off that started in 2021, would lead to a boom in M&A. Tempted by good deals, Big Pharma would seek drugs to restock pipelines.

But the past few months have shown that large drugmakers aren’t looking to scoop up undervalued assets. Rather, they are happy to pay a premium for companies with drugs that are in late-stage trials or already on the market.

GSK paid a more than 100 per cent premium for Bellus. And earlier this week, New Jersey pharma titan Merck paid a 75 per cent premium on its $10.8bn deal to buy Prometheus Biosciences.

There’s a method to Merck’s madness. The company could lose exclusivity over its best-selling cancer drug five years from now, and making expensive dealmaking bets has become a critical survival mechanism for industry heavyweights, Lex notes.

The deal comes just a few weeks after Pfizer spent $43bn on SeaGen, a cancer treatments maker previously pursued by Merck.

And while Pfizer only paid a 35 per cent premium to SeaGen’s previous Friday closing price, that’s just because the oncology-focused biotech had been in talks with buyers for several months. Pfizer’s price of $229 a share was far higher than Merck’s offer of $200 a share last summer, according to people familiar with the matter.

Flush with cash, pharma’s internal business development teams may be less interested in nabbing a bargain than ensuring their own job security, people familiar with the matter tell the FT’s Hannah Kuchler.

So instead of following the money, follow the clinical data: as assets get derisked, more bidding wars could ignite.

Three times a year, executives from some of the world’s biggest private banks — including JPMorgan, UBS and Citigroup — sit down with regulators in Singapore to discuss the city-state’s booming industry of private wealth management.

The forum, known as the Private Banking Industry Group, has been meeting for more than a decade. But the context has changed significantly in recent years as the super-wealthy — many of them from China — have poured larger and larger sums into Singapore.

The city-state has been trying hard to establish itself as a hub for private wealth. One banker based in Singapore said inflows from China “are probably overrunning” the “best expectations of what was going to happen”, DD’s Kaye Wiggins and the FT’s Mercedes Ruehl and Leo Lewis report.

That growth has brought difficulties. Singapore is trying to tread a careful path as a neutral financial centre at a time of rising tension between Washington and Beijing. An influx of Chinese money risks sparking a domestic pushback, widening the income gap as rents soar.

Multiple people who attended the meeting or were briefed on its contents told the FT that the Monetary Authority of Singapore gave a clear message: it wanted banks to avoid public discussion of the origins of the cash that has been flooding in.

That Singapore would send this message to private bankers, a group not known for high levels of transparency and disclosure about their work, is a sign of just how sensitive the issue has become.

After the FT’s story came out, the MAS published a statement on its website saying it “has not issued any directive to banks — tacit or otherwise — to avoid discussing the origins of wealth inflows into Singapore”. Which means, presumably, we can look forward to detailed disclosures from now on.

Wealth for the win Andy Saperstein was a long-shot to replace Morgan Stanley’s James Gorman. But the wealth boss is a safer bet in a market that has humbled Wall Street’s risk-takers, Bloomberg reports.

Balancing act Since George Osborne’s “twin peaks” regulation overhaul in 2013, the UK’s financial regulators have walked a political tightrope between risk and forging a post-Brexit future, the FT’s Laura Noonan writes.

Old habits die hard Despite a clampdown on betting sponsorships, UK football’s gambling ties will be hard to shake, the FT reports.

Jamie Dimon to be questioned by Jes Staley’s counsel in Epstein case (FT)

THG boss says company will ‘double down’ on profits focus after annual loss widens (FT)

HSBC accused by top investor of ‘exaggerating’ break-up risks (FT)

Shipping group CMA CGM in talks to buy Bolloré Logistics (FT)

Liontrust among suitors for Zurich-listed asset manager GAM (Sky News)

Trump Spac pays $15,000 a month for office in Caribbean home (FT)

Pension fund Calstrs braced for writedowns in $50bn property portfolio (FT)

Former NFL player to acquire $7bn ETF shop (FT)





This article is from FT Globetrotter

We recently asked FT readers to share their favourite urban running routes. Responses came in from all over the world, extolling the joys of pounding the pavement in cities from Athens to Zurich.

Read about a great route in a specific city by selecting it from the list below, or sit back and tuck into this global rundown from A to Z.

Tell us about your favourite city runs in the comments

Follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



Singapore has asked the world’s biggest banks to avoid discussing the origins of the significant sums of money flowing into the city over the past year, as wealthy Chinese funnel billions into the Asian financial hub.

The tacit directive from the Monetary Authority of Singapore was given during a February 20 meeting of an industry group made up of bankers and regulators, according to multiple people who attended.

The flow from China into Singapore has become a politically sensitive issue domestically, and the MAS wants banks to keep public discussion of the phenomenon to a minimum, said three people with knowledge of the talks. China was not mentioned by name, but it was clear regulators were referring to the country, they added.

The influx of mainland Chinese money and people into Singapore comes as China’s President Xi Jinping has launched a regulatory assault on business and an anti-corruption crackdown. The city-state has plotted a careful path as a neutral financial centre at a time of rising tensions between Beijing and Washington, becoming a destination for the assets of many of China’s wealthiest families.

“It was obvious that they [the MAS] were referring to China with all the press about family offices setting up here and mainlanders moving over, though they didn’t single out a particular country,” said one banker from an international bank.

Members of the Private Banking Industry Group include HSBC, Standard Chartered, UBS, BNP Paribas, JPMorgan and Citigroup, as well as local banks DBS and Bank of Singapore. It is jointly chaired by representatives of the MAS and UBS and meets three times a year.

The MAS, Singapore’s central bank, said that when banks reported the sources of their inflows, they should not single out any particular markets, according to another senior banker briefed on the discussion.

This banker summarised the MAS’s message as being that private banks should “just quietly do your job” because “you don’t want to antagonise”.

The MAS said the meeting in February noted that growth in fund flows into Singapore “has been driven by high net worth individuals from different regions”. The meeting also discussed “robust risk management controls to safeguard against money laundering and terrorism financing risks”, it added.

One banker said it was not the first time the MAS has used the forum to address large capital inflows from a particular market. In the past, booming Indonesian wealth — and the local scrutiny it attracted — concerned regulators.

“They desperately want to be the regional hub of private banking, and the situation has kind of granted them that wish,” said the banker. “[The Chinese flows] are probably overrunning their best expectations of what was going to happen.”

Lawyers and industry groups estimate Singapore had 1,500 family offices by the end of last year, with a large chunk of them from China. The MAS said there were 700 family offices at the end of 2021, up from a handful in 2018.

Singapore has been eager to use financial regulation and government policy to maximise the appeal of its financial services industry and attract wealth, said one private banker briefed by a colleague on the February 20 meeting.

However, it is acutely aware of the potential for domestic pushback against the influx of Chinese money and how it could widen Singapore’s income gap, already a political pressure point given the rising cost of living and soaring rents.

“The Chinese presence is being felt everywhere,” said one industry group executive in the asset management industry. “It is not just super yachts and luxury cars anymore, it is being percolated down to everyday people and it is a topic of conversation across all layers of Singapore society.

“We haven’t been told explicitly not to talk about” China, the executive added, “but there is a sense in the financial services industry that talking about it publicly will not be welcomed”.



Good morning from New York.

Sadly, today’s Moral Money is the last issue I write as a contributor from Nikkei. It has been such an honour to cover the transformation of ESG investing in the Asia-Pacific region as it transitioned from being a latecomer in the field to a global growth engine. From next week, my New York-based Nikkei colleague, Kaori Yoshida, will be stepping into my shoes.

Before I sign off, I would like to share the top three things which surprised me during my stint with Moral Money:

First, the speed at which the field of ESG investing has taken off has been astounding. The industry has evolved from a group of minor financial products to a $40tn behemoth.

But the backlash ballooned with equal pace. The word ESG leapt from presentations on Wall Street to people’s living rooms as commentators such as Fox News’ Tucker Carlson argued that ESG was a tool to spread liberal values and erase conservative ideals. During the US 2024 presidential campaign, I won’t be surprised if we observe some of the Republican candidates sparring over “anti-ESG” or “anti-woke” credentials.

Lastly, it’s worth noting how robust the sustainability movement remains despite this strong headwind. Many of my sources have told me that they’re continuing their efforts to decarbonise, even though they may speak less about ESG in public. Some companies said they would keep working on cleaning up their supply chains because it is what investors — as well as clients and consumers want. As one source in the finance industry told me: “Unfortunately, we have to live in the post-ESG era now. But it doesn’t mean our priority has changed.”

Thank you for sharing this amazing journey with me. I won’t say sayonara as I will keep covering the field for Nikkei. So, please stay in touch! You can reach me at shimizuishi_ny@nikkei.com.

The idea of unleashing the power of Asian investment to guide society to decarbonise was in its infancy when I started covering the region for the inaugural Moral Money in June 2019.

Back then, the term “ESG” was still rare in Japan. Yet I thought that the nation’s capital was a strong contender to become a green finance hub. Historically, Japan is environmentally conscious as a small island country without massive natural resources. Corporations have a tradition of taking into account the interests of customers and the local community — rather than just shareholder returns.

Back in 2019, many executives of large corporations were wearing rainbow-coloured badges, which celebrated the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, like a hot fashion item. And the country’s pension fund “whale” GPIF had Hiromichi Mizuno — one of the most influential figures for the global ESG movement at the time — as its chief investment officer.

Four years later, however, Tokyo seems to be losing its pole position in the race to become the Asian capital of ESG investing.

As Hong Kong residents left their city en masse following the implementation of Beijing’s national security law and its zero-Covid policy, there was a chance for Tokyo to grab financial talent from one of its main rivals. But they didn’t head to Tokyo. Instead, Singapore became the preferred destination.

A Hong Kong-based Japanese fund manager — who has seen many former colleagues relocate in the past three years — said that many people leaving Hong Kong disregarded Tokyo because the city lacks “the fundamental infrastructure that high-skilled global financial talents would like to keep”.

Foreigners can find Japanese culture difficult to integrate into seamlessly. English is not a common language, which can make things difficult if you don’t speak Japanese. Plus, tax codes are relatively unfavourable for high earners and financial businesses. The Japanese tax on financial gains hovers at about 20 per cent, while Singapore has no such levy. And while many expats enjoy having a nanny for their kids or maids at home in other Asian cities, such services are harder to afford in Japan.

Michael Sheren, former adviser at the Bank of England and longtime advocate of sustainable finance, highlighted to Moral Money a few reasons why Singapore has emerged as a winner in green finance over other big financial service hubs such as Tokyo, Hong Kong and Shanghai. For one, in Singapore there were clear efforts taking place between the domestic private and public sectors, said Sheren, who acts as president and chief strategy officer of Singapore-based fintech company, MetaVerse Green Exchange.

For example, Climate Impact X, a global exchange in high-quality carbon credits, was jointly established by financial institutions such as Singapore’s DBS Bank and Standard Chartered as well as Singapore Exchange and Temasek, the country’s state investor. Singapore’s government has also implemented clear guidelines around voluntary carbon markets — which would help to drive green finance activity, Sheren said.

He also noted that Ravi Menon, the managing director of Monetary Authority of Singapore, the city-state’s central bank, concurrently serves as chair of the Network for Greening the Financial System, which brings together more than 120 central banks to develop recommendations for central banks’ role in climate action. Last year, the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero selected Singapore as a location for its Asian headquarters.

But some still believe that Tokyo has an advantage over Singapore.

Keiichi Aritomo — executive director of FinCity.Tokyo, a partnership between the Tokyo Metropolitan Government and financial institutions to promote Tokyo as a global financial city — noted that it is not just a financial trade centre like Singapore, but a gateway to the world’s third-largest economy.

Aritomo argued that ESG investors in Tokyo have a chance to make a larger impact on green transformation — and collect bigger returns — compared to those in other Asian cities due to Japan’s extensive industry coverage, from high-tech manufacturing to agriculture. Aritomo also emphasised that Japan is fully democratic and politically stable.

Yet he acknowledged that Tokyo has some quirks that push foreign businesses away.

Despite its reputation for high-tech gadgets, many business transactions in the country are still conducted in an analogue fashion rather than by digital tools. As a result, documents are often required to be submitted by mail — or by fax (do you remember that?).

“We need to get rid of fax,” Aritomo told me. Trade transactions in Japan also involve too much paperwork and were unnecessarily complex, spanning a multitude of different regulators, he added.

Asia is home to the world’s largest emitters, so intensifying competition among cities to become a green financial hub in the region is welcome news — even though the winner may not be my hometown. (Tamami Shimizuishi, Nikkei)

You might remember activist investor Carl Icahn’s high-profile but unsuccessful bid to stop McDonald’s use of gestation crates for female pigs last year.

The latest shareholder challenge to McDonald’s is about human health, rather than animal welfare, as scientists warn that eating burgers from cows fed a cocktail of antibiotics to promote rapid growth can build our resistance to life-saving drugs.

In the coming weeks, the fast-food giant will announce whether the ballot at its annual general meeting in May will include a proposal for it to comply with World Health Organization guidelines on reducing antibiotic use. Asset managers Amundi and LGIM, as well as Hesta, one of Australia’s largest pension funds, are behind the proposal.

There is a strong business case for tackling antibiotic and antiviral resistance. Drug-resistant illnesses could compromise the profitability of some healthcare business models, proxy adviser Institutional Shareholder Services warned in a blog in March. “Humanity is in an arms race with pathogens that are increasingly outsmarting our current stock of weapons,” it wrote.

As the world’s largest buyer of beef, McDonald’s could lead the way in mitigating these risks, Kim Farrant, head of responsible investments at Hesta, told me. “When the efficacy of life-saving drugs [is] compromised, the entire economy suffers,” she said. “It’s important for our portfolio but also for our members.”

Most of Hesta’s pension fund members work in healthcare. It says it now puts antibiotic resistance on a par with climate change and biodiversity loss as a systemic risk to strong and stable markets.

But two similar proposals it co-filed earlier this year at US food processing companies Hormel Foods and Tyson Foods failed to get majority support from shareholders. And despite ISS’s warning in March, the world’s largest proxy adviser recommended that shareholders vote against these two resolutions.

ISS’s own research points to a lack of focus of the issue — just 4 per cent of pharmaceutical companies to which it gives an ESG rating are developing antibiotic or antifungal treatments.

As activist shareholders experiment with new types of health-related proposals, Simon Rawson, deputy chief executive of ShareAction, told me the responsible investment charity focuses its health-related investor engagement on issues such as obesity, tobacco and alcohol use and air pollution, because these disproportionately affect lower-income communities.

From antibiotic resistance to animal welfare and air pollution — it seems likely that health will stay a part of the ESG debate. (Kenza Bryan)



Chinese businesses have had to face political tensions with the west, US sanctions that hit their revenues, and severe disruptions from mainland Covid lockdowns. But many have found a simple way to cope with all of this: set up a new home in Singapore.

As a city state of 5.5mn people in the heart of south-east Asia, with a majority ethnic Chinese population, Singapore has long been a popular destination for mainland investment. However, the flows of money, talent and expertise from China have accelerated since 2018, as geopolitics, decoupling supply chains and the pandemic forced a need for diversification.

While its own market is small, neutral Singapore is regarded as a key hub from which to deploy capital into the rest of south-east Asia, home to 675mn people.

This has led about 500 Chinese companies to set up or redomicile in the city in the last calendar year, according to estimates by business groups. The influx has included family office funds, private equity firms and wealth managers. They have all brought expertise and talent from the world’s second-largest economy, ex­perts note, and an eagerness to invest in Singapore’s technology and start-up scene.

Singapore is a “gateway” to south-east Asia and, as such, where many regional start-ups have their holding companies, says Nick Xiao, chief executive of Hywin International, the Hong Kong-based unit of China’s Hywin Wealth.

Chinese investors see massive potential in a region with a young, growing middle class where successful innovation and products from China can be replicated, he adds.

“The financial infrastructure of Singapore has come together to make it the perfect launch pad for Chinese investors wanting to tap into this market,” Xiao says, referring to recent reforms to encourage more investment funds and family offices.

The benefits to the region’s technology scene are not only financial. Chinese exports include entrepreneurs and expertise — many of whom have gone on to start their own technology companies in south-east Asia.

But some start-ups and experts doubt whether Singapore can produce enough talent and sophisticated innovation to put it in the same league as tech-savvy countries, such as Israel.

“There are a few hurdles for Singapore to be a world-class technology hub,” says the head of one private equity group with a presence in the city, who asks to remain anonymous because of the sensitivities involved. “The government needs to make it easier for companies to employ foreign tech talent because there is a tech skills and talent gap here,” the private equity chief explains. “I know a number of start-ups that are employing tech roles outside of Singapore because government rules around foreign visas have become so tight. That has a flow-on effect to the level of cutting edge technology that can be developed here.”

Singapore has, however, climbed to second place in the city rankings for the FT/Statista survey of Asia-Pacific High-Growth Companies in 2023. Tokyo leads the city placings with 82 companies, followed by Singapore with 75, and Seoul with 60 groups on the list.

Chinese capital has helped foster a generation of start-ups in the region. Singapore-based Grab, the super app offering ride-hailing, delivery and financial services, has received backing from Chinese ride-hailing group Didi Chuxing, Hillhouse Capital, and China Investment Corporation. Both Indonesia’s Gojek and Singapore-based Sea, the parent of online commerce platform Shopee, had Tencent as a major backer.

Many mainland investors have also backed Singapore-based venture capital funds, most of which invest across south-east Asia. Insignia Ventures Partners has a number of wealthy individuals and Chinese tech companies invested across its funds.

“As much as south-east Asia start-ups take inspiration from China, there are many layers to the region that cannot be fully understood without a local ‘guide’ or partners,” says Yinglan Tan, Insignia founding managing partner. “This is where a lot of local investors or GPs [general partners] can step in.”

A number of Chinese funds are expanding their Singapore presence as they scout for investment opportunities. Shunwei Capital, which is part owned by Xiaomi founder Lei Jun, is growing its Singapore presence, according to Linked­In. Shunwei did not respond to a request for comment.

Source Code Capital, another major Chinese venture player that was an early backer of TikTok owner ByteDance, now has a Singapore-based venture partner, LinkedIn also reveals.

Wealth managers are fuelling the growth. Hywin’s Xiao says the company is looking at investing in venture capital funds that invest in south-east Asia, or co-investing alongside the local group and paying them a fee for finding the opportunity.

Others argue that the far greater and long-lasting impact on Singapore comes from the export of business leaders from China.

According to research by Asia Partners, a south-east Asia focused investment group, there are more than 13,000 people who graduated from Chinese universities working in south-east Asia tech, of which 557 are founders, co-founders or chief executives. Most — 68 per cent — live in Singapore.

SCI Ecommerce, a Singapore-based group ranked number 29 on this year’s list, was founded in 2014 by two former employees of Chinese ecommerce giant Alibaba.

SCI — short for Singapore, China, Indonesia — helps multi­national companies, such as Unilever or Nestlé, set up and manage online stores in south-east Asia and China.

Geopolitical tensions and the decoupling of China from the west has made south-east Asia more crucial for investors seeking diversification. As the US and Europe grow increasingly hostile to Chinese companies and money, south-east Asia is one of the few regionals globally that welcomes investment from the mainland.

But others question whether the capital inflows and expertise have been enough to put Singapore on the global map, with many investors still focused on short-term returns.

“Creating world-leading technology and exporting or selling that as a product, globally, takes time and Singapore has not got to that point yet,” says Ravi Chidambaram, chief executive and co-founder of Rimm, a Singapore-based software as a service (SaaS) platform for sustainability management.

“There are two ways for a tech company to scale: leverage the size of the market or build world-class intellectual property. As a Singapore tech company, yes, you do benefit from proximity to south-east Asia, but not from the massive tech and data science expertise needed to create that world-class IP. To build that type of ecosystem, you need more patient capital and a more liberal labour regime.”



In 2020, the pandemic halted travel and shut borders. But at the same time, two of Asia’s biggest financial hubs saw an opportunity to shift the global centre of gravity for hedge funds and the world’s wealthiest families.

Singapore established the “variable capital company”, a fund structure that allows a wide range of potential users to shelter large pools of capital in discreet, lightly taxed wrappers domiciled in a well-regulated financial centre. Hong Kong made enhancements to the “open-ended fund company”, a similar structure it had established two years earlier.

The vehicles are a direct challenge to existing offshore centres such as the British Virgin Islands, Mauritius and the Cayman Islands, and their advocates predict they could herald big changes in the way money is managed.

“We see this as the start of a massive shake-up of asset management, of family offices and the whole flow of capital,” says a Singapore-based partner of one UK law firm involved in setting up the new structures in both cities. “This sets the path for [HK and Singapore] to be the heart of a new hybrid between family offices and hedge funds.”

Investor take-up, particularly in Singapore, has been rapid. The bankers, fund managers and lawyers involved in setting them up say their impact could be far more widespread and disruptive than previously imagined, drawing assets and expertise into the region. To them, the innovations represent exactly the kind of regulatory boldness Asia needs.

“Singapore has always been the poorer cousin compared with the Cayman Islands, British Virgin Islands and even places like Mauritius,” says Ryan Lin, a lawyer at Bayfront Law, who describes the new structure as “a game changer”.

“[The VCC] came just as Singapore became increasingly popular as a wealth and fund management hub . . . it was extremely well-timed”.

The new vehicles represent a direct challenge to traditional offshore finance centres whose success has been built on privacy and low taxes and whose economies are heavily dependent on the revenue generated by financial services.

Others fear they will create a fertile space for money laundering and tax avoidance. Maíra Martini, a research and policy expert at campaign group Transparency International, says the risk with vehicles such as OFCs and VCCs is that they “usually function like a black box” and “can be very attractive to the corrupt and other criminals”.

Hong Kong spotted its opportunity in the wake of the Panama Papers and Paradise Papers leaks, which in 2016 and 2017 sparked hundreds of news stories worldwide about the use, and abuse, of offshore funds in the Caribbean.

The stories made some institutions, especially public pension funds, more cautious about the reputational risks of investing in private equity and hedge funds domiciled in places such as the British Virgin Islands and Cayman Islands. Investors were looking for alternatives because the public had started to “think that people only put money into the Caymans to hide something”, says a Hong Kong-based financial adviser.

In 2018, the territory’s regulators introduced its alternative, the OFC, which aimed to “enrich the choice of investment vehicles and facilitate the distribution of Hong Kong funds internationally”.

OFCs are corporate fund vehicles that are domiciled in Hong Kong and whose units can be offered to the public or held privately. The investments within them must be managed by an entity licensed as an asset manager in Hong Kong.

According to the adviser, who has worked on OFCs, the territory “was trying to capitalise on this trend” as well as attract lucrative business and help solidify its position as a global financial hub.

Singaporean authorities, frustrated at the tendency of local fund managers to register investment vehicles offshore rather than in Singapore itself, launched the rival VCC in 2020. The city-state made it easier for overseas and domestic entities to register an investment vehicle in Singapore provided they had a local entity to manage it.

Despite the “variable” moniker, VCCs can also have fixed capital, allowing them to cater to a diverse range of potential users including mutual fund groups, hedge funds, private equity, real estate firms and managers of family wealth.

The single locally incorporated structure can hold a pool of assets and multiple sub-funds, cutting down on costs. It is also covered by more than 70 double taxation agreements, making it less likely that the assets within it will be taxed twice over.

According to one lawyer who has established the vehicles, a “big differentiator” of VCCs compared with traditional structures is that they allow for easy dividend payouts to shareholders. “In a conventional entity, if you start paying dividends out of capital not out of profits, the regulators will be all over you.”

In both Hong Kong and Singapore, privacy is another, perhaps even bigger, draw: the names of shareholders are not made public. “That’s very important because if I was a shareholder and had money in multiple VCCs, I wouldn’t want people to know where I’d invested”, the lawyer adds.

Matthias Feldmann, a senior investment management partner at Clifford Chance based in Hong Kong and Singapore, points out that running costs are relatively modest. “A VCC is less expensive to operate once set up than an offshore fund vehicle . . . that is one of the key revenue streams of the government.”

For both financial centres, longstanding rivals within Asia, there were clear motivations for establishing the vehicles.

Hong Kong had an obvious target market: mainland Chinese investors and institutions, some of whom are drawn to the territory for its “familiarity and proximity”, says Sally Wong, chief executive of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Association.

OFCs can also use so-called connect schemes that allow mainland and Hong Kong investors to buy into exchange traded funds and wealth management products in each other’s markets.

Singapore’s ambition was more subtly aggressive: to comprehensively shed its reputation for sleepiness and to position itself, through regulatory innovation and reputational risk-taking, as the region’s new alpha predator.

The speedier take-up of VCCs in the city-state is a sign, say lawyers, of how successfully Singapore has managed to position itself as the “not China” option for both Chinese money — whether held inside or outside the People’s Republic — and other cash. Its safe-haven credentials have strengthened as relations between the US and China have deteriorated.

Both Hong Kong and Singapore introduced generous incentives to encourage registration of the new vehicles, cementing in the minds of investors the idea that it is now government policy to encourage their proliferation.

“The government is committed to developing Hong Kong not only as a fund distribution hub, but a fund domicile hub. This vehicle [OFC] is part of that package. It’s a strategic objective,” says Wong.

Hong Kong’s response to the launch — and rapid early take-up — of VCCs was to tweak the structure of the OFC to align it more closely with its south-east Asian rival. In 2021, the Securities and Futures Commission announced the government would pay 70 per cent of all fees to lawyers, accountants and other professional advisers engaged to establish OFC structures up to a value of HK$1mn (US$128,000).

That is more generous than Singapore’s subsidy of S$30,000 (US$23,000), but the Lion City also offers employment passes to senior managers and owners of the funds.

In Hong Kong, the managers of more than a dozen funds say they either recently completed or were in the middle of establishing an OFC.

“It’s not that we have a fixed idea yet of what might be coming under this umbrella,” says one fund manager who set up an OFC in January. “We just want to be ready to say ‘yes’ if, say, a Chinese tycoon calls us and says they want to put some capital into this kind of structure.”

But Hong Kong still lags behind its rival: 40 OFCs were set up in 2021 and 64 in 2022, a leap from just eight registered in the first two years but still far below Singapore’s numbers.

Part of the reason for this is the long shadow cast by an increasingly autocratic China. Professionals advising on the structure in Hong Kong say privately that one thing limiting the scheme’s take-up is that many Chinese investors prefer to put their money in Singapore, which they regard as being further from Beijing’s reach.

“That’s the problem we [Hong Kong] face: it’s not seen as being truly offshore,” says one adviser.

For Singapore, the rush to establish the new structures has been especially pronounced. “Prior to 2020, the vast majority of Singaporean managers had their funds in offshore jurisdictions such as the Cayman Islands, Mauritius or Luxembourg. Now the tables have turned,” says Mahip Gupta, a partner at Singapore-based Dhruva Advisors.

“Since the variable capital company structure was introduced, most have chosen Singapore as their fund domiciliation hub. Even new fund manager applications have significantly accelerated here.” Dhruva has set up 65 VCCs, and about a third shifted from other jurisdictions, according to Gupta. “A mass onshoring of funds is taking hold,” he adds.

There were 872 VCCs registered in the city-state as of February, according to government data. That helped drive a record S$448bn in total asset management inflows during 2021, 15.7 per cent higher than the previous year, according to the most recent data from the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the island nation’s central bank and financial regulator.

The number of licensed and registered fund management companies in Singapore increased 15 per cent year on year — by 146 — to 1,108 in 2021, the most recent data available.

“The pace of growth surprised even the MAS,” says one hedge fund manager. “They had to add more people to meet the demand.”

Experts disagree on exactly who is using the vehicles. “For large international managers or for institutional managers targeting international investors, the VCC is not yet that common,” says Feldmann.

A hedge fund executive whose firm has used the structures says the incentives offered by both centres do little to attract large blue-chip investors. “The big guys don’t care about these small subsidies . . . It’s pocket change to them.”

But Anne Yeo, head of funds and investment management for Rajah & Tann, says VCCs have come a long way since their inception in 2020. “In the past 12 months, we have observed a gradual shift in terms of the VCC being invested into by worldwide global investors.

“My sense of it is that VCCs serve a complementary role to Cayman or other fund structures,” she says. “We live in a complex world. There is no single fund structure that is just domiciled in one jurisdiction.”

Singapore’s VCCs have also been helped by the rapid expansion of another piece of its asset management industry: family offices. Large amounts of family wealth shifted to the city-state during the pandemic, especially from mainland China, outpacing arguably even VCCs in terms of growth.

Because they do not manage third-party funds, single family offices are not regulated by the MAS in Singapore and lawyers say they have been moving into the VCC space. The effect is the creation of an ecosystem pulling in capital from other parts of the world.

“The area where VCCs and family [wealth] overlap . . . is where single family offices decide there is an intention to take on external money and they start using a VCC structure,” says Vikna Rajah, a partner specialising in tax and trust for private clients at Rajah & Tann. The move requires them to become regulated fund managers, but it is adding to the boom in numbers, he adds.

The lure of the new structures, and of the capital expected to flow into them, is also beginning to trigger a movement of financial expertise. Singapore requires VCCs to have a fund manager, responsible for due diligence and anti-money laundering controls, based in the city-state. “That’s very smart,” the hedge fund executive says. “It’s going to create a lot of jobs for lawyers, accountants and auditors.”

Investment banks and long-only pension funds in Singapore and Hong Kong have reported a steady recent outflow of both junior and experienced people to family offices or firms involved with the newly established structures in preparation for a flood of new capital.

At one level, say lawyers, the similarity of the two structures, and the long rivalry between Hong Kong and Singapore for the title of prime Asian financial hub, make the VCC and OFC structures look like weapons in a battle between the two. In reality, they argue, this is about a much bigger proposition to global funds: establishing the two centres as a new and improved offshore destination.

But by positioning themselves as rivals to centres such as the Cayman Islands, both Hong Kong and Singapore are entering tricky territory. They are trying to lure away the best bits of the Caribbean islands’ lucrative business without also risking the public backlash they have faced for facilitating tax avoidance.

The two cities must also avoid attracting capital from sanctioned groups, money launderers and others who might be drawn to the lack of public disclosure about the funds’ shareholders.

“Legitimate funds could be mixed with dirty money and used to invest across different sectors,” says Martini at Transparency International. That can make “it difficult for authorities to trace potentially stolen funds . . . To mitigate the risks of these structures being used for money laundering, transparency and regulation of fund managers are key”.

Both territories say they have put in place such measures. King Au, executive director of Hong Kong’s Financial Services Development Council, an advisory body set up by the Hong Kong government, acknowledges that OFCs could have investors from the US and Europe, potentially including Russia.

“Therefore the fund managers or the banks who distribute the products have to, [through] the regulatory obligations, screen out these unwanted clients or money,” he says.

That task falls to executives at the groups managing the funds, both in Hong Kong and Singapore. One such individual says “reams” of paperwork and due diligence checks have been required; another points out he could be spot-checked by regulators at any time and held personally liable for any wrongdoing.

Some companies may be better than others at screening their investors, says the hedge fund executive — or be more “willing to take a risk”. But he agrees that bringing the checks onshore is “the right thing”.

“To me the point is they’re trying to make it a real jurisdiction from the start.”



Hong Kong-based asset manager Anatole is preparing to shift a key part of its business to Singapore, after telling investors it had significantly cut its exposure to China.

The firm, which made its name through outsized bets on China’s growth, is opening an office in the city-state and may move key functions and decision-making there, said three people familiar with the discussions.

Many Asia-based hedge fund managers were left nursing large losses following a years-long regulatory assault by Chinese president Xi Jinping on multiple sectors from technology to property.

Proximity to the mainland through a Hong Kong base has become less crucial for managers such as Anatole as they diversify into fast-growing south-east Asia, home to 655mn people and featuring Singapore as a regional financial hub.

Anatole may keep a smaller presence in Hong Kong, in part to try to avoid falling out of favour in China where it still has its largest exposure, said one of the people.

“The nervous system is likely going to be in Singapore,” said another person briefed on the negotiations, though they added that the decision had not been finalised and the situation could change. The company registered in Singapore in February, according to the city’s accounting authority records.

Gary Lee, Anatole’s chief operating officer, confirmed the group was opening a Singapore office. He said the office would be an “outpost”, adding that he remained “bullish on the China recovery”.

Lee declined to say how staff would be split between the two locations, whether he and founding partner George Yang would move to Singapore and whether there would be lay-offs in Hong Kong.

“We will maintain the resources we see fit to fully utilise the potential of the investment opportunity,” Lee told the Financial Times.

Since its inception in 2016, Anatole had focused on long-term investments in Chinese companies and its fund manages about $2bn, according to Bloomberg. However, last year Yang, Anatole’s chief investment officer, said it was considering fresh “hunting grounds”.

Anatole had told investors then that its flagship hedge fund had incurred large losses after misjudging the world’s second-largest economy. Chinese stocks plunged in 2022 as China’s economy ground to a halt during the coronavirus pandemic and after the central government launched a regulatory crackdown on the internet, property and education sectors.

Singapore is rivalling Hong Kong as a financial centre in Asia and has benefited from the latter suffering closed borders during the height of the pandemic. Geopolitical tensions have also increased the city-state’s attraction as a neutral financial outpost and haven for global capital — including from China.

While a number of financiers and law firms have added employees and expanded their offices in the city-state, Singapore has lagged behind in capturing more hedge fund business.

“Singapore is typically where you manage money, Hong Kong is where you make money. That is slowly changing,” said one financier.



The world is not short of artists at work on sprawling and multifarious projects, but even in that category Shubigi Rao stands out. Since 2014, the Mumbai-born, Singapore-based artist has been pursuing Pulp: A Short Biography of the Banished Book, a constellation of films, drawings, photos and a projected five books. The project centres on the precarity of literature and language around the world — the threats to the knowledge and communities that they represent — and reflects heartening efforts towards their preservation. Rao had planned to get it all done in a decade, but the pandemic delayed that. She is now just over midway through and intends to finish in 2026.

Pulp is “massive because I don’t know when to stop, frankly”, Rao says from her home in Singapore. “A lot of people think I have ambition. It’s not — ” She stops, a rare pause in her rapid delivery. “My ideas are always immense. And I just, you know, I just do them.”

It is the evening of her 48th birthday, but Rao has only recently woken up. She spent the previous night working, and there is ink on her fingers from finishing a piece that will be in the Encounters section of Art Basel Hong Kong (March 23-25). Titled “The River of Ink II”, it consists of 300 books that she has written in and drawn in, and drowned in ink, and it alludes to the story that the Tigris turned black in 1258 when the invading Mongol army threw the contents of Baghdad’s library into its waters. Rao holds up a few of the midnight-coloured volumes. One has the word “confetti” on its cover. “When you burn books,” she says, “the ashes that rain down, I call it confetti at a fascist parade.” She opens another to reveal a poetic sentence in silver: “Forgetting is the inevitable result of all human experience.”

You could see Pulp as a bulwark against that process. Rao’s latest volume, Pulp III, and a related film, Talking Leaves, record her interviews with far-flung librarians, activists, archivists and cultural guardians, such as a Singaporean writer who learned the endangered Kristang language and a Bosnian firefighter who battled the devastating 1992 blaze at the National Library in Sarajevo. Representing Singapore at last year’s Venice Biennale, Rao offered free copies of the book and screened the film. The art dealer Fabio Rossi stopped by and was enchanted. She is “so full of interesting things, things that I am interested in, too”, he says. “Books, literature, censorship, destruction.” From March 18, his Rossi & Rossi gallery in Hong Kong will stage a survey of her art, an opportunity to take stock of one of today’s most freewheeling art careers.

Born in 1975 in Mumbai, Rao grew up in Darjeeling, then New Delhi, where thieves ransacked a library that her environmentalist mother and civil-servant father had assembled. In the mid-1980s, they moved with their three children to Kaladhungi, an area in the Himalayas rich with wildlife. “We were never harmed by a single thing, but we were shot at by poachers,” Rao says. “Poachers also tried to set fire to our land because my parents’ idea of an outing was to take us in the jeep and chase down poachers.” They lived in a tent, then a hut, sans running water.

The historical and the personal regularly commingle in Rao’s practice, just as art has been intertwined with her life from early on. She was bullied at school, and “it was difficult at home”, she says, but she found solace in reading. “Growing up in India as a woman is — it’s not advisable, at least not for someone like me, who didn’t have the defence mechanisms in place,” she says. When it was time for college, she opted to study English via correspondence, travelling India on a motorcycle, disguised as a boy — “a lot of adventures, instead of sitting in class”, she says.

That disguise presaged her first big project, which she began after moving to Singapore about 20 years ago and deciding to go to art school: a decade of presenting material that she attributed to a man, S Raoul. He was a satire of an obscurantist scholar and his pursuits included creating an immortal jellyfish and inventing a device to prove that contemporary art can induce mental derangement. In this feminist provocation, Rao billed herself as “his protégé, his confidante, his collaborator”. Regrettably, Rao’s first “River of Ink” (2008) installation, which had 100 books, led to his death. “He tripped over this and broke his neck,” she says cheerfully.

Now operating fully under her own name, Rao has become an in-demand figure from her base in Singapore. (Asked about the city-state’s own history of censorship, she says that she addresses it in “subterranean ways”, while contending that “there are far more books banned in certain states in the USA, for instance”.) She will have a solo show at the Rockbund Art Museum in Shanghai in November and late last year she curated India’s Kochi-Muziris Biennale, which was marked by serious logistical issues and financial shortfalls, leading its president to apologise. (Rao is hesitant to comment — “I’m still too close to it, and things are still not OK” — but says she is proud of the show and moved by how artists in India rallied to assist with the beleaguered installation process.)

Rao has a few more years left of Pulp, but she already has an idea for another decade-long endeavour, she says. What propels her? While discussing her childhood, she says that “over the years, I accumulated an immense amount of anger. And this anger and rage is very vital and very important. I think it’s an incredibly powerful force.” Some of her S Raoul work has a darkly comic bite, but in Pulp that force yields a moral clarity that is potent yet understated. Her vision is expansive, yes, but this is fundamentally intimate art, focused on championing people who are doing crucial work or simply displaying the majesty of nature.

When asked about what she aims to accomplish through Pulp, Rao is quick to say that it takes at least 100 or 150 years for movements to create real change. But then she offers a few thoughts. “I hope enough people understand that the softer, quieter things are really important,” she says, “and much more powerful and enduring than the bombast and spectacle and the noise. That’s my approach to art-making, as well: less spectacle, and perhaps more thoughtfulness.”

March 18-May 15, rossirossi.com



The writer is chair of Rockefeller International

New York is greeting the exodus of its wealthy citizens with a shrug. The local elite seems a bit too sure that Manhattan is, and always will be, the gravitational centre of the cultural universe, or that the city is better off — as a professor recently put it to me — without all the “rich douchebags migrating to Miami”.

But complacency this deep could undo even the world’s greatest city, especially now. The pandemic has shown that remote offices can work full time, making it easier for anyone to relocate and magnifying what I call the cracked mirror effect. Cracks in New York — high taxes, surging crime, simmering anti-capitalist hostility — are reflected in the flight to no taxes and a warm welcome in Miami.A similar effect is visible in Moscow, where a heavy-handed Kremlin and world reaction to the war in Ukraine are chasing rich Russians out. Instead they are opting for more hospitable options, including Dubai. Meanwhile, regulatory pressure from Beijing is driving tycoons to buy second homes in Singapore.Millionaire populations dropped by 12 per cent last year in New York, 14 per cent in Hong Kong, and 15 per cent in Moscow. Dubai, Singapore and Miami are deliberately exploiting this migration by opening their doors to capitalists. These global cities rank among the most appealing to millionaire migrants — and make up the top three among luxury property markets where prices are expected to rise fastest this year.

On recent visits, I found all of them gaining momentum as people-magnets. Easy lifestyles smoothed by warm climes and efficient governments are drawing migrants from all over; they, in turn, are attracting new restaurants, swanky malls and art festivals.Singapore is the most established of the three: the millionaire population of 250,000 is much larger than those of Dubai or Miami and therefore naturally grows more slowly. Yet here, too, the energy is palpable. Recently, Singapore opened an agency to welcome family wealth management firms. The inflow was so overwhelming that the city is getting more selective about who qualifies for tax incentives. The local joke is that $500mn is the new $100mn, the sum required to get the welcome mat. Driving around I was struck by displays of wealth new to the usually sober city — one mansion had eight red Ferraris out front.Dubai now offers “golden visas” that allow the wealthy to buy property and stay. This is drawing in migrants not only from Russia but from across South Asia and the Middle East. A real estate boom is in full swing, driven by eight-figure purchases. Eighty per cent of transactions are made in cash, making the property market more stable than in past bubbles.

Dubai still values Guinness World Records as much as high culture: witness the colossus of the new Atlantis the Royal, a boutique hotel but massively scaled up to nearly 800 rooms and 17 restaurants, many run by world-famous chefs. It’s easier to find a great meal there than on the Upper West Side.Miami, once a quintessentially “sunny place for shady people”, has also achieved critical mass as a richly interesting city. People move here to avoid taxes, sure, but also to meet their fellow transplants, do deals in the growing financial district, walk the white sands and shop in the new design district — the first purpose-built luxury shopping neighbourhood in America.Increasingly, unabashedly capitalist cities are finding one another. Business class on the new Miami-Dubai flight is full every day, I was told, forging a direct link between American entrepreneurs and Middle Eastern oil wealth. Many other countries want to emulate Dubai’s success, including Zimbabwe, which hopes to remake Victoria Falls as a similar hub.Manhattanites who say good riddance to the “rich douchebags” might consider the Curley Effect, named after Boston mayor James Curley. By the time his fourth term ended in 1950, Curley had deliberately driven most of the rich “Anglo-Saxons” out of his city through incendiary rhetoric and bias. The effect was to deepen its early 20th-century stagnation.New York is not Boston circa 1950, but the exodus is a bad sign. For years, the state has been bleeding migrants to Florida, where the population is now slightly larger but the state government spends half as much — and the economy grows twice as fast. In 2022, for the first time, Florida had more non-farm jobs than New York.The migration of jobs and capital are leading indicators of development and of decline. Global cities hostile to wealth will end up sabotaging their own economic prospects to the benefit of more welcoming rivals such as Miami, Dubai and Singapore.



Thanks to the late Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore was built on a philosophy of cleanliness from the streets to politics.

For the latter, Lee, modern Singapore’s founding father, believed in paying politicians well. The idea was to secure their commitment while protecting MPs from influence peddling by the private sector. Singapore’s current prime minister Lee Hsien Loong — Lee’s son — receives S$2.2mn ($1.6mn) annually, four times what the US president earns. The benchmark level of a minister’s annual income is S$1.1mn, according to government data, much higher than what politicians earn in countries such as the UK.

But their state salary is only part of Singaporean MPs’ income — many have outside roles, including “full-time” executive jobs at companies.

Now fresh questions over the transparency of such roles have been raised after one of the country’s biggest technology companies appointed an MP to an influential position before backtracking.

The New York-listed Grab is a ride-hailing, food delivery and financial services group that has grown rapidly to have a dominant presence in the city through its “super app”. Its signature green and white logo is everywhere in the Lion City.

Tin Pei Ling from the ruling People’s Action party was appointed as head of public policy for Grab. As chair of the Parliamentary Committee for Communications and Information, she is potentially privy to information that may benefit Grab as well as influence regulatory affairs. Grab is facing regulation that would affect its business, for instance around the rights of gig economy workers.

There is no suggestion Tin or Grab intended the company to reap benefits it might not have otherwise. And taking a second job as an MP is permitted under Singapore law. The problem was the potential for conflicts of interest to arise.

The company itself has acknowledged such risks. “Much thought and care was given to address any potential conflict of interest that may arise when Pei Ling was hired,” Grab said when, in response to a public outcry, it moved Tin to a different role at the tech company in business development.

“The discourse has led us to pause and reflect on how we can create an environment where Pei Ling can serve effectively in both her roles as an MP as well as representing Grab. We acknowledge that this is difficult if the intent behind every action or position she takes in the future is doubted or called into question.”

Tin’s salary was not disclosed. That is not unusual in Singapore. Finding such information — even the roles MPs hold — can be challenging. Unlike in the UK or US, there is no list of politicians’ financial interests. MPs are only required to disclose to the prime minister in confidence their business and professional interests and any other fees they receive.

Such an approach seems an anomaly in transparency to some. Michael Barr, an associate professor in international relations at Flinders University, says: “One of the most extraordinary things about Singapore politicians is how thoroughly they manage to keep their business interests under wraps.”

Mak Yuen Teen at the National University of Singapore believes there is an unhealthy blurring of the lines between government and business in the democratic city-state. As such, a public register of financial interests for MPs would be a “good idea”.

Singapore still has a strong reputation in governance. While not immune to corruption or scandals, it ranks highly globally as a clean place for business. Last year, it scored 83 out of 100 on a widely used corruption index by the global group Transparency International, beaten only by Denmark, Finland, New Zealand and Norway.

The next review of Singapore’s public sector salaries, held every five years, is set for this year. At a time of soaring costs for citizens, the salaries of MPs and their roles in the private sector may draw more attention than they have in the past. New leadership and elections are also on the horizon and the PAP is facing declining popularity, especially among younger voters.

In such an environment, some argue more transparency on MPs and their outside pay might build confidence. “I’m not sure statements like the ‘ultimate safeguard is still MPs’ own conscience and judgment’ really cut it any more,” says David Black, the founder of Blackbox, a Singapore research firm.

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com

This article has been amended to remove an incorrect reference to the size of MP salaries in the penultimate paragraph.

Letter in response to this article:

An ‘incomplete picture’ of Singapore MPs’ interests / From TK Lim, Singapore High Commissioner, London SW1, UK



Hong Kong has lost ground to regional rival Singapore, according to a Financial Times analysis of real estate prices, air traffic and other indicators, underlining the challenge the Chinese territory faces as it reopens to the world after years of pandemic controls.

In recent weeks, John Lee, Hong Kong’s chief executive, has launched a campaign to convince the world that despite Covid-19 and a brutal security crackdown, the Chinese territory is not only open for business but remains Asia’s premier financial centre.

Yet the data demonstrates Hong Kong paid a price for its tough pandemic restrictions and quarantines, while Singapore made gains.

“The trajectory for Singapore to become Asia’s finance hub . . . that takes time. It won’t happen in a year. But if I was the Singapore government, I would be very happy with where things are headed,” said Michael Marquardt, Asia chief executive of IQ-EQ, an investor services firm.

Hong Kong’s regional importance has been entrenched by its location on mainland China’s doorstep. The city has only just reopened to tourists after three years in which many international airlines stopped their services.

In contrast, Singapore was one of the first countries in Asia to reopen its borders during the pandemic. Last year, Hong Kong lost its position as the region’s busiest airport to Singapore, according to Sobie Aviation.

More aircraft have arrived in Singapore than in Hong Kong every month since January 2022, flight statistics show. Arrivals in Singapore have now reached 70 per cent of pre-pandemic levels, while those in Hong Kong are just over half of what they were before the pandemic.

Despite the reopening, severe labour shortages in Hong Kong are preventing the full return of routes. Qantas has delayed the start of their Hong Kong to Melbourne service to the middle of the year.

“The airport is much busier but it’s still at a fraction [of before Covid-19],” said Kristian Odebjer, chair of the Swedish Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. “There are serious bottlenecks in terms of ground staff. I think that is holding back Hong Kong.”

Chinese leader Xi Jinping’s clampdown on technology entrepreneurs has heightened Singapore’s attraction as a destination for wealthy elites — and their funds.

Since mid-2021, Singapore’s foreign currency deposits have increased by more than $100bn, an FT analysis of bank data shows, while Singaporean dollar deposits remain steady. Deposits in Hong Kong banks have dwindled since early 2022, only halting in November as the Chinese city lifted quarantine restrictions.

The number of family offices in Singapore — privately run companies that offer wealth management services — has grown from a handful in 2018 to an estimated 1,500 by the end of last year, according to Singaporean data analysis firm Handshakes. Hong Kong, eager to regain ground, will host an “invitation only” meeting for some of the world’s richest family offices next month.

Perceptions that Beijing was increasingly anti-business and anti-private wealth was “the main reason for the migration of Chinese billionaires from mainland or Hong Kong to Singapore and other places”, said Zhiwu Chen, chair professor of finance at the University of Hong Kong.

“In the past, they might have parked it in Hong Kong but now move to Singapore,” said Kevin Au, director of the Centre for Family Business at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

It is difficult to quantify how many people have moved from Hong Kong to Singapore and banks — hesitant to annoy Beijing — remain reluctant to say how many staff they moved there during the height of the pandemic.

Some had been expanding in Singapore even before the pandemic, especially after the introduction of a tough new security law in Hong Kong in 2020 following protests and unrest. BlackRock doubled the size of its Singapore office in 2022, while Wells Fargo shifted its Asian hub from Hong Kong to Singapore the year before.

All of this has contributed to rental prices in Singapore surging 40 per cent in the fourth quarter of last year from the same period two years earlier. With 140,000 Hongkongers entering immigration programmes such as the one offered by the UK, rents in Hong Kong dropped 10 per cent in the fourth quarter from an all-time high in the third quarter of 2019.

This has also affected demand for office space. Grade A office vacancy levels in downtown Singapore stood at 2.3 per cent at the end of last year compared with 11.1 per cent in Hong Kong.

Hong Kong’s proximity to China remains a huge draw for investors. In terms of capital market activity, Hong Kong is still far ahead of Singapore, with stock market turnover and market capitalisation more than seven times larger than its rival.

In the asset management and advisory service industry, Singapore is fast closing its gap with Hong Kong. In 2021, Singapore’s assets under management grew 16 per cent to $4tn, while Hong Kong’s grew by only 2 per cent to $4.6tn.

More broadly, with Hong Kong open and China’s abandonment of its zero-Covid policy, the IMF has forecast Hong Kong to grow 3.9 per cent in 2023, faster than Singapore’s 2.3 per cent.

Some Hongkongers could yet return. “There will be some that the political situation in Hong Kong has become intolerable [for], they want to move away and stay away, but there will be some who maybe they could change their mind and economic conditions in the UK or US might not be as good as expected,” said Stuart Gietel-Basten, a demographer at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.



Missing Chinese investment banker Bao Fan was preparing to move some of his fortune from China and Hong Kong to Singapore in the months leading up to his disappearance, according to four people with knowledge of his plans.

The billionaire founder and chair of investment bank China Renaissance, who brokered some of China’s biggest tech deals, was establishing a family office in the city-state to manage his personal wealth in the final months of 2022, the people said.

A growing number of Chinese executives have set up family offices, a privately held company that manages investments, in Singapore after Beijing launched a regulatory assault on the tech sector and an anti-corruption crackdown. They increasingly view the city-state, dubbed the “Switzerland of Asia”, as a haven to park their money.

“Like many wealthy Chinese since the tech crackdown in China and during the pandemic lockdown, he was trying to diversify his wealth in Singapore,” said one of the people.

Bao, a veteran of Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse who co-founded China Renaissance in 2005, disappeared this month and has been unreachable, his company said last week. The bank said it had not been able to contact Bao, who is its chair, chief executive and controlling shareholder.

Officials in China have not addressed Bao’s disappearance. China Renaissance executive Cong Lin was detained in September last year not long after the Shanghai branch of China’s securities regulator called in Cong for a “supervisory discussion” about alleged violations in the group’s securities unit.

Bao’s disappearance has sent a chill through international financial and business circles in China at a time when Beijing is trying to project a more business-friendly image since relaxing harsh pandemic curbs.

Bao had made China Renaissance one of China’s top financial institutions, often winning tech deals from larger Wall Street rivals.

However, China’s president Xi Jinping has introduced policies that have hit the tech sector and wealthy tycoons including billionaire Jack Ma, whose listing of Ant Group was suspended by Beijing in 2020.

The number of family offices launched in Singapore by Chinese nationals eager to secure their family wealth has jumped and many from the mainland have relocated to the city over the same period.

An individual does not need to be physically present to set up a family office in Singapore, which offers a path to residency. The rise in demand to set up the family office funds and apply for tax incentives has led to long wait times.

While getting capital out of mainland China is difficult, many wealthy individuals have assets in places such as Hong Kong, where it is easier to shift money.

It is unclear if Bao was successful in setting up a fund or if the process is still ongoing. A government portal search showed no family office with Bao listed as director.

“It is difficult to know who is setting these single family offices up,” said one lawyer, who asked to remain anonymous because of the sensitivities involved.

“A lot of them use their children’s or spouse’s names as directors while the [Monetary Authority of Singapore] does not license or regulate them as they aren’t managing third party money.”

China Renaissance did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Singapore’s government has taken steps to boost the city’s appeal as a wealth management centre. In 2019, the MAS and the Economic Development Board established a Family Office Development Team to attract more family funds.

The number of family offices has grown from a handful in 2018 to an estimated 1,500 by the end of last year, according to Singaporean data analysis firm Handshakes.

Additional reporting by Joe Leahy in Beijing



Two years ago, Lauren arrived in Singapore from Hong Kong wanting more living space for her growing family. Now, they intend to move back. The reason: a 61 per cent increase in the rent on their four-bedroom flat and the high and rising cost of living.

A British mother of three whose husband works in finance, Lauren, who did not want to use her full name, said her experience of Asia’s two rival financial centres has been an eye opener. “Everyone thinks Hong Kong is the most expensive city,” she said.

Her situation is not unusual in the cosmopolitan city-state of 5.6mn people in which a quarter of the workforce is foreign.

A lack of housing supply due to construction delays during the coronavirus pandemic, as well as a wave of new arrivals from places including Hong Kong, China, Europe and Japan last year, pushed residential rents to the highest on record, according to the government’s private residential property rental index.

Rent per square foot in some central areas has overtaken Hong Kong for the first time, data shows. Analysts warn that prices could rise as much as 20 per cent again this year as real estate agents report bidding frenzies for desirable properties.

The situation underscores the cost of Singapore’s campaign to replace Hong Kong as the Asian destination for money and investment. Tough Covid-19 restrictions in the Chinese territory encouraged many to relocate, and the number of Employment Pass and S Pass holders — the main visas used by foreign professionals — increased 4.5 per cent to 338,000 in the 18 months until the end of June last year.

But higher rental prices could undermine Singapore’s attempts to become Asia’s dominant financial hub and attract the best talent, experts said.

Singapore’s government has been reluctant to help a mostly affluent minority. In November, in response to questions from members of parliament, it said that rent was only one factor for those considering a move to the city-state.

Others “include Singapore’s standing as a global business hub, our strong external connectivity, our good trade links, our education and healthcare standards and the quality of life”, said Desmond Lee, minister for national development.

Still, the high cost of living in Singapore, even with low taxes, is creating a “real crunch”, said Woo Jun Jie, a senior research fellow at Singapore’s Institute of Policy Studies. “It is something foreigners face more of the brunt of because most locals live in public housing and go to public schools.” About 80 per cent of Singaporeans live in lower-cost public housing.

“Singapore had a huge influx of people and business since Covid, we were seen as a safe haven during the pandemic. But [high rents] will affect Singapore as a business hub and I think some of it [business] will inevitably flow back into other markets, especially smaller players,” he added.

Nicholas Mak, head of research and consultancy at the ERA Realty Network, said rents could increase another 10 to 20 per cent this year. “Singapore’s small size means when you apply temperature, things boil fast. There is not a lot of spare capacity,” he said.

Emma, a marketing professional, moved with her family to Singapore from Hong Kong five years ago and was living in a three-bedroom flat in the island-resort area of Sentosa. The landlord informed her in November the rent would increase from S$7,000 ($5,200) per month to S$14,000. When they tried to negotiate, they were told to look in other suburbs.

“Our salaries have not gone up by 100 per cent or even 50 per cent — that is all our savings,” she added. She did not want her real name to be used for fear of jeopardising negotiations over their deposit. The family has since decided to return to Australia.

Shantanu Upadhuay, from India, works at a popular restaurant as front-of-house staff in the city’s Chinatown district. The 29-year-old is also moving to Australia with his fiancée after his S$500 rent more than doubled. “I can’t see myself getting ahead here, I have no savings now. In Australia, you can afford a car and have a life,” he said.

Real estate agents agree there is a problem. “I witnessed a crazy incident last year with tenants outbidding each other. It lost control. People are very upset,” said Edna Liong, who liaises with tenants for Huttons Asia. “What some landlords are asking for is not reasonable.”

Another agent, Ina Sultan of ERA, this month made headlines for asking 11 Chinese tenants to vacate their overcrowded flat in a public housing unit. Sultan said: “The problem of overcrowding is not new here, but I expect to see more of this because of prices.”

The bigger picture, agents said, was that rents in Singapore were still catching up after years of decline. “Landlords suffered with low rents for many years and nobody brought this issue up,” Sultan added.

It is clear that for all its attractions, high costs in Singapore are becoming a deterrent, said Jon Goldstein, managing partner of Page Executive Singapore, an executive recruiter. “The question at the mid-level of ‘should we stay or should we go’ — you are hearing that discussion a bit more.”

Even those who have found apartments are unsure about the future.

“If you told me five years ago I would be paying S$6,500 for a very old three-bedroom apartment, I would have said that is insane,” said Marta, a 34-year-old working mother who also did not want her full name to be published for fear of jeopardising her visa.

She moved to the flat last year after her previous landlord asked for a 60 per cent increase in rent. “This was the best option we could find, but after this lease expires we may consider leaving.”



Digital banking is accelerating in Singapore as deregulation encourages tech companies like Grab to enter the market in the hope of attracting younger customers and small businesses.

While this is expected to foster banking competition, retail virtual banks have yet to bring their operations fully online because of lingering regulatory restrictions. Meanwhile, incumbents like Standard Chartered are digitising their services at an accelerating pace.

GXS, a digital bank majority owned by Grab, operator of south-east Asia’s ubiquitous superapp, has expanded services since opening in September. GXS’s app hardly looks like a banking app. With its black and purple colour scheme, it has more of a music-streaming vibe.

The app updates GXS account holders with daily reports on how much interest their deposits have accrued. While a regular savings account offers 0.08 per cent interest, time deposits, opened for specific purposes such as travel or layaway purchases, earn 3.48 per cent. GXS hopes to increase user engagement by letting customers see the interest they earn every day.

“We are a bank created by digital natives for digital natives,” CEO Charles Wong told Nikkei Asia. GXS is targeting so-called gig economy workers like those who deliver meals or give commuters rides via the Grab app. The bank also looks to lure those just starting out in their careers. There is no minimum balance or account maintenance fees.

Grab owns 60 per cent of GXS, with Singapore telco Singtel holding the rest. The partners have a combined local customer base of more than 3mn and can gather reams of data that will tell them what their account holders like to eat, where they commute and how much they use their mobile phones. GXS executives believe that by analysing this data, the bank can offer timely small loans, insurance products and other financial services.

Deregulation has made it possible for nonbank companies such as Grab to enter Singapore’s virtual lending market. In June 2019, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) announced the creation of two licences, including a digital full banking licence, which allows holders to serve individuals and other customers. It also announced a digital wholesale banking licence, with plans to issue up to five of the new licences in total.

The Singaporean central bank was responding to similar moves by other Asian countries. In South Korea, internet giant Kakao got into banking in 2017, and Hong Kong issued digital banking licences in 2019.

“We must take advantage of these opportunities that digital finance brings,” MAS chair Tharman Shanmugaratnam said, “and not be overtaken by the wave of changes taking place globally.”

Interests were high during the four-month filing period, when 21 companies and groups, including foreign entities such as Chinese mobile phone maker Xiaomi, submitted applications for digital banking licences in Singapore. Another Chinese tech giant, ByteDance, owner of the TikTok video-sharing app, was reportedly among the applicants.

In the end, the Grab-Singtel consortium and Singaporean ecommerce player Sea were granted digital full banking licences. But despite high hopes, neither has made much of a splash in the nascent market. GXS provides services to selected Grab and Singtel clients, while Sea is rolling out on an invitation-only basis. Neither has disclosed precise customer numbers.

Lingering regulations aimed at ensuring digital banks’ financial stability are behind the slow rollout. For retail services, one regulation caps aggregate deposits at S$50mn ($37mn) during the entry phase. The government has yet to announce when full-scale services will be permitted.

In the meantime, Standard Chartered, one of the UK’s largest banks, has begun operating a digital bank called Trust Bank, which has attracted more than 400,000 users in four months. Trust Bank was founded with FairPrice Group, operator of Singapore’s biggest supermarket chain.

“Banks have to transform themselves from being just a bank to becoming part of an ecosystem,” Dwaipayan Sadhu, CEO of Trust Bank, told Nikkei. Trust offers deposit accounts, credit cards and insurance policies through an app. Customers can earn loyalty points and coupons from partner brands.

Freed from the expense of operating physical outlets, the digital bank can lower the cost of winning customers and share the savings with them in the form of higher interest on their deposits, Sadhu said.

Trust obtained a licence that allows it to offer services similar to those of conventional banks. It developed a core banking system, which resides on a cloud platform, jointly with Thought Machine, a British unicorn that counts JPMorgan Chase as a shareholder.

Meanwhile, Ant Group, the fintech affiliate of Chinese tech giant Alibaba, obtained a digital wholesale licence, which allows it to conduct transactions for corporations. Ant’s digital-only Anext Bank allows companies registered in Singapore to open an online corporate account in an instant, even from overseas, a first in the city-state, the bank says.

“We are clear on our mission to accelerate financial inclusion through technology-driven innovation,” Anext CEO Toh Su Mei told Nikkei, adding that the bank intends “to better serve the underserved SMEs [small and medium-size enterprises] not just in Singapore but also across the region”.

The bank’s online loan service, which will become fully available by June, does not require application forms for unsecured loans of less than S$30,000 with a cap of S$300,000. The service instead sifts through data provided by credit information organisations, with customer permission, and deposits approved loans almost immediately upon receiving an application.

In one estimate, about 80 per cent of Asia’s cross-border ecommerce services are operated by small to medium-size enterprises, many of which lack ready access to financial services. In a 2020 survey by Visa, 88 per cent of SMEs in Singapore said they planned to make at least some of their transactions digitally.

But it remains to be seen how much of a share digital banks can take. Singapore is said to be overbanked as it is, with 98 per cent of the adult population already account holders. Globally, there are about 250 digital-only banks. According to Moody’s Investors Service, their combined banking assets represent 0.4 per cent of those of traditional banks.

“We can expect the retail banking market to grow” in Singapore, Jan Ondrus, associate professor of information systems at ESSEC Business School Asia-Pacific, told Nikkei. “The new digital banks will not replace the traditional ones but complement their offerings, at least in the early days.”

In the medium to long term, digital banks are expected to utilise their technology in other markets in south-east Asia, where, unlike in Singapore, many residents remain unbanked or underserved. Moves to issue digital banking licences are afoot in Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. Grab plans to open digital banks in Indonesia and Malaysia this year.

“We have in place a regional technology architecture, including our core banking system, which our digital banks in Malaysia and Indonesia can tap or repurpose,” GXS’s Wong said, describing a set-up that will keep costs low as Grab opens banks in more countries.

Still, a bumpy road lies ahead for tech companies struggling with their core businesses. Sea has cut staff, and Grab has frozen employee recruitment. Both are operating in the red and have less scope to invest heavily into new services now than when they filed for their digital banking licences in Singapore.

“Most of the incumbent banks have trusted brands, large customer bases and a broad set of products and services that drive profitable business models,” Eddy Kwong, director and digital business lead for Asia Pacific at Allianz Global Investors, told Nikkei.

“Digital banks have not had the time to develop these capabilities yet and face the uphill battle of tackling customer aversion to change,” he added.

This story has been amended to correct a reference to regulations governing retail deposits.

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on February 27 2023. ©2023 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund GIC has put the brakes on private investments in China as it steps up scrutiny of risks in the world’s second-biggest economy.

GIC, one of the world’s largest investors in private equity funds, has scaled back commitments to China-focused private equity and venture capital funds over the past year, five people with knowledge of the matter said. It has also significantly slowed the pace of its direct investments in private Chinese companies.

Although GIC was an early backer of China’s economic growth story, some of the fund’s most senior figures have struck a more cautious tone on investing in the country during internal discussions over the past year, two of the people said.

The fierce debate inside one of Asia’s most powerful sovereign wealth funds reflects concern over how some of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s policies might affect investors despite the end of zero-Covid curbs that hit growth last year.

“They have dramatically decreased investments,” said one executive who had sought to tap GIC for funds to invest partly in China, adding that the “pivot” came at a time when it was difficult for funds to find other places to invest on the same scale.

ITjuzi, a data provider that monitors investments in China, recorded just two direct investments in Chinese companies by GIC last year, down from 16 in 2021.

Executives and senior managers are uneasy about growing geopolitical risk from souring US-China relations and are concerned that Xi’s “common prosperity” drive to reduce economic inequality in the country could have unintended negative consequences, two people close to GIC’s decision-making process said.

GIC, chaired by Singapore’s prime minister Lee Hsien Loong, has an estimated $700bn under management and has reaped impressive financial returns from China over almost three decades.

But GIC’s investments in China, which it does not quantify, have been hit by the country’s property crisis and Beijing’s crackdown on its own tech companies. The fund has been a significant investor in Chinese real estate and owns a stake in Ant Group, whose planned $37bn initial public offering was halted by Chinese regulators in 2020.

The fund was “burnt bad” by the crackdown on Ant and has become wary of other unexpected moves from Beijing that could hit its investments or its ability to exit them, one of the people said.

Investors said GIC executives indicated they were pausing investments and slowing decision-making commitments to China but were open to future discussions.

“This is consistent with what many sovereign wealth funds and pension funds are doing,” one of the people said. “Don’t be surprised if they’re among the first to come back . . . they know China much better than others.”

Private equity and venture capital funds targeting China deals raised a total of $108bn in 2021, up from $23bn in 2010, according to Preqin data, a sign of how capital has flooded into the country as its economy has boomed.

But fundraising slowed globally last year, as investors became more cautious about locking up their cash in illiquid funds.

The size of GIC’s publicly disclosed stakes in listed Chinese companies, a more liquid investment, fell 4.4 per cent in the year to December 2022, according to Bloomberg data, though it has risen 11 per cent since. The data does not include stakes that are below disclosure thresholds.

GIC, which has offices in Shanghai and Beijing, said it still had “significant exposures” to China and that it “continues to explore long-term opportunities”.

A quarter of GIC’s overall portfolio was invested in Asia, excluding Japan, in the year to March 2022, according to its annual report.

The reductions in China came as GIC ramped up overall investment. It deployed $40.3bn last year, 17 per cent more than in 2021, according to industry tracker Global SWF.

Other large investors have also become more wary of China as tensions with the US rise. The Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan has paused direct investing in private assets in the country, partly because of geopolitical risk, Bloomberg reported last month.

Additional reporting by Hudson Lockett in Hong Kong and Ryan McMorrow in Beijing



As regional and global environmental, social and governance-related regulations evolve and proliferate, the costs for Asian fund firms of keeping up with the various requirements across markets will continue to rise, experts say.

But with enforcement action for failing to conform with anti-greenwashing rules expected to grow, experts highlight that the potential costs and reputational risks of non-compliance are rising too.

Xuan Sheng Ou Yong, Singapore-based green bonds and environmental social and governance (ESG) analyst at BNP Paribas Asset Management, said compliance and operational costs have continued to increase as regulators in different markets make adjustments to ESG investing and disclosure frameworks.

“I don’t think we are close to a plateau — asset managers and investors will continue to spend more,” he said.

Greater resources are needed not just to pay for developing in-house strategies and to communicate these to investors, he noted, but also to comply with different European and Asian regulatory requirements.

“I wouldn’t expect anyone to reduce their investments in this space in the coming years,” Ou Yong added.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore introduced its first-ever guidance for disclosure and reporting for retail ESG funds last July, shortly after announcing plans to conduct climate-related stress tests on fund firms.

The MAS-backed Green Finance Industry Taskforce also rolled out a second green and transition taxonomy consultation last May, including guidelines for asset managers on how to apply the framework. This followed the release in February of green skillset guidelines, which aim to encourage firms to design new training programmes.

The moves are part of a wave of new regulatory requirements in Singapore and have been met by calls for greater clarity from financial institutions.

While fund companies now view incorporating ESG practices as integral to their business, questions are being raised about the resources needed to keep up with all this new regulation.

“How do you square increasing regulations and operational costs with ESG as a growth driver — it’s almost like a chicken and egg problem,” said Ng Sze Yoon, Singapore-based principal of distribution insight for Asia Pacific at Broadridge.

ESG is becoming more of an “infrastructure capability” as opposed to a standalone investment strategy, said Ng, and asset managers now needed to integrate it across the entire business, including investment products, servicing and operations.

Existing ESG regulations and standards are also evolving and shifting, with many asset managers currently facing challenges complying with the European Union’s Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation’s level two standards, for example, which recently came into force.

The SFDR’s level two standards come with a stricter definition of what can be classified as the “darkest green” Article 9 fund, as well as an increased reporting requirement for such funds.

BNPP AM’s Ou Yong said the French manager’s global sustainability team had more than tripled since 2019.

Despite the rising costs of having to comply with ESG regulation, more than two-thirds of Singapore fund firms see increasing investment into ESG strategies as the top expected driver of growth over the next three years, according to an Investment Management Association of Singapore survey, with many viewing it as a means to achieve differentiation.

Sustainable investing remains “if not the main, it’s one of the strategic growth drivers” for BNPP AM in terms of flows and asset growth, said BNPP AM’s Ou Yong.

But for managers that are not making ESG a priority, the pace of development in ESG regulations means that time is running out, as institutional investor expectations rise.

“Anybody who wants to stand out beyond the rest of the playing field has to demonstrate a lot more ESG credentials and capabilities,” Broadridge’s Ng said.

Grace Chong, Singapore-based counsel and head of the Singapore financial regulatory practice at Gibson Dunn, said fund firms also had to think about the increasing risks of not complying.

Many firms are also banking on the fact that Hong Kong and Singapore broadly accept SFDR standards as being locally compliant, but local regulators could add their own additional requirements at any time.

*Ignites Asia is a news service published by FT Specialist for professionals working in the asset management industry. It covers everything from new product launches to regulations and industry trends. Trials and subscriptions are available at ignitesasia.com.



This article is part of a guide to Singapore from FT Globetrotter

For almost five years, I lived a commuter’s life between London and Singapore. In the Lion City I had a house to lay my head in, but work often required me to road-test hotels both new and established, and I was asked by friends often enough for recommendations that I kept my finger on the pulse of who was doing what, where. Now that I’m no longer a local, Singapore’s hotels feature more holistically in my experience of the city; based on what I’m travelling for (work, friends, a stopover I need to cram both into), I care about neighbourhood, size, vibe and service. (Ah, service in Singapore. Still occasionally a bit of a blip issue . . .)

The good news is the hotel scene seems to be evolving into something befitting the size and sophistication of Singapore. An Edition, a Mondrian and a Standard are all in the pipeline — youthful brands with high design and reputations for plugging ably into local scenes. And Raffles is set to plant a second Singapore flag on Sentosa Island later this year. So whether you’re after a deep-dive into the cocktail-bar scene or a poolside loll followed by a Michelin-starred dinner, there will soon be more choice than ever. Meanwhile, here is a selection from among the city’s very best options, for different agendas.

The USP: Its heritage. From the name (taken from Singapore’s colonial founder, Sir Stamford Raffles) to the Long Bar (welcoming peanut shell-chucking expats since the early 1900s), it’s one of south-east Asia’s most storied hostelries, a semaphore in white stucco for the Lion City’s British East Indies history. In 2017-19 it underwent a total renovation by New York-based designer Alexandra Champalimaud, and while some of the public spaces gleam almost unrecognisably with slick new finishes and crystal lights, the overall Raffles gentility is still intact.

The rooms: There are 115, and thanks to the building’s generous proportions, the most modest (about 500 sq ft) puts rooms that call themselves suites in other hotels to shame. Champalimaud’s intervention was, cleverly, minimal. A few choice furnishings have been updated from ’80s staid to 21st-century low-slung: spacious armoires gleam with polished metal and leather linings; pretty encaustic tiles adorn the bathrooms. But the original hardwood floors remain, as do the lazily spinning ceiling fans and four-poster beds. And the long, shared verandas are, blissfully, still long and shared.

Food and drink: A smorgasbord of destination tables, many of which are primarily the preserve of tourists and businesspeople. You can still throw peanut shells at the now quite gussied-up Long Bar, but the Writers Bar next to the lobby, with its tryst-ready corners, is the chicer drinks venue. Take the constituents you need to impress to Anne-Sophie Pic’s stellar La Dame de Pic or to Yì, where Jereme Leung does very haute Chinese cuisine. Refined primi piatti and Super Tuscan reds are served at Alain Ducasse’s cheery Italian, Osteria BBR, formerly the hotel’s Bar & Billiards Room. But for my money, the most fun is to be had at Butcher’s Block, where Hawaiian chef Jordan Keao does brilliant, kind-of-Hawaiian, kind-of-Asian things with both meat and veg in his open kitchens.

Spa: A gorgeous one in the Raffles Arcade, a three-minute meander from reception.

Gym: Yes — it’s not huge, but serviceable, with personal training available.

Rates: Double, from S$1,300 (about £795)

Website; Directions

The USPs: Space, service and extreme family-friendliness.

More of a small citadel than a hotel, the flagship Shangri-La comprises the Tower, Garden and Valley Wings. The pool is truly enormous; the 15 acres of landscaping are mature and lovely; the Garden Wing’s terraces overflow with pink bougainvillea. There are space-, safari-, castle-, underwater-, treetop- and space-themed suites for the tots. But there are also concierges to service any and all business needs, from cars to translators — as well as an excellent Club Lounge, and some of the speediest butler service I’ve ever had.

The rooms: Besides those themed kiddie suites, design-wise things are fairly straightforward, if also comfortable. The Tower Wing rooms are spare and a bit monochrome, but well configured for work, with large desks (often set in a window, so you face out to the view), plenty of outlets and good lighting. The bathrooms are smallish but good, clad in marble and dark wood. For longer stays, the Horizon Club Junior suites are like little apartments, complete with slick kitchenettes and dining areas.

Food and drink: As at Raffles, the options here cut a wide swath, from Italian at Waterfall to sashimi at Nami to a sublime version of chicken rice — that staple of hawker centres — in the patrician Lobby Lounge that earned its not-so-hawker-centre price tag. Breakfast at The Line is a thing of wonder: a United Nations of regional specialities — nasi goreng, siu mai dumplings, bagels, Cronuts and every imaginable thing in between, spread across what feels like acres of counter and cart space.

Spa: One of the best in town, and a favourite of locals. Shangri-La’s Chi brand is well established, and this one is a hushed, private enclave done with low lighting and lots of warm wood and colour.

Gym: Yes, with row upon row of Life Fitness aerobic machines. A bonus: the hotel’s two outdoor tennis courts.

Rates: Double, from S$380 (about £230)

Website; Directions

The USPs: A colonial “godown” (warehouse) that eventually became a disco, which became the first hospitality project of local restaurant impresario Wee Teng Wen (whose Lo & Behold group counts some of the city’s finest drinking and dining venues in its portfolio), The Warehouse is, for now anyway, Singapore’s design hotel par excellence. Local firms Zarch Collaboratives and Asylum recast the old spaces with clever lighting, lots of smoothed concrete and some post-industrial-vibes beams and metalwork.

The location, right across the river from Robertson Quay, is ideal for foodies (there’s a plethora of good eats within walking distance, from high-end Neapolitan pizza to old-school chilli crab), runners and walkers (the river paths, which run all the way to Marina Bay, are great for otter-spotting), and anyone who wants a change from the touristic Orchard or Beach Roads, or the CBD, Singapore’s business and financial district.

The rooms: Understated, minimal but not cold, and very clever in how they leverage space. All 37 rooms and suites have elegant freestanding units variously combining wardrobe, workspace, storage and minibars. Floors are smooth timber; bedding is soft and cozy; bathrooms have big showers and generous sink space — even the very compact Warehouse Sanctuaries, the smallest room category. The River View Mezzanine has a soaring ceiling and tons of natural light; the River View suite is a single-level loft, with a sexy open-plan bathroom.

Food and drink: The Lobby Bar is also the lounge and reception in one unstructured space — but it works, with a sunken bar along one wall and long, low butterscotch-leather sofas arranged in seating areas along the room’s perimeter; it’s a great place to invite friends to start off an evening. Po, the small restaurant adjacent to the lobby, elevates heritage and home-cooking traditions — in this case, Singapore’s own. Delicious, carby Asian comfort food.

Spa: No

Gym: No, but there is a small rooftop pool.

Rates: Double, from S$404 (about £250)

Website; Directions

The USPs: Maxwell Reserve, housed in a century-old British colonial-administration building, started out in 2019 as one half of the Six Senses Singapore, which retired the management account in 2020; the other half, Duxton Reserve, now comes, like Maxwell, under Marriott’s Autograph Collection. The three-storey building sits at the border of Chinatown and Tanjong Pagar, two of Singapore’s culturally and architecturally most interesting neighbourhoods (the latter also one of its nightlife hubs — you’re in striking distance of some of the city’s buzziest cocktail bars and restaurants, as well as the Maxwell Food Centre, reliably good for all sorts of hawker specialities).

The rooms: All 138 were designed by Jacques Garcia, so are heavy on jewel tones, velvet, Persian rugs and passementerie. The 160 sq ft Petit Club rooms are compact, but perfect for a solo traveller, with alcove beds framed in a peacock-feather jacquard fabric and plenty of daylight. The Junior Club and Salon Club suites have multiple windows and generous separate seating areas. The minibars, stocked with small-batch spirits, craft aperitifs and gorgeous mixing kit, are a win.

Food and drink: Several on-site options, including an Indian restaurant, Shikar, and a steak house called the Officer’s Mess Polo Bar, as well an almost outré jewel-box drinking establishment, Isabel, with a backlit pink-onyx bar and yet more red velvet (fun for the ’gram addicts, perhaps). But the fact is, in this neighbourhood you’ll probably be eating elsewhere.

Spa: No, but there is an outdoor rooftop lap pool.

Gym: Yes, small but serviceable.

Rates: S$420 (about £255)

Website; Directions

The USPs: Island-idyll feels; marquee-name architecture; serious luxury.

Set on the south-west side of Sentosa Island, about a 20-minute taxi ride from the CBD (on a good-traffic day), this was the first Capella hotel to open, 14 years ago. Sentosa is home to golf courses, yacht clubs, and an integrated resort or two; there’s a Disney-esque vibe to much of the island, but there are also quite lovely parts, where dense greenery gives way to South China Sea views, imparting passable island-holiday vibes. The Capella, on a nicely landscaped hill, enjoys one of the best vantages, in two late 19th-century Tanah Merah colonial barracks joined by a sinuous extension courtesy of Foster + Partners. No wonder it’s a staycation favourite — it very much says “resort” rather than hotel.

The rooms: Capella is a five-star enterprise all the way, and this is reflected in the design. Entry-level rooms are long, large and softly contemporary, with gleaming timber floors and picture windows overlooking the water (usually dotted with supertankers, but still). The suites carry the design over into bigger spaces with separate sitting areas, while 38 villas take it into serviced private-residence dimensions, all with plunge pools and terraces. Three manor houses — two colonial, one contemporary — offer the full Monty: multiple en suite bedrooms, dining rooms, cook’s kitchens and their own pools and terraces.

Food and drink: What you’d expect at a place of this calibre, ranging from Fiamma (a new Italian overseen by star chef Mauro Colagreco) and Cassia (contemporary Chinese, in a stunning room designed by Andre Fu) to Bob’s Bar, which capitalises on the resort’s prime sundowner position with outdoor seating.

Spa: Yes — the Auriga spa, a multi-award-winner that offers Biologique Recherche facials and a daunting number of combination-treatment Wellness Journeys (with attendant price tags).

Gym: Also excellent, all Technogym aerobic equipment, full weight circuits, and personal trainers by appointment.

Rates: Double, from S$1,600 (about £980)

Website; Directions

The USPs: A centre-of-the-action location on Collyer Quay; fast, polished service; proximity to the CBD.

The ace in Fullerton Bay’s pocket is arguably its situation: overlooking Raffles Place, the Singapore Flyer big wheel and the three infinity-pool-crowned towers of the Marina Bay Sands hotel-casino complex (you could stay there, but trust me — it’s better to wonder at the spectacle from these coordinates). It happens to also be a lovely hotel: modern, full of light, with elegant interiors by Andre Fu and a youthful staff who’ve always impressed during my various stays. And there are few better places to catch the nightly Spectra light and water show than from a table at Lantern, the Fullerton Bay’s rooftop bar. It’s an easy 10-minute walk to Marina Bay Sands and its gargantuan shopping mall offering (which runs the gamut from Céline to Din Tai Fung), and a further 10 minutes to the weirdly wonderful Gardens By The Bay. The CBD is an easy walk in the other direction.

The rooms: They do the job, in the best possible way. The entry-level double is more than 450 sq ft, with clever sliding partitions separating the bathroom from the bedroom, for enjoying the views while you soak in the tub. Every one of them has a well-provisioned work area and a small separate sitting area. The windows throughout the hotel are floor-to-ceiling, so light is a USP all day. A few of the Bay View rooms have terraces with Jacuzzis. Design throughout is what you might call subtle contemporary pan-Asian: glossy hardwood details, hits of bold-hued silk, lots of orchids.

Food and drink: Breakfast is served in La Brasserie, a pretty double-height space at ground level that’s also open for lunch and dinner. With its more than 200 covers, The Clifford Pier, the hotel’s heritage lobby restaurant, is vast, though pretty; and there’s an equally attractive afternoon tea with views served at The Landing Point. But Lantern and its views are probably the winner here, given how easy your access is from the Fullerton Bay to many of Sing’s favourite eateries in Tanjong Pagar and Telok Ayer (another easy, if occasionally sweaty, 10 or 15-minute walk).

Gym: Yes, full service, and a 25m lap pool on the hotel’s roof.

Spa: Not on site, but guests have booking privileges at the spa at the Fullerton Hotel, about a 10-minute walk up Fullerton Road.

Rates: Double, from S$901 (about £550)

Website; Directions

The USPs: A CBD-meets-Chinatown location; value for money; cool architecture creds.

WOHA is one of Singapore’s most laurelled architecture firms, having designed local rapid-transit stations, luxury resorts on Bali and even a university campus in Bangladesh. And the Oasia is one of the most distinctive buildings on the Singapore skyline, thanks to its striking combination of bright-red aluminium mesh cladding and lush green vertical plantings, evidencing a full 21 different species. Three interior “verandas” — entire floors given over to outdoor space — create additional bio-havens (the green “quantum” WOHA has achieved here is tantamount to requirements for 10 whole buildings). This means two outdoor pools, plus a yoga lawn — all many storeys above the city.

Rooms and suites: Nice clean lines and lots of light wood, minimal frippery — the basics you need (a good bed; a wall-mounted TV with lots of channels; a small but serviceable work space; natural light; bathtubs in the Club rooms), and not much you don’t. The views-for-days from most of them are a bonus.

Food and drink: There’s all-day simple dining at The Marmalade Pantry, on the hotel’s ground floor (think salads and sweet-potato fries, a handful of pastas and fancy sandwiches), which is where hotel guests eat breakfast. OSO Ristorante, while not part of the actual hotel, is a haute Italian-leaning venue on the tower’s 27th floor. Along with nice sharing plates of cheese and salumi (and caviar, if it’s your thing), there’s an extensive entrée menu that’s very carnivore-friendly.

Gym: Yes — like the rooms, compact and not complicated, but with what you need: treadmills, ellipticals, weights and room for stretching. Weekly yoga classes are complimentary (though first come, first served).

Spa: None, but staff can recommend local day spas for treatments.

Rates: Double, from S$284 (about £170).

Website; Directions

Tell us about your favourite place to stay in Singapore in the comments

Follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



On a busy penultimate day at Davos yesterday, Greta Thunberg and her fellow activists didn’t disappoint. Returning to the Swiss town after three years, Thunberg delivered a blistering attack on the World Economic Forum’s claim to be building a better world for all, as she cast the assembled corporate elite as a key driver of the climate emergency. “The people who we really should be listening to are not here,” she said. “Instead we are bombarded with messages from . . . the people who are causing this crisis.”

It’s hard to argue with that. Still, for journalists covering the drive for a more sustainable world economy, this week has been a useful opportunity to gain insights from meetings with figures from around the world. We’ll be back on Monday with a final round-up of our main takeaways.

In today’s edition, Gillian highlights a possible shift in the shape of philanthropy in Asia. And Kenza updates us on the insurance sector’s continued struggles to grasp the climate nettle. Have a good weekend. (Simon Mundy)

Davos devotees often argue that the main benefit of the event is that it fosters partnerships. This week, one small sign of such a partnership emerged in relation to Asia: Temasek Trust, the philanthropic arm of Singapore’s Temasek sovereign wealth fund, announced its backing for the World Economic Forum’s “Giving to Amplify Earth Action Initiative” to fight climate change.

It’s true that there are a lot of pious pledges floating in the Davos air. But this one in particular is a striking straw in the wind of a bigger shift. While the region has billions of dollars of philanthropic capital in the hands of rich families, this has hitherto been used primarily to support domestic issues, in a fairly ad hoc, fragmented way, with little channelled to climate change.

But what Temasek Trust is trying to do is position itself — and Singapore — as a hub for this philanthropy to create a more co-ordinated initiative for environmental action. The trust has already got the backing of some western charities, such as the Gates Foundation, and big individual donors such as Ray Dalio. And it’s now trying to gain further support from Asia’s richest families.

If this gains momentum, Temasek Trust hopes to use its money and expertise to not only design and lead projects, but also — perhaps most crucially — develop blended finance initiatives, using philanthropy to underwrite some of the risks of private sector investments in climate infrastructure in the region.

Will it work? This is still unclear. But Temasek starts with a big advantage: it has deep (ish) pockets, a strong record of efficiency — and Singapore is arguably the most neutral hub in Asia. Moreover, as Asia rises in financial power on the world stage, there is a growing desire to get more involved in climate change diplomacy. And the younger generations of Asia’s rich families stand to inherit vast sums in the coming years, and often have a strong desire to get involved in the fight. (Gillian Tett)

Axa, Allianz, Swiss Re and other major insurers laid out an industry blueprint for climate goals at Davos this week, detailing the role they intend to play in the energy transition.

Whether clean or dirty, infrastructure and energy projects must obtain insurance cover before they can get credit from banks, thrusting the operations of insurers, reinsurers and brokers into the spotlight.

The Net-Zero Insurance Alliance (NZIA), a climate-focused industry club whose members’ portfolios account for 15 per cent of global premiums, has given insurers until July 2024 to choose at least three climate targets to report against annually.

Among their options: expanding the number of clients who have set science-based net zero goals; doing more underwriting business for weather-related damage, carbon removal technologies or clean energy; and moving away from the most polluting clients.

Speaking at the World Economic Forum by video link on Tuesday, former Bank of England governor Mark Carney described the target-setting guidelines as “a hugely important step on the industry’s journey towards net zero, but also the world’s move to that same objective”.

Carney said insurers served as “society’s early warning system”, and were on the “front lines” of climate change, given the annual disaster-related losses exceeding $100bn that they have had to cover in recent years.

The NZIA has been plagued with fears that collective action to boycott certain industries could amount to a breach of competition law, and resisted pressure last year to recommend its members stop insuring all new coal projects, citing competition law risks.

It has, to a large extent, been playing catch-up with other groupings in the umbrella body Carney founded, the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero. Banking and asset owners issued their own target-setting guidelines in 2021 or earlier.

Activists argue that what insurers have now come up with amounts to a “frustrating step backwards”, for three geeky reasons.

Firstly, one of the decarbonisation targets insurers can choose from calls for them to cut emissions such as carbon and methane by at least 34 per cent by 2030 — notably lower than the minimum 43 per cent cut that the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said is aligned with the Paris agreement.

Secondly, certain important types of insurance, such as construction risk, which would be needed to build oil and gas plants, are out of scope.

Finally, targets do not have to include the scope 3 emissions of insurers’ clients — emissions related to their supply chains and the use of products — for many companies, the biggest part of their carbon footprint. This appears to be at odds with a UN standard laid out at COP27 for the integrity of net zero targets, as well as the UN’s Race to Zero campaign. Both stipulate carbon accounting should include mandatory disclosure of indirect emissions.

The targets follow a first attempt at drawing up global carbon accounting rules for insurers by the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF) at the end of last year. Its insurance industry members now have until the end of 2025 to publish a breakdown of their clients’ direct emissions — also omitting scope 3.

Perhaps because it is an accounting body with a boring name, PCAF has been more successful at attracting members from the US, such as Liberty Mutual and MassMutual. Currently, the NZIA’s only North American member is Fidelis Insurance, based in Bermuda. It says a priority for the coming year is to expand further into that region. (Kenza Bryan)

Don’t miss Martin Wolf’s magisterial essay on the crisis of democratic capitalism, in an age of strongman demagoguery, culture wars and severe inequality. The answer, he writes, must be “a political response rooted not in the destructive politics of identity, but of welfare for all citizens — that is, a commitment to economic opportunity and basic security for all”.



Shortly after opening its doors on a Tuesday morning in mid-December, the Rolls-Royce showroom in Singapore’s Redhill neighbourhood was already bustling. US-China tensions remain high, financial markets are skittish, the risk of global recession looms heavily: it is the perfect time to put down an $80,000 deposit on a hot pink Phantom.

The number of Rolls-Royce cars registered in Singapore surged in 2021 and remained at record levels in 2022 — waiting lists for the cars now stretch into years. One type of buyer dominates. For the cars that leave the forecourt, a predictable future in the city-state awaits — shuttling the short routes between the mansions and apartments of Sentosa and other pockets of extreme wealth to luxury shopping malls, the discreet offices of their family funds and the private clubs of Orchard. According to employees at the showroom, the new buyers are overwhelmingly Chinese.

The flows are part of a transformation of Singapore that is becoming a proxy for the way in which one segment of China is dealing with geopolitical tension and decoupling.

Chinese individuals, their families, their companies and their advisers, according to a wide range of bankers, lawyers, accountants and investors interviewed by the Financial Times, now see Singapore as the vessel that can navigate them through a series of expected storms. At the same time, they add, it is becoming an increasingly vital place for outposts of Wall Street and the global financial industry to interact with them. For many years, Singapore has liked to sell itself as the Switzerland of Asia. The new cold war, says one former top official, is finally turning that pitch into a reality. The big question, though, is how far Singapore will tolerate being Switzerland with Chinese characteristics.

“This is a dramatic, epochal realignment of wealth in Asia. Capital moves as quickly as it can to the safest destinations with the highest rate of return. In Asia, that place is increasingly Singapore,” says Drew Thompson, visiting fellow at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy in Singapore.

The change on the ground in Singapore is palpable. Property deals by mainland buyers are the dominant transaction and the international schools are bursting at the seams, with hundreds of Chinese applicants for a vanishingly small number of places. Chinese Michelin-starred restaurants might — just — be able to find diners an available dinner booking next April.

Singapore’s status as an Asian financial hub has been doubly enhanced by the Chinese influx. The number of Chinese family funds in Singapore has soared from a handful a few years ago to an estimated 600 today. At the same time, some 500 Chinese businesses have registered in the city in the past year, preparing to use their Singapore-based status to venture more boldly into India and other jurisdictions where they face obstacles.

There is exponentially more business for private wealth managers and other financial services and, as the scale of activity has grown, it has made sense for many of the largest US, European and Japanese investment banks to shift more of their senior staff to Singapore from Hong Kong.

“I think many mainland China clients still see Singapore as a safer long-term bet than Hong Kong for a few reasons. First is political stability, second is economic stability and finally, its rising status as Asia’s financial hub,” says Kia Meng Loh, co-head of private wealth and family office practices at Dentons Rodyk, a law firm.

But for all the signals that Singapore has found itself in a prime position to thrive amid geopolitical uncertainty, the story has distinct vulnerabilities. China’s tolerance of what has been happening — the exodus of capital and individuals — will eventually have a breaking point that may come with consequences.

Singaporean society could also push back, warn senior figures close to its government. The cost of living has soared in Singapore, angering locals who see danger and division in the rising rents, the bursting schools and the growing number of Rolls-Royces. Meanwhile, the inflow of so much capital so quickly also exposes Singapore to the potential for bad actors using it as a spot to hide money.

“Capital is always moving. And it, and the people controlling it, can just as easily flow back out,” says one investment banker based in the city.

Singapore has been a hub for Chinese migration and capital since it was first declared a freeport by Sir Stamford Raffles in the 19th century. Roughly three-quarters of Singapore’s 3.5mn citizens are ethnically Chinese, making it culturally an easy fit for the newest arrivals.

“Chinese money has always had a significant role to play in Singapore’s economy, even before Singapore became the Singapore we know today,” says Yinglan Tan, head of Insignia Ventures, a Singapore-based venture capital fund with many Chinese backers.

That appeal has grown during the pandemic. As China sealed itself off from the world, employed harsh lockdown measures and cracked down on wealth as part of a “common prosperity drive”, some in mainland China looked overseas.

As many parts of the world, particularly the west, have become more wary of Chinese investment and business, Singapore’s neutrality, stability, low taxes and low corruption makes it an obvious choice.

Investment migration consultancy Henley & Partners has had a significant spike in migration inquiries from Chinese nationals in 2022, which are up 83 per cent by end of November compared to the full year 2021. In the top two positions were Greece and Portugal, which offer “golden visas” that grant residence without having to spend time there. Singapore was in third place.

“Generally in pure investment migration programmes, such as Portugal, the vast majority of people don’t move. Singapore and China are different. A lot do want to move physically,” says Dominic Volek, head of private clients at Henley & Partners.

One of the most obvious areas where this flow of Chinese capital can be seen is in family offices, the private wealth management firms set up for rich individuals and their relatives. If they are domiciled in Singapore, family offices qualify for tax exemptions. Coupled with the city’s stability and a globally respected financial regulator, the number of funds has exploded. Approvals are taking months as the Monetary Authority of Singapore grapples with the surge.

Singapore has gone from some 50 family offices in 2018 to 700 by the end of 2021 and lawyers and wealth management advisers estimate that number reached about 1,500 by the end of 2022. IQ-EQ, an investor services firm, estimates about 40 per cent of that total are mainland Chinese.

Wang Jue, a 35-year-old from Chengdu in China, represents one of many of the Chinese entrepreneurs venturing overseas and choosing Singapore as a business base.

Wang says he shifted more assets from his Hong Kong family office to a new Singapore family office set up in 2021. The art collector and investor, who lives in China but visits Singapore frequently and owns property in the city, has more than 300 pieces from Czech artist Alphonse Mucha that he wants to set up for viewing in the metaverse.

“Singapore is a choice globally, not just Chinese,” he says over a Zoom interview, with work by US artist KAWS, Japanese painter Yayoi Kusama and a Ming dynasty antique in the background. “The politics are stable, the economy is stable and finally, it is a finance centre so capital can flow easily in and out.” Singapore has not had to confront the sort of mass street protests that were seen in Hong Kong, he says.

Many of those family offices go on to set up other types of structures such as offshore funds. The number of investment funds launched as part of a 2020 government scheme designed to lure money from rival low-tax jurisdictions has surged to 776 at the end of 2022 (from 470 at the end of 2021), according to figures from Singapore’s accounting authority. Called a Variable Capital Company (VCC), the vehicle is meant to attract those who traditionally looked to jurisdictions such as the Cayman Islands to house assets.

Caroline Lee, who advises Chinese clients with a family office in Singapore, agrees with Volek of Henley & Partners that Chinese are increasingly looking to move physically to Singapore. Opening a family office opens the door to getting a visa to live and work in Singapore, she says. “Many travel to and fro. They see Singapore as cosmopolitan. They can speak Chinese or English and it is easy to adapt.”

One of the key attractions is Singapore’s education system, seen as one of the best in the world. The vice-principal at one of the city’s large international schools says anecdotally that of the last 20 families accepted at the school half had been from China.

“Often we do not even deal with the parents. We deal with the manager and what they call the ‘communicator’ — basically a translator,” the vice-principal says, speaking anonymously because of sensitivities involved. “Often one or both parents are travelling in and out of China. They pay a fortune to buy or rent a luxury unit nearby and then the kids live with the maid, the manager and the communicator.”

This is borne out in real estate data, which show two strong years of property purchases in Singapore by mainland Chinese. According to government data, Chinese citizens bought 1,738 flats in 2021, which was 50 per cent higher than in 2019 and the most since 2012. Purchases were slightly lower, but still a historically high 1,314 units in 2022.

Private residential property rents hit a record high in 2022, surpassing the previous peak in 2013, according to Urban Redevelopment Authority data — the last time Chinese mainlanders were heavily buying Singaporean residential property.

“What our agents are telling me is that they are expecting more sales with the reopening of China,” says Christine Sun, senior vice-president of research from OrangeTee & Tie, a property research consultancy. “This past year a large portion have been luxury buyers. Once China relaxes we are expecting more buyers in even suburban areas.”

“A lot of mainland buyers that have become Singapore citizens or permanent residents are buying units in bulk,” she adds. Singaporeans and permanent residents avoid higher stamp duty fees on property purchases — the tax for foreign buyers was lifted from 20 to 30 per cent in 2021 to cool the market.

All of this together has put Singapore in an enviable position globally as an international wealth hub. A record S$448bn ($339bn) in asset management inflows was recorded in 2021, 15.7 per cent higher than the previous year, the latest data from the Monetary Authority of Singapore show. By comparison, net fund inflows in Hong Kong for asset management for 2021 was HK$1.514tn ($194bn), compared with HK$1.379tn in 2020, according to the city’s Securities and Futures Commission.

That realignment of wealth has brought tantalisingly closer the city’s long-held ambition of being a deeper and self-sustaining financial hub.

“The thing that Covid did for Singapore was that prior to the crisis it really struggled to have that community of finance professionals to the extent that it became self-sustained. Now the flow is here. The decision makers are here. Walking distance from my office I can meet lawyers, asset managers, portfolio managers, someone running a family office, someone wealthy wanting to set up a family office. Prior to the pandemic it wasn’t as deep,” says Michael Marquardt, Asia chief executive of IQ-EQ, an investor services firm that sets up family offices.

At a time of intense geopolitical rivalry between the west and China, Singapore remains open and welcoming of both.

“You can be Chinese, come here and eat Chinese and do business and have a network. If you are from New York, you can come here, eat your food, do business and have a network,” Marquardt adds.

Singapore has also stolen important conferences from under Hong Kong’s nose. SuperReturn Asia, Asia’s leading private capital conference, last year was held in Singapore for the first time and attracted large companies and investors from all over the world, including China.

“When Singapore wants something, the whole machine gets behind it. Singapore Venture Capital Association co-hosted [the event], Singapore Tourism Board provided sponsorship, the Monetary Authority of Singapore and other agencies provided content, the sovereign [investors] were supportive and spread the word,” says Shane Chesson, a founding partner of Singapore’s Openspace Ventures who was involved in moving the conference location.

“They’ve played a blinder but they also move quickly and don’t squander the opportunity,” he adds.

Still, many in Singapore hesitate to say the shift is permanent. If rich Chinese feel that the current level of repression is lessening, that could reduce the number of people seeking an exit. But even more worrying, say experts, is the potential for Beijing to look at Singapore’s welcome to China’s wealthy and their accompanying flows of capital and seeing it as an opportunity to extend its influence.

“You run the risk of China being covetous of Singapore as a Chinese outpost. The more Sinicised and mainland it becomes, the more it could be seen as a part of greater China,” says Thompson. “It is an existential risk.”

The other issue Singapore’s ruling party is grappling with is the impact on the city’s carefully managed societal mix. The government for instance sets ethnic quotas in public housing — where about 80 per cent of Singaporeans live — as a way of trying to ensure racial and religious harmony.

Cracks are emerging. The conversations among wealthy — and aspiring wealthy — Singaporeans and other parts of its establishment regularly turn to complaints about the new Chinese nationals building “enclaves” or “mini Chinatowns” in certain neighbourhoods.

But the clearest indication of unhappiness among the local population is the cost of living, and especially rising rents. According to data from the URA, rents for private homes surged 8.6 per cent in the third quarter, which was the steepest growth since 2007. Rents for private apartments, dominated by foreigners and expats, and government-subsidised housing, where most citizens live, are soaring.

“The government was quite happy for people to blame Hong Kong expats. But it has become pretty clear that while that was a contributing factor, the real reason for the eye-popping prices has been the Chinese buyers, many of whom are willing to pay double the asking rent, or pay millions in cash for properties that sit empty,” says one real estate agent.

There is a concern that at some point the Singapore authorities will face ever louder complaints from the middle class, and, potentially, from the thousands of foreign professionals living and working there. If the quality of life changes, a lot of that wealthy capital might move on, experts warn.

In this respect, Hong Kong’s swift transformation under a new national security law and its loss of business and people due to Covid restrictions offers a cautionary tale for Singapore on how quickly a city’s fortunes can change.

Singapore, sums up Simon Tay, chair of the Singapore Institute of International Affairs, is in a sweet spot as globalisation slows.

“In a world where China is looking for friends, it gets a warm reception in Singapore. At the same time, Wall Street and US companies increasingly see us as a premium alternative to other hubs,” he says.

“There is much to navigate and all depends on not having to make a choice [between the west and China], because that would force Singapore to destroy value. Cold wars are all about value destruction.”



Ratan Tata, who was one of India’s best known businesspeople and led his family conglomerate on a bold international expansion, has died aged 86.

An industrialist from an influential Zoroastrian Parsee clan, Tata wanted his family’s storied corporate group to wield clout beyond the nation it helped to build — but found its execution did not always match his grand vision.

Born in Mumbai (then Bombay) in 1937, Tata’s life spanned a period of enormous change for India — from winning independence from Britain in 1947 to becoming the world’s fifth-largest economy in 2022.

Tata was “an uncommon leader whose immeasurable contributions have shaped not only the Tata Group but also the very fabric of our nation”, said Natarajan Chandrasekaran, current chair of the group holding company, in a statement.

Attending prestigious prep schools in Mumbai and graduating from New York state’s Cornell University in architecture studies, Tata first worked in Los Angeles, where he said he “fell in love and almost got married”.

But the relationship disintegrated after he returned to Mumbai to spend time with his ailing grandmother — a stabilising presence in his childhood after his parents’ divorce — and the 1962 war between India and China deterred his would-be partner from joining him.

Tata worked on the steel shop floor of the family business, which was founded by his great-grandfather in 1868, before moving into management. In 1991, he took over as chair from his uncle, JRD Tata. His accession coincided with India’s economic opening to the world, and under his leadership the group ventured abroad.

It began by buying British tea maker Tetley Tea in 2000. By 2007, Tata had completed a takeover of Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus, which eventually cost $13bn and left it owning a clutch of UK factories. The timing, just before the global financial crisis, was disastrous. Tata later said the UK plants were “underinvested and overmanned”.

The group announced it wanted to divest in 2016 and this September closed its blast furnaces at the UK’s biggest steelworks in Port Talbot. Under a deal with the UK government, it plans to develop greener forms of steelmaking at the plant.

In March 2008, Tata bought British carmaker Jaguar Land Rover from Ford for $2.3bn. In just two years, the Indian group founded under British colonial rule had become the UK’s biggest manufacturing employer. Critics who decried the deal as value-destructive were briefly silenced when JLR contributed strongly to Tata Motors profits three years later, but JLR has since had a chequered record.

Tata’s pet projects included the Tata Nano, an ultra-cheap car marketed at Rs100,000, then worth $2,600, to help bring millions more middle-class Indians to the automotive market. But sales of the Nano were dismal and Tata Motors took years to recover from its costly failure. “I’m very depressed,” Tata said of the Nano’s flop.

More recently, as group chair emeritus, Tata enthusiastically supported the reacquisition of national carrier Air India, which was founded by JRD Tata but nationalised in 1953, in a deal that valued the struggling airline at $2.4bn. In a tweet welcoming Air India back into the family fold, Tata said his uncle “would have been overjoyed”.

Tata had cultivated a reputation for straight-dealing, and despite an enthusiasm for private aircraft and flashy sports cars, presented a modest lifestyle relative to the ostentatious spending of fellow Indian tycoons. He was revered in Mumbai as India Inc’s elder statesman, and praised for his humility.

In 2014, Britain awarded Tata an honorary knighthood for his contribution to relations with India, investment in the UK and philanthropy. But his genteel personal brand was damaged by a bitter dispute with Cyrus Mistry, his successor as group chair.

Mistry was a fellow member of the tight-knit business community of Parsees — descendants of Persian Zoroastrians who migrated to the subcontinent between the eighth and 10th centuries. He was abruptly ousted in a boardroom coup in 2016.

Mistry accused Tata of a catalogue of governance failures including having abused his position as chair of the Tata Trusts, a philanthropic trust that owns the majority stake in Tata Group holding company Tata Sons. Mistry claimed Tata had interfered in the running of Tata Sons, an allegation he denied.

In a drawn-out legal and media battle that sullied the group’s reputation, the family patriarch was ultimately the winner, vindicated by a Supreme Court ruling in 2021. Bad blood remained between the conjoined houses of Tata and Mistry — the latter still owns 18 per cent of Tata Sons — and Ratan Tata did not offer any public condolence when Mistry died in a car accident in 2022, aged 54.

An animal lover who famously ordered that stray dogs be allowed to lounge in the lobby of the Tata headquarters in Mumbai, Tata never married and had no children.

“If I had a family, I could not have spent as much of my time involved with the group. And, things would be very different, in terms of eating, sleeping, living for your job,” he told the FT just before his 2012 retirement as group chair.

While the overseas expansion he led was at times messy, it created what is now one of India’s most outward-looking and modern corporate forces.

Chandrasekaran, the group’s current chair and the first not related to the founder by family or marriage, has said he had to “stop the bleeding” at its debt-laden companies. But Tata is now at the forefront of business in India across a range of sectors from electric vehicles to renewable energy.

Mukesh Ambani, head of the rival conglomerate Reliance Industries, said Tata’s death was “a big loss, not just to the Tata Group, but to every Indian”. “Ratan Tata was a visionary industrialist and a philanthropist, who always strove for society’s greater good,” Ambani said.

“I would hope that people would say that I was able to lead the group with dignity and that I tried to do the right thing,” Tata said in 2012 of his legacy. “You never succeed, having that said, because you always have upset somebody or another, but I think that’s what I would like to be remembered for.”



India’s finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman has denounced the EU’s planned carbon tax on imports as an arbitrary “trade barrier” that will hurt the world’s fastest-growing large economy and other industrialising nations.

Sitharaman said the EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM), under which tariffs are to be levied from 2026, would impede developing countries’ transition away from fossil fuels by making the change harder to fund.

“They are unilateral and are not helpful,” Sitharaman told the Financial Times’ Energy Transition Summit India in New Delhi. “Absolutely, it is a trade barrier.”

“You are being stifled by steps which are not going to facilitate the green transition,” she added.

The CBAM is intended to penalise embedded carbon emissions from the production of goods imported to the EU such as cement, fertilisers, iron and steel, and chemicals. The tax, which was approved last year, has triggered alarm among India’s fast-growing heavy industries, which fear it could wipe out one of their biggest markets.

A report by the New Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment estimated the CBAM would result in an additional 25 per cent tax on carbon-intensive goods exported from India to the EU, a burden that at 2022-23 levels would be equivalent to 0.05 per cent of the country’s GDP.

India relies on coal for more than half of its electricity generation and to directly power much of its production of goods, such as steel.

New Delhi has also been riled by a controversial EU anti-deforestation law that will block foreign companies from exporting to the bloc if their products are deemed to have contributed to forest loss.

After widespread international criticism of the deforestation law, which was meant to enter into force in December, Brussels last week proposed a one-year delay to its implementation.

Sitharaman said India was on track to be a net zero carbon emitter by 2070, barring “unilateral” external challenges, such as the EU carbon tariff and deforestation initiatives.

“That is another one of those steps which can hurt countries like India,” she said of the deforestation rules. “You will have major disruptions in the supply chain, that’s not going to help countries spending a lot on transition costs.”

Under the CBAM, exporters to the EU must register the emissions produced in creating their products, with charges kicking in from 2026. The EU is confident the measure would survive a possible challenge at the World Trade Organization because it applies to domestic producers as well as imports.

Sitharaman said India had raised concerns with the EU “several times” and would do so again, but that she did not expect the issue to affect ongoing free trade negotiations with the bloc.

“I’m sure it won’t be escalated to the level of hurting the talks,” the finance minister added. “But our concerns will definitely be voiced.”

Ignacio Garcia Bercero, non-resident fellow at the Breugel think-tank in Brussels, said the EU measures were being taken to meet the global challenge of climate change and damage to nature, not for protectionist reasons.

“We are not going to meet internationally agreed global goals to stop deforestation unless importing countries contribute. Europe does not produce most of these commodities so it is not protectionist,” he said.

On CBAM, Bercero said the EU’s heavy industry was paying more for emissions and without the tariff would simply be forced out of business by cheaper imports from countries without a carbon tax.

Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the WTO director-general, told the FT last month that global carbon pricing was necessary, but that poorer countries should pay less.



In the 1990s, when India was pursuing economic reforms, testing nuclear weapons and raising its profile internationally, its defence establishment began work on a homegrown military jet engine: the Kaveri, named after a river in the country’s south.

For a nation where self-reliance in industry is a mantra of both Narendra Modi’s government and those that preceded it, the ability to develop and build such powerful technology on its own soil — referred to in India as an “indigenous” product — is one of its biggest dreams.

But producing advanced fighter jet engines is a complex process and the knowledge to make them requires real-world experience built up over decades. Only five countries — notably the current permanent members of the UN Security Council — know how to build them: the US, UK, France, Russia and China. Beijing, however, is just moving from a reliance on imported equipment from Russia and only recently test flew a fighter jet with a supposedly homegrown engine.

India was eager to join the elite club. But despite years of research, prototyping and testing, the Kaveri flopped. India had failed to produce an engine with sufficient thrust to power its current generation of Tejas light combat aircraft. Instead, it plans to use a version of the Kaveri in future unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones.

Yet India’s mission to build an “indigenous” military jet engine is back on. What it learned from its work on the Kaveri, not least its mistakes, may yet bear fruit. According to Indian defence industry officials, foreign diplomats and analysts, the world’s fifth-biggest economy is in an advanced stage of deliberations on producing its first world-class “Made in India” jet engine, working with a western partner that is yet to be decided.

While the foreign partner would bring its technological experience, the engine would be wholly developed and built in India — making it the first truly “indigenous” product of its kind. Once complete, the engine would be fitted into India’s new suite of fifth-generation advanced fighter aircraft due to be airborne by the mid-2030s.

A behind-the-scenes battle is now heating up, involving lobbying, horse-trading, and pledges about future ownership of intellectual property, to become the aerospace partner of choice for the world’s most populous country.

Jostling for the lucrative contract to help India fulfil its ambitions are three key players: General Electric of the US, the UK’s Rolls-Royce, and French group Safran. France and the US are already India’s second and third-biggest defence suppliers after Russia, whose aircraft and other military equipment India is diversifying away from.

Which partner New Delhi chooses would be freighted with geopolitical implications. It comes at a time when India’s international ambitions are rising, its military rivalry with China is deepening, its relationship with the US is expanding and the Modi government is aspiring to join the world’s top tables, including the UN Security Council.

On the table for the three companies — and the governments backing them — is a decades-long partnership across both defence and civil industries with a fast-growing economy, one that will depend on imported knowhow and kit for years to come.

“Part of the attraction is simply one of scale,” says Douglas Barrie, senior fellow for military aerospace at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. “India will over time require considerable numbers of aircraft as the air force looks to recapitalise combat aircraft fleets.”

India, says Philippe Errera, executive vice-president of international and public affairs at Safran, is “hugely important” for the group, “based on the present and looking into the future”.

“This goes beyond military jet engines, to include defence more broadly but also commercial engines,” he adds.

Last year, India managed to land an uncrewed spacecraft near the Moon’s south pole. But despite years of trying, it has yet to develop a viable, advanced military jet engine.

Developing an engine large and powerful enough for a civil jet is already extremely complex, analysts say. It relies on knowledge built up over decades, including which materials to use and why and on how to integrate the different parts.

A military jet engine that is capable of delivering world-class performance on a consistent basis brings with it an extra set of challenges, given the higher speeds and tolerances involved. This helps explain why more countries have nuclear weapons capability than the technology needed to keep a fighter jet in the air.

While large civil engines need to maximise fuel efficiency, military jet engines are about the amount of power an engine can produce in relation to weight of the aircraft, analysts say. “No other form of power apart from nuclear comes close to the level of power density you get in a gas turbine,” says one industry expert, who asked not be named because of the sensitivities around discussing large military deals.

Civil airliners fly predictable route patterns and spend much of their time at cruising altitude; military jets have to fly at much higher speeds and with the ability to accelerate quickly. This means, for example, that the bearings in the gas turbine have to be developed to withstand greater tolerances. The engines also use afterburners, which provide a short burst of increased thrust by igniting additional fuel in its exhaust stream.

Complicating things further, most fifth-generation fighters — like the one being mooted by India — will have their engines embedded within the aircraft frame to minimise their radar and infrared signatures to help avoid detection. All these complexities extend the development and certification programme for military engines.

“India has a technology bottleneck which it has to pass through with gas turbines,” says Prasobh Narayanan, a senior aviation analyst at Janes in Bengaluru. “It is not able to crack that bottleneck on its own, and needs help.”

India’s efforts to develop the Kaveri in the 1990s came at a time of acute strategic challenges, after the Soviet Union — its biggest military supplier — collapsed. New Delhi was also at loggerheads with Washington over its nuclear weapons programme, and began developing military ties with alternative suppliers such as France.

The situation today is far different. India has reconciled with the US and over the past two years the two nations have expanded co-operation in defence and technology. This partially reflects a shift in India’s threat perception; it now sees China, and not its neighbour and long-standing foe Pakistan, as the bigger danger.

Since Modi took power in 2014, he has stepped up efforts to bring foreign defence groups to India and promote more “indigenous” production in defence, urging private groups such as Tata, Adani and Mahindra to begin making defence products ranging from personnel carriers to drones.

However, the entry of these Indian conglomerates to the defence market over the past decade have failed to make up for the failings of its state-owned groups, led by Hindustan Aeronautics (HAL), India’s biggest aerospace producer. India’s Defence Research and Development Organisation and HAL are set to be the Indian partner in developing the new jet engine. HAL and India’s ministry of defence did not respond to requests for comment.

India abandoned plans for a “Make in India” project to produce French Rafale jets locally, opting instead to buy 36 imported jets in 2016. Today India also remains its biggest defence importer — not a point of pride for a country that aspires to boost its own industrial exports and create desperately needed jobs. China is going to be “increasingly active in the combat aircraft export market and with its own rather than Russian-sourced engines”, says Barrie of the IISS. But he believes Beijing is unlikely to compete in traditional western markets.

The world’s large aero-engine makers have been active in India for decades, forging partnerships with domestic contractors and setting up local manufacturing. Engines by Rolls-Royce powered the first flight of the Indian Air Force in 1933, while Safran is the leading supplier of turbine engines for the country’s military helicopters.

After the Kaveri engine failed to meet performance criteria, HAL turned to GE engines, and uses the US producer’s F404 models in its first-generation Mk1 fighters.

During Modi’s state visit to Washington last year, GE announced it was ready to supply India with its newer F414 engines for the forthcoming Tejas Mk2. The agreement includes the potential joint production of the F414 engines in India.

GE signalled at the time that it believed that this positioned it well for future work. The US company said it would continue to “collaborate with the Indian government” on the engine programme for the more advanced fighter.

India’s commitment to building its own military jet engine is backed by significant funding. In March, its Cabinet Committee on Security approved funding worth $1.8bn for the manufacturing, testing and certifying of five prototypes for the Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft programme over the next five years.

Indian officials have spoken of inducting the planned jet into the Indian Air Force by the early to mid-2030s, leading to speculation among defence analysts in the country that it will soon decide who its partner on the “indigenous” jet engine will be.

Rolls-Royce and Safran each insist that they are ready to work with HAL, the state-owned aerospace firm, to co-develop a bespoke engine that would entail a full transfer of intellectual property to India, including the right to include it in future exports.

Britain’s Rolls-Royce has emphasised its long history in India, which stretches back more than 90 years and involves multiple partnerships across its divisions.

“What we are talking about is a gear change,” says Alex Zino, director of future programmes for Rolls-Royce’s defence division. “Now is the time to co-create that IP and that capability in-country, so that it is owned in-country.”

India, Zino says, would have the freedom to operate, upgrade or modify the co-developed engine, should they partner. Rolls-Royce has been working on its proposal “through and with the UK government”, he confirms.

Safran, too, is promising India similar freedoms to own any engine technology it and HAL co-develop. The French company’s proposal would give India “strategic independence in terms of empowering the country to design, develop and produce state of the art military jet engines domestically and export them”, says Errera, the Safran executive.

GE’s offer, by contrast, would withhold a small portion of the IP on any future co-developed jet engine, according to two people familiar with its plans. “Some things the US, from a national security perspective, might want to retain,” says one of the people. GE declined to comment.

Some US officials remain wary of India’s continued close relationship with Russia, analysts say, meaning Washington and GE might be less willing to part ways with coveted technology in its entirety. Although India and the US are co-operating more closely than ever, including on defence, New Delhi retains ties and trading relationships with not only Moscow but other governments, such as Tehran, that are inimical to Washington.

Working in GE’s favour, however, is geopolitics and India’s deepening relationship with the US — part of a joint strategy to build an “Indo-Pacific” bulwark against China. India is already deploying multiple US defence platforms, including helicopters, howitzers, and mobility aircraft, and is in the process of agreeing a major contract for long-endurance UAVs with General Atomics.

“I think the American offer is the most serious one,” says Amit Cowshish, a retired senior civil servant formerly active in India’s defence ministry. “The Americans could possibly be pushing harder with the kind of clout they have, which is much more than that of any other country.”

France has made an appeal based on its own burgeoning relationship with New Delhi. Safran employs just under 3,000 people in India — a number it says will grow as it expands its operations there. The French group, in which the government holds an 11 per cent share, plans to open a maintenance facility in the aerospace and tech hub of Hyderabad, a city in southern India’s Telangana state, next year. The site will support the Leap engines Safran makes through its CFM International, a joint venture with GE Aerospace, and which power the majority of the Airbus A320 family of commercial jets.

“We have stood by your side through thick and thin,” Safran’s chair Ross McInnes assured an audience at India’s Defence Conclave earlier this month. “The same cannot be said of your other western partners,” he added, noting that France was the only western country that stood with India after the uproar over its nuclear tests in 1998.

Errera echoes the point, saying there is “more predictability and more stability in the relationship” with France than with its rivals. And unlike the US, where Congress needs to sign off on big defence deals, the French government could green light any future co-operation.

India’s government and HAL have given no indication of when they will issue the first “request for information” to potential engine partners.

Although India’s state-dominated defence establishment tends to move slowly, and with limited transparency, analysts and officials say New Delhi will need to quicken its pace if it wants to keep up on defence.

“If they don’t make the decision, soon they will be missing the deadline” for a decision on their engine programme, says Raji Pillai, resident senior fellow with the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, a Canberra-based think-tank. “India’s fighter jet numbers are depleting pretty fast.”



The head of KPMG US says the industry urgently needs to make it easier to become an accountant, and the EU is suing Hungary’s government over a new security law it says is in breach of citizens’ fundamental rights. Plus, India races to extract as much oil as possible while there remains a market for crude.

Mentioned in this podcast:

KPMG US head says the industry urgently needs to make it easier to become an accountant

India in rush to boost oil production before energy transition

EU sues Hungary over new security law

The FT News Briefing is produced by Niamh Rowe, Fiona Symon, Sonja Hutson, Kasia Broussalian and Marc Filippino. Additional help from Michela Tindera, Breen Turner, Sam Giovinco, Peter Barber, Michael Lello, David da Silva and Gavin Kallmann. Our engineer is Joseph Salcedo. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. The show’s theme song is by Metaphor Music.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



India will radically reform regulations and invite foreign oil majors to explore both onshore and offshore as it races to extract as much oil as possible while there remains a market for crude, the country’s oil and gas minister has said.

“I was with Exxon yesterday. I was with BP a few days earlier. I have had meetings with Chevron [ . . .] I went to Brazil and had a discussion with Petrobras,” Hardeep Singh Puri told the Financial Times’ Energy Transition Summit India in Delhi.

“I said you come, join Oil India prospecting off the Andaman waters. Don’t make any investment, just come in. We will incentivise them. And if you strike oil and you are a partner, you will have first right of refusal,” Puri added.

The minister said India had “several” oilfields the size of ExxonMobil’s 11bn barrel discovery in Guyana waiting to be found and that the country needed to move quickly to tap them before the world switched to other forms of energy in order to hit net zero climate targets.

“At the end of the day it’s a race,” he said. “If it remains there unexploited, when the [energy] transition becomes total, there is a philosophical debate on that. I keep telling Guyana, you got a big find, but by the time the oil starts coming into the market, the transition already would be in a pretty advanced stage.”

The Indian minister’s remarks appear to signal that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government intends to make up for lost time in offshore oil exploration and production, where some investment has been deterred by fluctuating regulations and persistent red tape.

Estimates of India’s potential oil wealth differ hugely. S&P Global Commodity Insights believes there may be as much as 22bn barrels of oil in unexplored basins. Rystad, an energy consultancy, puts the figure at just under 8bn.

Meanwhile, analysts at the International Energy Agency are pessimistic about the chances of a significant increase in the country’s 700,000 barrels per day of production.

“In part, the absence of international companies may be due to lacklustre discoveries since the turn of the century,” they wrote, in their annual Indian Oil Market outlook. Over the past 23 years, 2bn barrels of oil have been discovered in India, compared with 10bn in each of Angola, Norway and Guyana and 40bn in Brazil.

“Against the backdrop of capital discipline, major players may be waiting on the sidelines for a world-class find before establishing operations in the country,” they added.

Puri, who promised in July more than $100bn of investment opportunities in the sector by 2030, is trying to reduce India’s overwhelming dependence on imported oil.

“We just took our eye off the ball. There was neglect,” he said. Only 10 per cent of India’s potentially oil-producing basins were being explored, while the country imported 85 per cent to 88 per cent of its oil and spent $150bn a year on foreign energy resources, Puri said.

To trigger more oil exploration, he said he would radically change India’s legal framework. “We sat down with the majors and said: ‘Look, guys, tell us which are the areas where you want tweaking in policy?’ In the next session [of parliament], which will be fully next month, I will get that bill passed and it will be enacted into law,” he said.

The proposed legislation reforms regulation of oilfield development to protect companies against sudden windfall taxes and gives them the right to arbitrate any disputes outside India, among other changes.

Puri said India had also opened more than a million square kilometres that were previously “no-go areas” because of military or other restrictions, and had put “all the data which people require” on a repository at the University of Texas in Houston.

BP, Reliance and Vedanta were among the companies that submitted bids this year in India’s ninth licensing round, for nine onshore blocks, eight shallow-water blocks and 11 ultra-deepwater blocks. Puri said 38 per cent of the bids were for areas that were previously restricted.

Foreign oil companies are hoping India’s status as one of the world’s fastest-growing big economies will underpin future demand for crude. “India is growing and looks very, very healthy,” said Darren Woods, chief executive of ExxonMobil, at the company’s last results call.

“India is where the real growth is going to come, so it has an underlying advantage,” said Puri. He promised that a 10th auction round for licences would swiftly follow once parliament has passed his legislation.



India has unveiled a $760mn bailout for the Maldives after the cash-strapped Indian Ocean archipelago turned to New Delhi to stave off a sovereign default despite attempts by its president to tilt towards China.

India’s central bank said on Monday it had agreed currency swap lines of $400mn and Rs30bn ($357mn) to the Maldives, a move that cements New Delhi’s central role in supporting its economy.

The swaps were announced during a meeting in New Delhi between Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Mohamed Muizzu, who was elected Maldivian president last year on an “India Out” platform.

Muizzu’s campaign capitalised on resentment in the Maldives, a Muslim-majority country of just over half a million people, towards their huge northern neighbour. But in written remarks issued through his office ahead of his arrival in India, Muizzu described India as “our closest neighbour, with whom we share deep historical, cultural and economic ties”.

“India’s proximity and long-standing support have been pivotal in the Maldives’ development and stability,” he added.

The Maldives’ net or usable foreign exchange reserves fell to about $36mn in September, the country’s monetary authority said on Monday, underscoring the depth of a crisis facing the dollar-pegged rufiyaa currency.

The swaps would be “instrumental in tackling the ongoing financial challenges faced by the Maldives”, Modi’s office said after his meeting with Muizzu.

India has already rolled over $100mn of short-term dollar loans to the Maldives this year, allowing the country to make an interest payment this month on a $500mn Islamic sukuk that comes due next year.

Investors had worried that the Maldives would be the first country to default on a sukuk, a form of debt that follows Islamic strictures against interest.

Muizzu this year told India to withdraw its small military contingent from the islands, a force that mostly helped in medical evacuations and maritime surveillance.

Muizzu also alarmed India by paying one of his first foreign visits as president to China — New Delhi’s biggest regional rival. However, the Maldives and India have since reconciled and civilian personnel have replaced the soldiers.

Muizzu said the Maldives had also “cultivated a robust relationship with China”, which he described as “one of our top development partners”, including through projects under Beijing’s flagship global infrastructure programme, the Belt and Road Initiative.

Last month the state-owned State Bank of India agreed to lend $50mn to the Maldives, days before it faced a roughly $25mn coupon payment on the sukuk.

“Given its ambitions of being a net security provider in the Indian Ocean, India has no way of turning away the Maldives,” said Indrani Bagchi, chief executive of the Ananta Centre, a New Delhi-based think-tank.

“There has also been a better realisation of the actual role India plays inside the Maldives, including a fairly large humanitarian role — something which cannot be replicated by any other power,” Bagchi said.

The Maldives’ foreign exchange reserves fell to critically low levels after its tourism economy was battered by Covid-19 travel restrictions and debt ballooned because of high spending on infrastructure projects and imports.

The country’s sukuk maturing in 2026 plummeted to trade at 70 cents on the dollar last month over investor fears of a sovereign default. They rose 0.4 per cent to 80 cents on the dollar following Monday’s bailout news.

Wary of Chinese influence in its backyard, India has sought to assist regional neighbours suffering economic difficulties. In 2022, New Delhi provided nearly $4bn in loans and grants for supplies of fuel, medicine and other food to Sri Lanka after it suffered a crippling liquidity crisis.



The restive Indian-controlled territory of Jammu and Kashmir is poised for the results of its first regional election since being stripped of autonomy by Narendra Modi in 2019, a contest being closely watched for signs of the future direction of one of Asia’s most intractable conflicts.

Voting closed on October 1 in the Himalayan territory, which is part of a region also claimed and partially controlled by Pakistan and a perennial flashpoint between the nuclear-armed neighbours. The votes will be counted and results announced on Tuesday.

Wrapping up a peaceful election would represent a public relations coup for India’s governing Bharatiya Janata party, which says it has brought peace to Jammu and Kashmir since downgrading what was India’s only Muslim-majority state to a union territory under direct federal rule.

“The peaceful and participative elections are historic wherein democracy is taking root . . . driven by the will of the people of Jammu and Kashmir,” said Rajiv Kumar, India’s chief election commissioner, as voting closed.

Modi’s government five years ago revoked a constitutional article that guaranteed significant regional autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir.

Unlike past regional elections, which were subject to boycott campaigns by Kashmiri separatists, this vote was marked by vigorous campaigning and strong participation by large national parties, smaller regional rivals and independent candidates.

To ensure order during voting, which was carried out in phases beginning last month, paramilitaries in security vehicles mounted with guns patrolled towns that have previously been hotbeds of Kashmiri separatist militancy.

Opposition politicians have accused New Delhi of ruling the disputed region by fear and oppression. After downgrading the state, the government blocked the internet there for months and carried out mass arrests of separatists, activists and others.

“The BJP’s jackboot policy has created fear,” said Tariq Hameed Karra, Jammu and Kashmir president of the Indian National Congress, India’s biggest opposition party. “There’s anger in every part of the state over the legal, constitutional, cultural, religious and economic oppression of the people.”

People were “not allowed to air their grievances”, he said.

Iltija Mufti, a candidate for the regional People’s Democratic party, which wants restoration of statehood and autonomy, said the Modi government had “disempowered and dispossessed” people in the territory.

While deadly encounters between Indian security forces and insurgents remain common, the number of people killed has fallen, according to security analysts.

They said this was in part because Pakistan, which backs Kashmiri separatism, had in the past few years been focused more on Afghanistan and on its own economic problems, according to Ajai Sahni, executive director of the Institute for Conflict Management in New Delhi.

“There is a very sustained downward trend in fatalities because of improvements in Indian security force capabilities and a weakening of the economy and security force capacity in Pakistan,” Sahni said.

According to the institute’s South Asian Terrorism Portal, 134 fatalities among Indian security forces, insurgents and civilians were reported in the region in 2023, down from an average of well over 1,000 per year at the height of the conflict from 1990-2006.

In Sopore, a town in lush northern Kashmir, farm workers took time off from the harvest season to queue early at a polling station surrounded by willow trees used to make cricket bats.

Mohammad Ramzan Ganai, 78, a supporter of Kashmir’s oldest party, the National Conference, said people wanted elected representatives who would defend their basic interests, including seeking the restoration of the territory’s statehood and autonomy. “This vote is different because we want our basic rights back,” Ganai said.

While the election will allow some transfer of power to a 90-seat regional assembly, Jammu and Kashmir’s status as a union territory means New Delhi will have much more direct control than it does in Indian states.

Bringing Kashmir under the same regime as India’s other states has long been a pet project for the BJP. But while Modi has voiced support for restoring statehood, the party has dismissed any suggestion it could give Jammu and Kashmir back substantial autonomy and the special rights previously granted to people defined as permanent residents.

Analysts said New Delhi’s direct rule by handpicked bureaucrats had left a gap in public representation. “People feel a disconnect with governance,” said Nisar Ali, an economist on a central government data committee. “Their motivation is to elect local representatives so that they can access government services through them.”

Intense development of roads and other infrastructure over the past five years has converted swaths of the picturesque mountainous territory into construction sites. But residents complain of high electricity tariffs, drinking water shortages and high unemployment under the current administration, which has had only limited results from its efforts to promote business and inward investment.

A parliamentary committee said in a report last year that about 1.35mn people in the territory — about 8 per cent of the population — were addicted to drugs.

The Jammu and Kashmir election, along with several state ballots across India in coming months, will test popular support for the Hindu nationalist BJP after it lost its majority in the national parliament in June.

The BJP won two seats in Jammu and Kashmir in June, with National Conference also taking two and an independent winning one.

Exit polls — while not always accurate, as June’s parliamentary elections proved — suggested no party or grouping was expected to win a majority in the regional vote. Abhijeet Jasrotia, a local BJP spokesperson, said the party would win “30-plus” of the 43 seats in Hindu-dominated Jammu, and two or three of 47 in Muslim-majority Kashmir.

“We will definitely emerge as the largest grouping, and I hope we are not too far from the halfway mark,” said Omar Abdullah, vice-president of National Conference, which ran a joint campaign with Congress.

Analysts said lasting peace and stability for Jammu and Kashmir would require more than democratic elections. India also needed to improve relations with Pakistan, according to Ali. “We cannot think of the future of Jammu and Kashmir in isolation,” he said.



Danone plans to expand in India as the French consumer goods group attempts to catch up with entrenched competition in the world’s fastest growing large economy.

The company’s presence in India, where it sells milk-powder protein and baby formula, is “nowhere near where it should be”, chief executive Antoine de Saint-Affrique told the Financial Times.

Danone, which also holds a minority stake in small Indian yoghurt making start-up Epigamia, is reassessing its India strategy. Investors are attracted to country’s large market, it is the world’s most populous nation with 1.4bn people, and manufacturing potential at a time when economic activity is faltering in China.

The French company has fallen behind global rivals Unilever and Nestlé in India’s fast-moving consumer goods industry, where revenues are estimated by a government promotion agency to hit $616bn by 2027.

De Saint-Affrique, who has led Danone since 2021, has been charged with turning around lagging performance following a period of boardroom turmoil that resulted in the ousting of his predecessor Emmanuel Faber.

Since then, Danone has sought to reverse falling sales volumes and under-investment. The company’s second-quarter sales volumes this year climbed 2.9 per cent on an annual basis, beating expectations.

“If you look at the top-three countries of Danone, it’s [the] US, China, France,” said de Saint-Affrique, speaking in the north Indian city of Chandigarh. He added that it was the company’s “ambition” for India to rank among the top five.

De Saint-Affrique, who was visiting India to announce a four-year €20mn investment to expand Danone’s existing plant in Punjab, warned that if companies do not scale in India over the next decade “you will be less relevant as a global player”.

The maker of Activia yoghurt and Evian bottled water has struggled to make inroads in India, the world’s biggest producer of dairy products, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Harit Kapoor, lead consumer analyst at Investec India, described Danone’s history in the country as “stop-start” and said its current market share was “tiny”.

Danone’s 13-year partnership with Indian biscuit giant Britannia Industries, which is owned by the billionaire Wadia family, ended in 2009 following an acrimonious branding dispute. In 2018, the French company stopped producing fresh dairy and UHT products — sterilised, long-life goods that do not need refrigeration — in India.

“[Danone’s] brands are not highly penetrated, they are very, very small,” said Sachin Bobade, analyst at Mumbai-based Dolat Capital. “I’ve not seen their products frequently.”

Bobade said that India’s dairy market is not easy to penetrate. Dairy co-operatives, such as Amul brand owner Gujarat Milk Marketing Federation, control a 60 per cent share of Indian dairy product sales, according to estimates by Investec.

“Organically creating size in the Indian market is extremely hard,” said Investec’s Kapoor.

Danone is an “exceptionally late entrant”, he said. “The only way to build up quick scale, especially in say water or dairy, is to acquire.”

De Saint-Affrique said that Danone had a later start in the country compared with rivals, including his former employer Unilever, which has been operating in India for decades. “We are only at the start of our growth journey in India,” he said.

The chief executive did not rule out Indian acquisitions, but added: “There’s plenty of things that we can do organically.”

Danone’s experience in China and Indonesia, the company’s two biggest markets in Asia, gives the company “a good blueprint on what we could do in India”, de Saint-Affrique added.

China, North Asia and Oceania is Danone’s fastest-growing region, registering 8.4 per cent annual like-for-like sales growth in the second quarter. The company does not provide country specific data for India.

India is “of high interest to us”, said de Saint-Affrique. Last year, Danone appointed former Hindustan Unilever chair Sanjiv Mehta to its board as an independent director in a move to bolster its expertise of the region.

“I’ll be back probably in the next six months,” de Saint-Affrique said. “The market matters to us.”



Indian companies are moving to fill the gap left by the exclusion of Chinese exports from the fast-growing US solar industry, as Washington steps up its crackdown on manufacturers with ties to Beijing.

Sumant Sinha, chief executive of ReNew, among India’s largest renewables companies, told the Financial Times that there “will be demand” for solar components from India as Washington reduces reliance on Chinese supplies for its energy transition.

“​​There is a need for some diversification, and India can actually become that plus one to China as far as the green tech supply chain is concerned,” Sinha said.

He added that ReNew was considering exporting to the US from its solar factories in India pending US tariff rules. “[India] will fill the gap.”

Washington is weighing additional tariffs on solar imports to protect the domestic industry after a flood of Chinese-produced panels drove global prices to record lows.

Last week, the Department of Commerce released preliminary estimates of duties as high as 293 per cent for solar cell exporters in four countries in south-east Asia, where the US sources the bulk of its solar supplies, often from Chinese companies.

The looming decision has driven developers and manufacturers to look beyond the region to markets not subject to tariffs. Wood Mackenzie expects cell manufacturing in countries outside of the main hubs of China and south-east Asia to more than double over the next couple of years, with India making up 40 per cent of new capacity.

“There’s no modular manufacturer in India who is not thinking of exporting,” said Subrahmanyam Pulipaka, chief executive of the National Solar Energy Federation of India, a lobbying group that counts big developers such as Adani Group, Tata Power and ReNew among its members.

US imports of Indian panels and cells surpassed $1.8bn last year, up from about $250mn the year before, according to BloombergNEF.

Indian manufacturers are also investing in US factories following President Joe Biden’s landmark Inflation Reduction Act, which included lucrative subsidies for domestic producers, with Waaree and VSK Energy announcing manufacturing commitments worth at least $1bn each last year.

“The main advantage is that they’re not Chinese,” said Martin Pochtaruk, chief executive of Heliene, which operates a solar panel factory in Minnesota.

The company used to source its cells from Vietnam and Malaysia, but now purchases primarily from India to insulate itself from new tariffs. In July, Heliene announced a $150mn joint venture with Premier Energies, India’s second-largest solar cell manufacturer, to build a US factory.

The Biden administration has raised protections against solar imports with ties to Beijing, doubling the duty rate for Chinese cells, applying anti-circumvention tariffs on Chinese companies in south-east Asia, and banning goods linked to forced labour in Xinjiang. The White House also maintained Trump-era tariffs that applied to solar products from most countries.

Despite the efforts, US imports of panels sit at record highs. Several manufacturers, including VSK Energy, have delayed or scrapped their US manufacturing plans despite the availability of federal tax credits.

“Tariffs haven’t worked,” said Pol Lezcano, a senior analyst at BloombergNEF.

“Manufacturers don’t come to the US. They don’t really find the right business and supply chain environment that they need to scale up manufacturing.”

Rapidly declining prices for imported panels have helped transform solar into the leading source of new power on the US grid. The Energy Information Administration expects solar installations this year to grow 42 per cent, reaching 127 gigawatts.

In April, the largest US solar manufacturers, First Solar and Qcells, and others filed a petition for tariffs on cells to be applied to four countries in south-east Asia in order to rescue a struggling domestic industry.

Luigi Resta, president of rPlus Energies, a developer, warned that the tariffs would slow down the pace of deployment and raise prices for consumers. The company has started to source from Indonesia, another emerging solar manufacturing market, to safeguard it against trade impacts.

“The nature of the industry is that we have to be very flexible,” Resta said. The company now sources about 1GW of panels between Indonesia and Vietnam.

Industry executives and analysts expressed concern that plans to build production lines in tariff-exempt markets may lead the US government to play a game of “Whac-A-Mole” with tariffs and fine those countries in the future, risking billions in capital expenditure.

“If too many people go to one place, it just ruins it for everybody,” said Jim Wood, chief executive of SEG Solar.

Last week the company broke ground on a $500mn factory near Jakarta, which will help supply cells to its panel factory in Texas.



“I never had any formal art training: I just learnt as I went along,” says Indian collector and philanthropist Kiran Nadar. Her vast collection of South Asian art now numbers 15,000 pieces, a small selection of which is being shown in a major exhibition at the Barbican cultural centre in London, The Imaginary Institution of India: Art 1975-1998.

In Nadar’s London home, an elegant apartment in a listed building overlooking Regent’s Park, one wall is dominated by a painting of horses by MF Husain — often known as the “Picasso of India” — while, on another wall, a painting by Manjit Bawa shows a flautist playing to a group of grey cows. Small sculptures by Henry Moore are dotted around on the tables and a beautiful inlaid ivory cabinet stands by the door.

Nadar, wearing a flowing green, pink and orange robe, is relaxed, friendly and open as we sit down to talk about how she started collecting, her philanthropy and the new museum she is opening in Delhi.

Her collecting began once she was married. After studying English literature at university in India, Nadar met her husband, Shiv Nadar, the billionaire founder of India’s HCL Technologies, when she was working in advertising and he was a client. “My first major art purchase was of two works by MF Husain for our home — in fact he was asked to paint one but he brought us two, so we kept them. And then I bought a graphic male nude, “Runners” (1982), by Rameshwar Broota — my husband was horrified! I was a bit crestfallen and told him we had to go to the studio and apologise [for changing our minds], but when he met the artist he said I was right to have the painting. And it is in his study to this day.”

But it was only after buying work by Manjit Bawa that she became “galvanised”: “I never really thought I was collecting, just acquiring. But then it reached a stage that we had no more wall space and I was just putting them into storage. It wasn’t even formalised storage, it was in the basement. I realised it was a bit futile to leave them like that.

By 2010 she had acquired 500 works, so she decided to create a space to show them, the Kiran Nadar Museum of Art (KNMA) — initially on the HCL campus in Noida, Uttar Pradesh, then in South Court Mall in New Delhi, supported by the Shiv Nadar Foundation. A vast new museum, designed by Adjaye Associates, will open on a 100,000-square-metre site directly across from the Indira Gandhi international airport in New Delhi in 2026 or 2027.

I ask her about the choice of the Ghanaian-British architect David Adjaye for her new museum. Since that decision was taken in 2019, Adjaye has been accused of sexual assault, sexual harassment and promoting a toxic work culture according to an investigation in the Financial Times last year, allegations which he has denied.

“The choice [of Adjaye] was made by a jury . . . which whittled applicants to six, out of the initial 60. And Adjaye was the outright winner,” says Nadar. (A 2019 press release said there were five on the shortlist from 47 applicants.) “At that stage, we had absolutely no idea about David’s personal life and we had paid about two-thirds of what our commitment was. So we continue to work with Adjaye Associates and David will not be involved as a person, on any of our projects, until such time that we are comfortable. That’s the way it stands today.”

While her collecting focus was on works by the Bombay Progressive Artists’ Group, a Mumbai-based collective of artists synthesising Indian art history and European Modernism from 1947, she also bought contemporary art: “I bought at huge prices. Then the crash came and even today some of the works haven’t reached what I paid for them at that time.” That “crash”, specifically in Indian art, took place in 2006-07 and was fuelled by speculation and the creation of art funds. Prices continued to fall over the next few years, in some cases, as she says, never to recover.

“We’re keen that Indian art gets more international recognition,” she says. KNMA part-funded the Indian pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 2019 (only the second time the country has staged one) and this year organised a retrospective of MF Husain there. “India is such an important country. Every country has a pavilion [at the Biennale] and so should we; if there is no space in the Giardini, there must be another important space [the Biennale organisers] can give us. I think at the next Biennale, India will have its own space.”

As well as Indian art, Nadar’s collection includes western names: she mentions Antony Gormley, Olafur Eliasson and William Kentridge, as well as South Asian diaspora artists such as Shahzia Sikander, Anish Kapoor and Raqib Shaw.

Art isn’t her only passion. “I’m actually very multi-dimensional!” she exclaims, waving a hand in the air. She is one of India’s foremost bridge players and will represent her country at the World Bridge Games in Buenos Aires this year.

I bring the conversation back to the future of her collection. “For the moment it is funded by the foundation, but there will be an endowment. I can’t be here for ever, and I can’t leave it in hands where it’s not going to serve: we will make sure it will be very, very professional.”

‘The Imaginary Institution of India: Art 1975-1998’ runs to January 5, barbican.org.uk



When I arrived in India for a few days recently, I was puzzled by Indian consumers’ and producers’ attachment to powerful reds. The country’s most celebrated wine, J’Noon, is a blockbuster if ever there was one. Surely, in India’s sultry climate, the refreshment of whites and rosés is needed, or at least a lighter red such as a Pinot Noir?

When, for the third night running, I got back to my hotel room shivering from the aggressive air conditioning during dinner, the penny dropped. Wine in India is becoming increasingly common, but it’s the drink of the well-off and the well-off are devoted to fiendish air con. Perhaps they need those full-bodied reds to warm themselves up?

Despite punitive import duties of 150 per cent by value, and complex regulations and taxes that differ state by state (some of which are dry), wine has steadily been replacing cocktails and whisky among affluent Indians.

During my time in Delhi and Mumbai I was told that many Indian drinkers believe that red wine is good for their health. The World Health Organization may disagree but the burgeoning Indian wine trade is not minded to draw their customers’ attention to this. And the theory that India’s highly spiced food doesn’t go with wine has largely been abandoned.

We enjoyed a range of wines carrying nine of India’s most respected labels with the excellent Indian cuisine of Masque restaurant in Mumbai’s old mill district, the fashionably grungy equivalent of east London or Brooklyn. This was at a special dinner organised by India’s one and only Master of Wine, Sonal Holland. The wines had improved considerably since my last visit in 2017.

Hridhay Mehra, Masque’s head sommelier, confirmed the cultural hurdles that wine has had to overcome in many sectors of Indian society. “It took ages for me to convince my parents that I drink for a living. I used to have to hide bottles of wine in my bedroom cupboard,” he told me. A few days later, back in London, I was to meet a young Indian-born wine writer who emigrated to America with her parents as a teenager. Her mother, a keen wine drinker, still drinks it out of a cup rather than a more revealing glass, she said.

The Masque dinner was the first time these nine producers had met socially. Holland asked them each to provide one wine and found, perhaps inevitably, that most of them wanted to show a full-bodied red. A notable exception was the LVMH-owned sparkling-wine producer Chandon, which provided our sparkling rosé aperitif made in the same way as its stablemate in Champagne, Moët & Chandon. But even this definitively effervescent company has just launched a still red, Aurva Shiraz 2021, under a screwcap.

Shiraz is the most-prized variety of winegrape in India and does well in the heartland of Indian viticulture, Nashik, a four-hour drive north-east of Mumbai. Cabernet Sauvignon does better in Solapur, seven hours to the south-east of Mumbai, where the nights are warmer. Chenin Blanc is the most popular grape for white wines.

There is now a Wine Growers of India association, encouraged by Ashwin Rodrigues, owner and chief winemaker of Good Earth Wine, who gained his winemaking experience in the Barossa Valley. He excitedly told me that the association now holds technical meetings “for winemakers, not CEOs” at which they serve each others’ wines blind and comment on them, all in aid of improving the quality of Indian wine overall.

He was seated at our table at this dinner, and I heard him ask Ipsita Das, managing director of Moët Hennessy India, why she recently raised the price of Chandon quite substantially, to the equivalent of about £25 a bottle. “We thought India was ready for a premium wine,” she answered with a careful smile, before admitting, “It has been a tough journey.” As a fellow Indian wine producer trying to balance the books, Rodrigues expressed deep gratitude for her move, although a more cynical diner at our table observed, “Indians are still learning to drink sparkling water, let alone sparkling wine.”

Per capita consumption of wine may have risen in recent years, but it’s still not much more than two centilitres a year. Although, as one wine professional pointed out, “If we all consumed wine, there’d be none left for anyone else in the world”. This seems unlikely, given the extreme poverty experienced by so many Indians, but a report from research group IWSR on prospects for alcoholic drinks identified India as the country with the greatest volume growth last year and one of the few expected to grow in future.

Partly because of those import taxes, 75 per cent of wine sold in India is Indian and Rajeev Samant of Sula Vineyards has a 60 per cent share of that 75 per cent. Inspired by what he saw in California, Samant has been in the business for 25 years. Countless Indians have had their first-ever taste of grape-based wine at Sula’s tourist-focused winery in Nashik, so Samant bears considerable responsibility for the prospects of the Indian wine market. Sula has become so ubiquitous that Samant has been developing other labels such as The Source and RĀSĀ (another full-bodied red).

But the really well-heeled drink imported wine. At another dinner, I sat next to one wine lover who commutes between London and Mumbai and told me he always loads up at the Mayfair wine treasure trove Hedonism before travelling back to India and goes gamely, and expensively, through the red channel on arrival.

When Holland started out in wine 17 years ago, there were very few Indian wine professionals, but the Indian wine importers I met recently were admirably well informed. I was told that Italian reds, particularly from Tuscany, are currently popular but that the reputation of Bordeaux has been harmed by too many poor-quality wines.

In another sign of the times, this month sees the establishment of the Sommeliers Association of India by Bordeaux-based Master of Wine hopeful Amrita Singh. There are apparently already 35 to 40 candidates for professional somm exams, and the first Indian qualified as a Master Sommelier in August. Kamal Malik currently works for a wine importer in the Maldives.

The Indian sommeliers I met were unanimous that more somms are needed in their country, pointing out that there are probably a thousand bartenders for every wine waiter. Supply is hindered by the fact that even top hospitality schools are not allowed to serve alcohol to anyone under 25 — virtually all their students.

There may be only 10 Indians resident in India who have reached the top, Diploma, level of Wine & Spirit Education Trust courses, but early evening wine tastings have become a popular leisure activity. Devati Mallick, a young woman who organises them, assured me that when Indians travel, they tend to become interested in wines from the regions they explore.

Susmita Bomzon worked in Dubai before returning to her native India to set up, in 2023, the country’s first wine bar, Captain’s Cellar, in the basement of the Taj Mahal hotel in New Delhi. Thanks to Enomatic wine dispenser cabinets, she offers 48 wines, Indian and imported, by the glass. According to Master of Wine Holland, “Fifteen years ago this would have been unthinkable.”

It’s no wonder that Australia, having been crippled by punitive tariffs imposed by China in 2020, decided to look to India for new export opportunities, concluding a trade agreement in 2022. This is one rapidly growing market that gives the world’s wine producers, concerned about shrinking sales elsewhere, some reason to be hopeful.

Tasting notes, scores and suggested drink dates on Purple Pages of JancisRobinson.com. International stockists on Wine-searcher.com

Follow @FTMag to find out about our latest stories first and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen



Following the pandemic tech boom, edtech company Byju’s was India’s most valuable start-up in 2022, worth an estimated $22bn.

The company, founded by a charismatic former maths teacher Byju Raveendran, sold tutoring services to millions of parents seeking to prepare their children for India’s brutally competitive school entrance exams.

After winning investment from the likes of Mark Zuckerberg, BlackRock and Dutch tech investor Prosus, Byju’s went on a global acquisition spree and became a sponsor of the Fifa World Cup in Qatar and the country’s cricket team.

But after central banks raised interest rates following the Covid-19 pandemic, the cheap money dried up. The value of the company plunged, and investors were forced to write off stakes worth hundreds of millions of dollars.

Creditors of Byju’s are now in US courts to locate almost half of a $1.2bn loan, while the company fights insolvency proceedings in India over delayed national cricket authority sponsorship dues. The Qatar Investment Authority has also launched a case in India’s tech hub of Bengaluru, where Byju’s is based, to recover more than $200mn from Raveendran.

Byju’s has been unable to access its bank accounts and pay salaries as a result of the Indian legal proceedings, Raveendran said in a company-wide email in August shared with the Financial Times. “I have felt like a man screaming into a hurricane of hurdles,” Raveendran said. “When we regain control, your salaries will be paid promptly, even if that means raising more personal debt.”

Byju’s, which is now worth $120mn according to data provider Tracxn, has denied wrongdoing. Raveendran told the FT that his company no longer had access to capital and the entirety of the $1.2bn term loan at the heart of the sprawling legal battle with its creditors had been spent.

He said they had not been able to pay their lawyers in a Delaware court case and that what he described as the company’s “strategy” of trying to conceal money from creditors “has not gone right”. Raveendran added: “I will fight it out because we will win eventually.”

The company’s legal battles from Delaware to Bengaluru have shone a harsh light on start-up corporate governance standards, said Shriram Subramanian, founder of Bengaluru-based proxy advisor InGovern Research Services. “It’s a big failure of corporate governance from multiple perspectives,” he said.

Byju’s overdue accounts released in January showed losses almost doubling to nearly $1bn in the year to March 2022. While the platform still has about 7mn paying users, the number of employees — more than half of them teachers — has plunged from about 80,000 at its peak to about 27,000 today, Raveendran said.

Subramanian questioned why investors tolerated Byju’s delayed filing of accounts and pointed out that the company did not have a chief financial officer for 16 months between 2021 and 2023.

“The Byju’s saga has a general resonance,” Subramanian added. “There is an element of caution and more scrutiny of start-ups, investors are expecting more due diligence and a path to profitability. No more is there a blind throwing of money.”

Total annual funding to Indian start-ups was $32bn last year, less than half of the 2020 peak of $67.3bn, according to Tracxn.

“The different layers of scandal that have draped this company for the last couple of years create a very complex cocktail of issues,” said Nirgunan Tiruchelvam, a Singapore-based analyst at Aletheia Capital. “It’s not good for the tech ecosystem in India.”

A lawsuit launched in Delaware by a group of more than 100 creditors to recover $533mn of the $1.2bn syndicated loan to Byju’s secured in November 2021 has revealed disorganisation at the edtech company.

Earlier this year, Raveendran’s brother Riju struggled to explain to a US judge that he did not know the whereabouts of $533mn of the loan. Riju, who was the sole director of US-based Byju’s Alpha, a company created to receive loans, said in May: “I really don’t know where the money is.”

Riju, who lives with Raveendran and his wife Divya Gokulnath, the company’s husband-and-wife co-founders, in Dubai’s affluent Emirates Hills community, said he had sent emails asking them where the money was.

Raveendran said Riju had not lied as he had restricted information to him.

Riju’s attempts to find the funds “were tepid at best” and his “testimony lacks all credibility”, said US bankruptcy judge John Dorsey at the May hearing. The court found him in contempt and in July imposed a fine of $10,000 a day until the money was located.

“I have struggled in my own mind whether we are seeing ineptitude . . . or we’re seeing something more nefarious,” said Ravi Shankar, a Kirkland & Ellis advocate acting for Glas Trust, an agency representing more than 100 Byju’s creditors. “Two brothers doing whatever it can take to salvage a crumbling empire.”

After Byju’s Alpha was accused by the creditors of default, they removed Riju as sole director of the company in 2023 and installed Timothy Pohl, a restructuring expert. Last month, Delaware’s Supreme Court affirmed that default.

Pohl unearthed bank accounts that showed transfers signed off by Riju to a little-known Florida-based hedge fund Camshaft Capital. It was set up in 2020 and registered with the address of an IHOP pancake restaurant in Miami by then-23-year-old William Morton, a high school dropout with no investment qualifications.

In a separate Florida suit, the creditors’ lawyers allege Morton splurged on Ferrari, Lamborghini and Rolls-Royce cars after the Byju’s transfer, as well as a condo with an ocean view with a listed monthly rent of $29,000.

Morton’s lawyers said Camshaft “vigorously denies” the allegations. In June, they told the Delaware court that millions of dollars in fees he received in the deal were “not with us today”.

Earlier this year, it emerged in court that Camshaft transferred the funds to OCI, a British company. The creditors’ lawyers are now seeking documents about the transfer in UK courts. Morton and OCI did not respond to a request for comment. Raveendran said Camshaft had not lost the company money and declined to comment on OCI.

Riju’s lawyers at the end of July said in court that funds were spent on goods and services for Byju’s and “not for an improper purpose”. Byju’s has launched a counter-lawsuit in New York against the lenders, accusing them of unfairly accelerating the loan terms and negotiating in “bad faith”.

Raveendran added “there has never been any fraud” and “not a single dollar” of the loan was transferred to India or personal accounts.

Byju’s faces more legal challenges in India. The Qatar Investment Authority — the country’s sovereign wealth fund, which invested in the company and loaned Raveendran $250mn in 2022 — is fighting in a Karnataka court to claim back more than $200mn from him. Raveendran declined to comment on the QIA case.

Byju’s was also pushed into bankruptcy proceedings in India by the country’s national cricket authority over unpaid sponsorship dues. Although the company settled the case in August, India’s Supreme Court stayed the settlement order after the US creditors alleged Byju’s might have used money from their loan to pay the Board of Control for Cricket in India. Byju’s has denied the allegation.

The lenders know that time is not on their side. Earlier this year, they said the cost of recovering the funds could make “finding the money nothing more than a Pyrrhic victory”.Raveendran said Byju’s would pay back the lenders. “If they have the patience, come work with me,” he said. “We will make a comeback.”



Swiss watch exports have fallen this year, but one market is showing strong growth: India. Exports to the country rose 20 per cent in value, year on year, in the first seven months of 2024 to SFr139.5mn ($165mn), compared with a 2.4 per cent fall globally. And that export value represents a 41.4 per cent increase on the same period in 2022 — the largest rise recorded by the Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry for any market, over such a timescale.

Now, a trade deal is set to make watch exports even easier. In March, India signed an agreement with the European Free Trade Association to phase out custom duties on Swiss watches (about 20 per cent) within seven years and give improved protection around the use of the terms “Swiss” or “Switzerland”.

India is, in many ways, an ideal watch market. It was the fastest-growing major economy in last month’s World Bank update, and one in which the number of millionaires (in US dollars) will rise 22 per cent between 2023 and 2028, to 1,061,463, according to the latest UBS Global Wealth Report. The Deloitte Swiss Watch Industry Study 2023 flagged the country as the “next big growth market”, and found that 94 per cent of Indian consumers wear a watch (in the US, it is 79 per cent).

“As the population is getting more wealthy and developing, and the luxury market is exponentially growing compared with the consumer market, there’s an upgrade [in the watches people buy],” says Karine Szegedi, consumer industry and fashion and luxury lead at Deloitte Switzerland, and the study’s co-author.

Watchmakers are expanding their retail presence. IWC opened its first boutique in India, at Jio Mall in Mumbai, last November. Then Breitling launched boutiques in Chennai and Pune earlier this year, having opened its first Indian store in Hyderabad in 2023. It plans to have boutiques in each of the country’s top eight to 10 cities.

This focus comes amid a slump in sales in China, the second-largest export market for Swiss watches. There, the value of exports fell 23.2 per cent, year on year, between January and July, to SFr1,269.5mn. “We’re being asked if [India] will be offsetting the maybe softer results in China,” says Szegedi. “Not yet, because it’s an immature market . . . We believe that now, as well, with the EFTA agreement, you have to enter it to test it and see how the market responds to your brands.”

Gerald Charles started working with Ethos Watches, an Indian retailer, in Delhi and Mumbai last November after noticing rising demand from rich Indians who were travelling to, or had homes in, Dubai. It launched in two further locations, Bengaluru and Kochi, last month. Federico Ziviani, Gerald Charles chief executive, says there will be a fifth opening next year — bringing the brand, which he says makes 1,500 watches a year, to capacity for the country .

He says the Indian market, where the brand’s emerald green watches are popular, is robust because it is driven by internal demand. “Thinking about what happened during Covid, where travelling was blocked, only the strong local markets performed well,” he says. “So that’s why it’s so important to be in India, rather than selling to Indian collectors from abroad, because this creates a service to them, because they have the watch right at [their] doorstep. [It also] creates robustness in case of any geopolitical or economic changes.”

Ziviani says the challenge in a country of 1.4bn people is getting the watch “on the right wrist”. “We have the advantage that the Gerald Charles watch . . . is very polarising,” he says. “You hate it or love it . . . so there is a strong component in the client choosing us.”

Cricket — a sport beloved in India — is influential in growing brand awareness. Panerai previously had former India captain MS Dhoni as an ambassador and collaborated with him on two limited edition timepieces exclusive to the Indian market in 2019. Mohit Hemdev, Panerai brand manager for India, says this “really helped the brand get the right kind of visibility in the market”.

Jean-Marc Pontroué, chief executive of Panerai, says exposure through cricket and the “evolution” of India meant the time was right for expansion. “You see the number of planes this country is ordering, the new facilities built, new industries growing — that is contributing to the development of the country, which creates a growing affluent customer group,” he says. However, he says Panerai’s growth will depend on “the speed of the luxury industry” — such as the development of malls.

Panerai opens its fourth India boutique, in Bengaluru, this month. The brand also has 10 points of sale across six cities with partners including TimeVallée, the Richemont-owned multi-brand retailer. Pontroué says Panerai has tripled its business in India since 2018. “It’s by far the fastest-growing nationality we see appearing more and more with knowledge of luxury watches,” he says.

Pontroué says that, while India has a long association with jewellery, the more recent appetite for high-end watches is driven by interest in gold, jewellery watches, and Switzerland. Hundreds of Bollywood films have been at least partially shot in Switzerland, against scenic backdrops such as the Alps. “[For] a lot of Indians, their first or second European destination to visit becomes Switzerland,” says Hemdev.

Rado, which has worked with Indian Bollywood actor Hrithik Roshan since 2011, took on British Bollywood actress Katrina Kaif as an ambassador last October to target female customers. Adrian Bosshard, Rado chief executive, says there has been an “overproportion increase” in its women’s watch segment in India this year and last.

Other brands are seeking to attract clients with special releases. Carl F Bucherer launched a Heritage BiCompax Annual Hometown limited edition dedicated to New Delhi, featuring city landmarks engraved on the case back, with Ethos Watches in June. Raymond Weil, which has traded in India since the early 1980s, launched the Freelancer Ganges India limited edition last October to celebrate 20 years of its own collaboration with Ethos.

Rado saw India overtake China as its largest market for sales about two years ago, says Bosshard. The brand has 33 boutiques in India and more than 200 other points of sale. Bosshard says Rado has built “customer confidence”, which helps as Indian consumers “are very cautious to have value for money”. For this reason, the brand’s ceramic watches are popular, he says, because their “scratch resistance” means they have “a long-term beauty on your wrist”.

An informal survey of about 100 partners and directors from Deloitte Consulting in India in July found that, while Rolex was the most recognised Swiss watch brand, it was followed by Swatch Group houses Omega, Tissot and Rado, respectively, showcasing the early investment that group made in the market. Popular high-end brands, including Patek Philippe, Audemars Piguet and Richard Mille, did not feature in this top 10 for brand recognition in India.

Bosshard compares the situation in India to what he saw in China 20 years ago. “Purchasing power is growing and, of course, in this kind of environment people want to celebrate themselves.”

One opportunity identified in the Deloitte Swiss Watch Industry spotlight on India, from July, is to tap into wedding gifting. It found 40 per cent of Indians planning to buy a watch within 12 months would do so for a present, compared with 27 per cent globally.

Deloitte’s 2023 study predicted India would be in the top 10 of Swiss watch export markets within a decade. It was 22nd in July. However, Bosshard would not be surprised if this happened within seven, or even five, years.



Ajesh Kumar, a college graduate in a village in Haryana, a rural state bordering Delhi, recently applied to work as a cleaner. But there were more than 400,000 jobseekers for an estimated 5,000 positions, making the 30-year-old’s chances about one in 80.

“There’s just no hope, no chance” of getting one of the government posts, Kumar said, which are prized because of the guaranteed hours, wages and benefits, however low, of public sector work. Among the applicants were two of his family members.

Kumar is one face of India’s most intractable public policy issue: a chronic shortage of formal jobs in the world’s most populous country and, according to companies, a corresponding shortage of suitable candidates to fill them.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s economic record will again be on the agenda in Haryana on Saturday in one in a series of regional polls in which the opposition will seek to build momentum against his Bharatiya Janata party. The opposition managed to push the BJP into a parliamentary minority for the first time since 2014 in nationwide elections this year, in part by highlighting persistently high joblessness.

India’s economy is failing to create enough jobs for its young and growing population and train the skilled workers its companies need to harness that demographic dividend. This mismatch is feeding widespread grievances and represents one of the biggest challenges for Modi as he enters his second decade in power.

“Every month about a million formal job seekers are being added to the workforce,” said Rituparna Chakraborty, co-founder of Teamlease, which describes itself as India’s biggest staffing company. “Nine out of 10 of them go into the informal sector — jobs where there is no employment contract, no social security benefits, no protection, and no wage guarantees.”

“The poorest Indians tend to take on daily wage jobs in things like construction because there aren’t too many alternatives,” said Shruti Rajagopalan, senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University, in Virginia.

“The people in the middle are still waiting, and would rather hold out for a government job, or work on the family farm because at least it provides them food security.”

Modi’s government has taken steps to tackle India’s joblessness. In the first post-election budget, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced an apprenticeship scheme aimed at benefiting 10mn young people over five years. The government has also promised training subsidies for companies, stipends for apprenticeships and help for vocational schools to amend their curricula to align with job market demands.

In its previous term, Modi’s cabinet also cut corporate taxes and took steps to amend labour laws in a bid to stimulate job growth.

Corporate India, however, laments a shortage of qualified candidates for its top jobs. Conglomerate Larsen & Toubro said in June that it faced a shortage of 45,000 skilled labourers and engineers across its businesses, which range from construction to information technology.

Analysts said the skills gap bodes ill for Modi’s “Make in India” manufacturing push, and attests to neglect and uneven standards at Indian secondary institutions.

“So many people come out of these colleges, but we can do a lot to make them more employable in the industry,” K Krithivasan, chief executive of Tata Consultancy Services, India’s biggest IT company, told the Financial Times earlier this year.

Mohandas Pai, chair of private equity firm Aarin Capital and former chief financial officer at IT giant Infosys, said most industries were struggling to find skilled workers as India’s economy expands at an annual clip of about 7 per cent, with job openings outpacing the supply of employable workers.

At the same time, he said: “Many industries are not willing to spend money to hire them, skill them and train them.”

A study published this year by Quess Corp, an Indian business service provider, and the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry argued that India faced a wage — rather than an employment — problem. About 80 per cent of jobs pay less than Rs20,000 ($238) a month, not enough to meet rising living expenses, the study’s authors argued.

On the supply side, economists say cumbersome labour regulation is also holding back industry from creating jobs. Much of the legislation only kicks in for companies employing 10 people or more, points out George Mason University’s Rajagopalan. “Either people are not hiring the 10th worker, or they hire the worker informally,” she said.

Modi’s government in 2020 approved an overhaul of India’s patchwork of labour laws, which regulate areas ranging from maximum shift hours to the number of clocks per factory floor. But the reforms have yet to take effect.

There is even disagreement over how to measure India’s unemployment. The Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy, a think-tank, publishes the most widely cited indicator, which is conducted monthly. In August, it showed a jobless rate at 8.51 per cent, and unemployment on a rising trend.

“This is a pretty high unemployment rate in a country growing at 7 to 8 per cent per annum,” said Mahesh Vyas, CMIE’s managing director. “We have also been seeing the unemployment rate very high for a long period now in both rural and urban regions.”

Modi’s political circle favours the Periodic Labour Force Survey, which reports quarterly rural and urban unemployment rates and shows the jobless rate at below 5 per cent and falling.

Analysts said the discrepancy was because of what counted as work, including part-time agricultural work.

Vyas claims the definition of a job in the PLFS is “too relaxed”. He also pointed to growth of India’s net fixed assets at companies, which he said served as a proxy for employment and joblessness and had been growing at only about 5-6 per cent in recent years.

“Employment will increase only if investments increase, and I don’t see that,” Vyas said.

Kumar, in Haryana, for example, might or might not qualify as unemployed depending on who is counting. He is earning some money on commission for a company that sells cattle feed, and is considering setting up a dairy business with his brother.

Like many young Indians, he also aspired to an army post, completing a correspondence degree in political science and passing the written test three times. But he was rejected in the interview.

“You need sources and contacts when you reach that level,” Kumar said. “I did not have them.”

“I have given up looking for jobs,” he added.

​Letter in response to this article:

India’s rich are the main beneficiaries of growth / From Deepankar Basu, Associate Professor, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, US



India’s capital markets regulator has raised the barriers on derivatives trading to curb the frenzy among millions of young retail investors who have piled into high-risk options and short-term bets on the country’s booming stock market.

The Securities and Exchange Board of India on Tuesday imposed tough measures including raising the minimum contract size on index derivatives by about three times to at least Rs1.5mn ($18,000). It also reduced the amount of tradable weekly options contracts to one per exchange from November.

The crackdown comes after the watchdog and India’s finance ministry repeatedly issued warnings about the risks involved in derivatives markets. Investors can use options to leverage their bets, by borrowing many times the amount they have on deposit, but they can magnify losses as well as gains.

The Indian stock market has soared in recent years as the country has become the world’s fastest growing large economy. While its expanding number of middle-class households are increasingly investing their savings in domestic equities, analysts have likened the fevered interest in derivatives trading to gambling in a nation where betting is not legal.

“The equity cult has been going up in India,” said Kranthi Bathini, director of equity strategy at WealthMills Securities in Mumbai.

The problem is “uninformed, uneducated investors are becoming prey to this retail speculative frenzy, that’s where the regulator and the ministry of finance is concerned”, he added.

Many Indians have also been spurred on by a proliferation of cheap discount online brokerages and popular, if largely unregulated, “finfluencers” who dish out trading tips on social media.

In a recent study, Sebi said fewer than one in 10 future and options traders made a profit. Its latest order noted the trend of “increased retail participation” as well as “heightened speculative trading columns in index derivatives on expiry day”.

Research by Mumbai-based Axis Mutual Fund found that the number of active derivatives traders in India shot up to 4mn last year compared with fewer than 500,000 before the coronavirus pandemic. Most of them resided in the country’s smaller cities and were below the age of 40.

The trend has drawn wider global attention after the notional value of options on India’s benchmark Nifty 50 index overtook those on the S&P 500 and quant trading firm Jane Street reportedly made $1bn on trades in the country’s option market last year.

Sebi’s action is just the latest attempt to cool India’s retail trading mania. While its latest order was published after local market hours, in July shares of listed Indian brokerages, which have cashed in on the derivatives boom, fell after new rules mandated uniform charges that are not discounted for high volumes.

The regulator’s new curbs would “have some impact”, Bathini said.



In the heart of the Indian megacity Kolkata, a makeshift protest camp has formed outside one of its most overburdened hospitals. The walls of RG Kar Medical College Hospital are covered with angry slogans: “Stop rape”, “We want justice”, “Staying silent when the fire is raging is siding with the ones who lit it”.

The demonstrations, which spread into a national strike, have come in response to the rape and murder of a female trainee doctor who was attacked at the hospital in early August. The 31-year-old lay down to sleep in a seminar room at the end of a 36-hour shift. The following morning, the woman — known publicly by the pseudonym Abhaya (“fearless”) because of an Indian law protecting the identities of victims — was found dead with appalling injuries, including signs of sexual assault.

According to her colleagues, the state-run hospital lacks adequate facilities; doctors and patients of both genders are forced to share bathrooms, conditions described as both unsanitary and unsafe.

This is hardly the first instance of a brutal attack against a woman to cause shock and outrage across India. But the crime — and the protests — are resonating with unusual force. “Nowhere is safe for women,” says Shyamadra Sarkar, 24, a medical student in Kolkata. Families feel it would be safer for daughters to be cooped up at home rather than risk going out to work, she says. “Parents think, ‘If you’re not safe outside, stay at home’.”

As well as highlighting the threat of violence, the case has also provoked much wider questions about the status of working women in the world’s most populous nation and its biggest developing economy.

As part of his Viksit Bharat (“Developed India”) strategy, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said he wants India to have an economy worth $30tn by 2047, the centenary of its independence. But the nation currently employs only about a third of its women.

The prime minister has voiced frequent support for women-led development, including at last year’s international events around the G20, which India chaired.

Speaking in August shortly after the murder, Gita Gopinath, deputy managing director of the IMF — one of India’s most globally prominent professional women — described women’s safety as “non-negotiable and crucial in getting more women employed”, adding: “That cannot happen if women do not feel safe at work.”

Many economists have argued that encouraging more women to enter the paid workforce is one of the most important steps that India could undertake to turbocharge growth.

The World Bank has estimated that if women’s participation in the workforce were to reach 50 per cent, India could boost its annual growth rate by 1.5 percentage points. Christine Lagarde, then IMF managing director, stated in 2015 that India’s GDP would be nearly 30 per cent larger if the participation of women were to match that of men, describing this as an “economic no-brainer”.

Many of Asia’s successful manufacturing economies have benefited from creating safe, welcoming workplaces for women. Female workers notably played a key role in building the economy of China, India’s biggest neighbour and rival. In Vietnam, nearly 70 per cent of women are in paid work, far above the global average.

Adding to the pressure for change is India’s aspiration to draw in foreign direct investment from companies exiting China. Multibillion-dollar government subsidies for export industries, part of the country’s bid to become a “China plus-one” manufacturing power, have targeted electronics — a sector where producers like Samsung and Apple tend to prize female workers’ focus and dexterity over men’s.

“Gender is now macro-critical in India,” says Radhicka Kapoor, a senior specialist on employment with the International Labour Organization in New Delhi. “When you have all these targets of becoming a developed economy by 2047, you need additional drivers of growth — and addressing the gender gap is an important part of that.”

Indian politicians agree there is a clear link between women’s safety — their ability to get to and from jobs unharmed, and work without fear once they are there — and their underrepresentation in the workforce. Families and lawmakers routinely cite safety concerns as a reason to keep women out of the labour force, or restrict where and when they can work.

“Conversations around the safety of women can switch into very high gear,” says Rukmini S, an independent data journalist and author of the book Whole Numbers and Half Truths. “This has an impact on perceptions and the willingness to send women out to work.”

According to India’s national crime record bureau, the recorded rate of all crimes against women rose about 13 per cent over the four years to 2022, though analysts say it is hard to assess whether this is attributable to better reporting and more women speaking out, or a genuine increase in incidents.

The Georgetown Institute’s 2023 Women Peace and Security Index ranked India 128th out of 177 countries globally, and highlights areas for improvement in women’s empowerment, justice and safety. The ranking noted a marked drop in women’s perception of their own safety since 2017, when the survey began.

A report by the economic think-tank Prosperiti recently highlighted persistent workplace discrimination against women, noting that more than 50 laws limit employment in industries deemed hazardous, as varied as in the petroleum industry and liquor sales. Twenty-four of India’s 36 states and territories restrict women’s right to work on night shifts, while 11 states prohibit women entirely from working at night — measures designed to protect women, but which have the effect of limiting their participation in the workforce even further.

Campaigners have called for reforms to address gender stereotypes in legislation and encourage solutions like CCTV and safer transport. But change has been slow. Since 2022, a few states, including Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, have eased their restrictions on night shifts — partly because of pressure from manufacturers such as Apple and its supplier Foxconn, which are expanding their operations there.

Women do, of course, contribute enormous amounts to the Indian economy, but largely via unpaid work at home, in family businesses or in agriculture. Because of entrenched patriarchal and cultural norms, Indian women are heavily burdened by caregiving responsibilities, analysts say, limiting workforce supply. A recent government report estimated that childcare and home commitments kept 44.5 per cent of women out of work.

As so often, it is a vicious cycle. “Employers discriminate against women as they are perceived as less attached to their jobs than men,” says the ILO’s Kapoor. And in a country where good jobs are scarce, opportunities are more limited still.

Comparative data shows that India lags most of its south Asian neighbours when it comes to women in paid work — even poorer countries like Bangladesh, where women dominate one of the continent’s biggest garment industries. And such discrimination spans class divides, with some wealthier families keeping women at home because they can afford to.

“In India, more prosperous families prefer that the daughter-in-law doesn’t work outside the house,” says Swati Narayan, author of Unequal, a book about how India compares to its neighbours in areas such as health, education and work.

Despite being in a weakened position after an election in which his party lost its majority, Modi is pushing forward with his Viksit Bharat programme.

“It would be harder for India to become a Viksit Bharat by 2047 if one-third of the population is not engaging — most likely not out of choice but because there are limited opportunities,” argues Poonam Gupta, director of the National Council of Applied Economic Research.

The government has put in place policies and benefits designed to support women, including a Rs100 ($1) cut in the price of cooking gas — announced on March 8, International Women’s Day. According to a statement put out by the prime minister, this was a way of “empowering women and ensuring ‘ease of living’ for them”.

Economists point out, however, that such policies incentivise women to stay at home, and that it might be more valuable for the state to create employment in areas where women are under-represented, including law enforcement; according to a 2022 study, women made up just over 10 per cent of India’s police force.

Modi’s own council of ministers features only seven women — fewer than 10 per cent of the total. Despite changes to legislation aimed at making boardrooms more inclusive, women hold just 18 per cent of board seats in India, compared with a global average of more than 23 per cent.

“For women-led development, we need more women leaders,” says Gupta. “Building the pipeline for women’s leadership requires both intention and concerted measures.”

A working paper on “unshackling job creators”, prepared under the auspices of Viksit Bharat by a government think-tank and published in June, envisions a future in which women make up more than half of India’s high-skilled labour force, and makes recommendations on reducing “structural barriers” to women’s work, including childcare responsibilities and restrictive social norms.

Gupta, the NCAER economist, calls for measures that would allow women to move around and travel without fear — a key to the huge expansion of manufacturing in Vietnam, for example. “We have to make every space in the country safe for women,” she says.

Some have tried to find tech-based solutions. As long as a decade ago, in the wake of a Delhi gang rape that caused national outrage, tech giant Microsoft launched Guardian, an Indian-specific women’s safety app that allows users to share their location with contacts in real time.

India’s southern states have taken the lead on this issue. On average, the south of India is more developed than the north and devotes more resources to female education, health and mobility. Data from the 2021-22 Annual Survey of Industries showed that more than two-thirds of all Indian women working in industry were in four southern states: Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala. Tamil Nadu alone accounts for nearly half of India’s female workers.

“Labour force participation is higher in southern states — that is a fact,” says the data journalist Rukmini S.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, these are also the states keenest to attract foreign direct investment, and which are leading the way by promoting solutions for female workers such as safe bus transport and workers’ hostels.

Some Indian companies, including the diversified Tata Group and the consumer goods group Hindustan Unilever, are taking steps to increase female employment.

Kapoor, the ILO economist, says that India might start to tackle the problems around supply and demand by creating jobs in the care sector, which would enable new paid jobs — ones less likely to be endangered by artificial intelligence and automation — and free up more women to work.

“This is something Indian women were traditionally comfortable working in, and it creates decent employment,” she says. “It also represents an investment in human capital and the productivity of future generations.”

In Kolkata, meanwhile, both female and male trainee doctors at RG Kar are still on strike, defying orders to return to work except in emergencies. “Our parents say they must sit with us in the hospital, especially on night shifts, because authorities aren’t doing enough,” says Shreya Shaw, a spokesperson.

Nearly two months later and despite five arrests, Abhaya’s case remains unsolved and still under investigation, which has intensified pressure on the authorities.

Addressing the nation on independence day a few days after the murder, Modi condemned “atrocities” against women. Mamata Banerjee, chief minister of West Bengal state, where the crime occurred, and India’s most powerful female politician, said the accused should be hanged. Yet even she has been attacked by figures in Modi’s rival Bharatiya Janata party and others, who accused her of responding too slowly.

The protesters are not budging from their demands. The first of these is justice: they want the culprits who murdered Abhaya punished. Initial rumours suggested a case of suicide, and there was an unusual delay in filing a police report on the case, says Shaw. “We had the suspicion that something was not right.”

The protesters are also demanding that Kolkata’s commissioner of police resign, along with those responsible at the medical college (the former principal has been arrested on charges of evidence-tampering). As well as enhanced safety measures on the campus, including CCTV cameras and more security personnel, they also want more places where women can rest during and after shifts. “There are restrooms, but they are not sufficient and not adequate for women,” Shaw says.

Shayamadra, the medical student, says that, even if even the numbers of women in paid work have increased in India, for far too long life “has been hard” for anyone wanting a career.

“Even though the numbers are going up, the changes are happening at a very superficial level,” she says. “I am hoping society will truly change in the future.”

Data visualisation by Aditi Bhandari



Bank of America has placed two bankers in India on administrative leave as part of an investigation into allegations of wrongdoing in the US financial giant’s Asian investment bank, according to two sources familiar with the matter.

The internal investigation, which was launched earlier this year following a whistleblower complaint, is probing whether BofA and bankers in its Asian operations had tipped off certain investors of upcoming secondary offerings, allowing those investors to “front run” the stock sales and profit from nonpublic information.

A spokesperson for BofA declined to comment. The bank previously confirmed the existence of the internal probe, but at the time said it had found no evidence of misconduct. Neither banker has been fired, and could be reinstated following the investigation, according to the two sources.

The two bankers, one of whom is a senior member of BofA’s Indian investment banking operation, were put on leave on Tuesday. They could not be reached for comment.

BofA’s investigation, for which it has hired outside law firms, is examining whether bankers in its Asian operations sent messages or held meetings with hedge funds and others in advance of large secondary stock offerings on behalf of its corporate clients.

The investigation is looking at a number of deals but is focused on a March $200mn stock sale for the Sun Life life insurance subsidiary of Indian conglomerate Aditya Birla. The investigation is looking into whether the BofA bankers disclosed the upcoming offering and other nonpublic information related to it to certain investors.

Banks are required to disclose such meetings within one day of them being held to stock exchanges and all investors. A person with knowledge of the matter said BofA had discovered that the Indian bankers set up meetings with certain investors prior to the offerings and failed to disclose the meetings as required. They also did not adhere to a “cooling off” period as required by regulators and the bank, the person said.



Increasing loan and credit card debt racked up by young Indians splurging on aspirational purchases from clothing to holidays has raised concerns about rising delinquencies and a wider lending slowdown.

About a third of millennials and 40 per cent of Gen Z Indians are submerged under unsustainable borrowings, estimates Freed, an Indian debt resolution platform. The average Freed client has six loans equalling Rs560,000 ($6,694), up from four loans worth Rs520,000 in April.

“You have this aspirational spending meeting easy borrowing,” Ritesh Srivastava, founder and chief executive of Freed, told the Financial Times. “What makes it worse in India is that there’s a lending boom, there’s a lack of financial literacy and household savings are at an all-time low . . . that’s a heady cocktail.”

The Reserve Bank of India has repeatedly warned about the rapid rise of unsecured lending after Indian banks and fintech companies offered easy credit to millions of the country’s growing middle class following the coronavirus pandemic. In August, central bank governor Shaktikanta Das reiterated his concern about the continued growth of loans “mostly for consumption purposes”.

Indian household debt is accelerating, though it remains low in comparison to developed countries. The country’s household debt to GDP hit a record high of 40 per cent in the most recent financial year ending in March, according to economists at financial services group Motilal Oswal. Personal disposable income in India has not kept pace with the country’s broader economic expansion and net financial savings were at a four-decade low last year, according to the Mumbai-based group.

Goldman Sachs analysts said in August that there were “rising concerns of deterioration in asset quality” in India, warning that the continued growth in unsecured loans “has led to significant over-leveraging of some households”.

Regulators have started trying to address the rise in delinquencies. In November last year, the RBI said lenders had to increase the risk weight, the minimum amount of capital they must hold in relation to the asset, for personal loans from 100 per cent to 125 per cent.

“RBI is worried about the rising cases of delinquencies at the unsecured borrower level and they want to pre-empt it,” said Abhay Agarwal, founder and fund manager at Indian asset manager Piper Serica in Mumbai, which exited its holdings in the country’s lenders in July.

“They don’t want the bubble to become so big that when it blows, it hurts the entire financial lending system.”

The RBI’s moves have helped ease growth in credit card and unsecured personal loans, with the overall pace of retail lending by banks moderating to 14 per cent in July from 31 per cent a year earlier, according to the central bank’s most recent data.

But Nomura analysts estimate that personal loan delinquencies in India overdue by more than 90 days have increased to 5.1 per cent in the last financial year from 3.9 per cent.

Rajeev Jain, chief executive of Bajaj Finance, the country’s largest non-bank lender, told the FT it had been pruning back its own exposure to unsecured lending after it became “hot”.

“Supply in a business like credit always finds demand . . . when so many people jump in it leads to some level of exuberance,” Jain said. “We are watching it carefully to see whether there could be more problems down the road.”

India’s shadow banks are expected to be hit by a rise in delinquencies of between 30 to 50 basis points in the year through to March 2025, resulting in increased credit costs, according to ICRA, an Indian rating agency owned by Moody’s Ratings.

“They had a great time post-Covid,” said Agarwal, referring to the lending sector. “But that party is now over.”



A new generation is taking over at the top of world chess. India captured the gold medals at the 188-team Olympiad in Budapest last Sunday with a dominating performance by Gukesh Dommaraju, 18, and Arjun Erigaisi, 21. Gukesh, who challenges for the world crown in November, is now up to No 5 in the live ratings, while Erigaisi is No 3 and close to the 2800 rating points landmark.

Away from the board, the Fide General Assembly voted to maintain sanctions against Russia and Belarus which allow their players to compete only as individuals under a neutral Fide flag. Magnus Carlsen, who rarely gets involved in chess politics, made an intervention when he was awarded a Fide trophy as the all-time best player. First, he said: “In my opinion, Garry Kasparov has had a better chess career than I have. I understand why I got this award, but he is more deserving.” Then he added: “I would say, at least in Garry’s honour, I am sure that he would take the opportunity to advise against reinstating the Russian and Belarus Chess Federations, so that is what I would do as well.”

Final leading Olympiad scores were India 21/22 match points, United States 17, Uzbekistan 17. China, Serbia and Armenia also totalled 17 points, but had worse tiebreaks. The US took team silver, and the unanswered question remained whether they would have outscored India if the world No2 Hikaru Nakamura had travelled to Budapest instead of opting to prefer his streaming career.

England finished 20th on 15/22. The eight-time British champion Michael Adams, now 51, was the team’s top scorer on an unbeaten 6/9.

India won the Women’s Olympiad with 19/22.  Kazakhstan took silver with 18, and the United States won bronze on 17, while England finished 27th on 14/22. Jovanka Houska was England’s best scorer on 8/10.

Gukesh, who won the top board gold, and Erigaisi, who won the board three gold, scored at a pace that even Carlsen could not match. The Norwegian’s ambition of achieving Olympiad gold and eliminating one of the few gaps in his brilliant career record remains unfulfilled, as he had to settle for top board bronze.

India’s superiority was reminiscent of the legendary USSR teams of the 1950s and 1960s, which were packed with world champions and challengers and rarely lost a game, let alone a match. In Gukesh and Erigaisi, India have what could well prove to be the Botvinnik and Smyslov or Karpov and Kasparov of the 2020s and 2030s.

Hungarian grandmaster Péter Lékó put it well: “India’s way too strong. They are very young, very determined, brilliantly prepared, and also have fantastic chemistry, so it’s a very tough team for anyone to beat”.

Gukesh and Erigaisi are a pair whose strategically profound and technically accurate styles are a test for the strongest opposition. In an extensive interview for New in Chess, Erigaisi revealed that his father is a neurosurgeon and his sister a medical student, but that his own interests were different, so that he dropped out of college after a year when his chess talent became obvious.

His sponsor Quantbox, a Singapore trading company, pays for his full-time coach Rustam Kasimdzhanov, who previously trained Vishy Anand and Caruana. Erigaisi’s mature strategic style is ambitious with both colours. In round five at Budapest he instructively defused the dangerous Dragon Sicilian and reached a winning rook endgame.

China, which won gold on its last appearance, was handicapped by the continuing poor form of the reigning world champion Ding Liren, who has now dropped out of the world top 20 in the live ratings.

The chess elite will come to London next month when the franchise-based six-team Tech Mahindra Global League is played at Friends House, Euston, from October 3 to 12. World champions Carlsen and Anand, world No 2 Nakamura, and the double world title challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi will all lead teams. The Olympiad hero, Erigaisi, is also competing.

The time limit is rapid chess, 20 minutes per player per game, with the added bonus for spectators that there is no per-move increment, implying some exciting time scrambles.

Daily and season tickets are available from the Chess & Bridge shop in Baker Street, London, or online at chess.co.uk.

Puzzle 2591

Arjun Erigaisi v Shamsiddin Vokhidov, India v Uzbekistan, Budapest Olympiad 2024.

White to move and win. India had won their previous eight matches, but world No3 Erigaisi failed to find the right move for a ninth. Can you do better?

Click here for solution



India has given the Maldives a bailout that will help the island nation avoid an unprecedented sovereign default on an Islamic form of debt next month.

India’s biggest state-owned bank agreed to lend another $50mn to the Maldives, India’s high commission in the country said in a statement late on Thursday, days before the archipelago is due to pay a roughly $25mn coupon on an Islamic sukuk.

Sukuk follow Islamic principles in shunning traditional interest payments and instead offer creditors a share of profit from an underlying financial instrument.

No government has ever skipped a sukuk payment, but investors have grown concerned in recent weeks that the Maldives would break new ground in a market tapped by countries including Egypt, Pakistan, South Africa and the UK.

Heavy borrowing for infrastructure projects has plunged the Maldives deep into a foreign exchange crisis despite a recovery in tourism to the island paradise.

The Maldivian sukuk traded at about 78 cents in the dollar on Friday, a recovery from a low of 70 cents after Fitch Ratings downgraded the country’s credit rating deep into junk territory this month.

The State Bank of India, which had previously lent the Maldives $50mn, also rolled over a short-term bond in May, underlining how the archipelago is relying on stop-gap rescues by New Delhi while the government of President Mohamed Muizzu looks for a lasting solution to the crisis.

The country still has to find a way to repay more than $500mn in debt next year, and $1bn in 2026, when the $500mn sukuk will come due.

The loan from the SBI, which has taken the form of rolling over a one-year treasury bill, is bigger than the Maldives’ net international reserves as of last month.

These dwindled to $48mn, out of gross reserves of $470mn, as the country faces high debt repayment bills and keeps up the rufiyaa currency’s peg to the dollar. India is one of the country’s biggest creditors, alongside China.

“These subscriptions have been made at the special request of the government of the Maldives as emergency financial assistance,” the Indian high commission said. The new T-bill would carry no interest payments, it added.

Muizzu campaigned for the Maldivian presidency last year on a pledge to reduce Indian influence in the archipelago, leading to an early spat with the government of Narendra Modi.

But the two countries have rebuilt ties as the Maldivian financial crisis has deepened. Muizzu’s office has said that he plans to visit Modi in New Delhi soon.

The government has said that it is also seeking a $400mn currency swap arrangement with India through a south Asian regional body.

This month the Chinese central bank said it had signed a memorandum of understanding with the Maldives to facilitate the settlement of trade in local currencies, in another sign of support.



A surge in demand among Indian consumers for gold jewellery and bars after a recent cut to tariffs is helping to drive global bullion prices to a series of fresh highs.

India’s gold imports hit their highest level on record by dollar value in August at $10.06bn, according to government data released Tuesday. That implies roughly 131 tonnes of bullion imports, the sixth-highest total on record by volume, according to a preliminary estimate from consultancy Metals Focus.

The high gold price — which is up by one-quarter since the start of the year — has traditionally deterred price-sensitive Asian buyers, with Indians reducing demand for gold jewellery in response.

But the Indian government cut import duties on gold by 9 percentage points at the end of July, triggering a renewed surge in demand in the world’s second-largest buyer of gold.

“The impact of the duty cut was unprecedented, it was incredible,” said Philip Newman, managing director of Metals Focus in London. “It really brought consumers in.”

The tariff cut has been a boon for Indian jewellery stores such as MK Jewels in the upmarket Mumbai suburb of Bandra West, where director Ram Raimalani said “demand has been fantastic”.

Customers were packed into the store browsing for necklaces and bangles on a recent afternoon, and Raimalani is expecting an annual sales boost of as much as 40 per cent during the multi-month festival and wedding season that runs from September to February.

Raimalani praised India’s government and “Modi ji”, an honorific for Prime Minister Narendra Modi, for reducing gold duties.

Expectations of rapid interest rate cuts by the US Federal Reserve have been the main driver of gold’s huge rally this year, according to analysts. Lower borrowing costs increase the attraction of assets with no yield, such as bullion, and are also likely to weigh on the dollar, in which gold is denominated.

The Fed cut rates by half a per cent on Wednesday, pushing gold to yet another record high, just below $2,600.

But strong demand for gold jewellery and bars, as well as buying by central banks, have also helped buoy prices.

India accounted for about a third of gold jewellery demand last year, and has become the world’s second-largest bar and coin market, according to data from the World Gold Council, an industry body.

However, that demand has meant that domestic gold prices in India are quickly catching up to the level they were at before the tariff duty cut, according to Harshal Barot, senior research consultant at Metals Focus.

“That entire benefit [of the tariff cut] has kind of vanished,” said Barot. “Now that prices are going up again, we will have to see if consumers still buy as usual.”

Jewellery buying had been flagging before the cut in import duty, with demand in India in the first half of 2024 at its lowest level since 2020, according to the World Gold Council.

India’s central bank has also been on a gold buying spree, adding 42 tonnes of gold to its reserves during the first seven months of the year — more than double its purchases for the whole of 2023.

A person familiar with the Reserve Bank of India’s thinking called the gold purchases a “routine” part of its foreign exchange reserve and currency stability management.

In China, the world’s biggest physical buyer of gold, high prices have meant fewer jewellery sales, but more sales of gold bars and coins, which surged 62 per cent in the second quarter compared with a year earlier.

“We observed strong positive correlation between gold investment demand and the gold price,” wrote the World Gold Council, referring to China.

All of this has helped support the physical market and mitigate the impact that high prices can have in eroding demand.

“It acts as a stable foundation for demand,” said Paul Wong, a market strategist at Sprott Asset Management. “In parts of Asia, gold is readily convertible into currency,” making it popular for savings, he said.

Western investor demand has also been a big factor in bullion’s rally, with a net $7.6bn flowing into gold-backed exchange traded funds over the past four months.

After hitting a fresh high on Wednesday, analysts warn there could be a correction in the gold price.

“When you have this scale of anticipation [of rate cuts], for this long, there is room for disappointment,” said Adrian Ash, London-based director of research at BullionVault, an online gold marketplace. “I think there is scope for a pullback in precious alongside other assets.”

Whether or not gold pulls back from its record highs, Indian jewellery demand looks set to remain strong through the coming wedding season, according to MK Jewels’ Raimalani.

Soaring prices of bullion have been no deterrent to his customers, he added. “Indians are the happiest when prices go high because they already own so much gold. It’s like an investment.”



India has overtaken China’s weighting in one of the world’s biggest stock market benchmarks, as share sales and rising liquidity in Indian companies make the country more open to investors.

India’s share of the free-float, “investable”, version of the MSCI All-Country World index, which tracks almost all global stocks that can be bought on the open market, rose to 2.33 per cent this month, eclipsing China’s 2.06 per cent.

The shift makes India the sixth-largest weighting in an index that is dominated by US companies. It also reflects demand in India’s red-hot stock market, which is also unlocking shares for global investors to buy just as the Chinese economy slumps and fund managers dump China-related stocks.

“It is a natural evolution of the market,” said Vivian Lin Thurston, a portfolio manager at William Blair Investment Management.

“You have Indian equities performing strongly and Chinese ones lagging. There is a rebalancing happening as MSCI adds and drops names, so some of the Indian stocks that have improved liquidity get a bit more weight in the system.”

India’s blue-chip Nifty 50 index has hit record highs this year as the country’s economy registers the strongest GDP growth of any major economy and millions of middle-class households pile their savings into local mutual funds. Some $38bn of domestic money has flowed into Indian equities this year, exceeding the annual level of each of the past 16 years.

Indian companies have rushed to take advantage of the country’s soaring stock markets, with Ola Electric and mortgage provider Bajaj Housing Finance among the biggest initial public offerings so far this year.

More than $38bn has been raised on its equity market this year, the highest in Asia and more than double the amount over the same period a year ago, Dealogic data shows.

Earlier this month the free float of Indian stocks also supplanted Chinese counterparts as the largest country in the MSCI Emerging Markets investable index, at 22 per cent to 19 per cent.

When not adjusted for free float, China remains ahead of India in the closely watched MSCI Emerging Markets index, which does not include small-cap companies. But China has seen its share fall from 40 per cent in 2020 to a quarter while India’s has risen to a fifth from below 7 per cent 10 years ago.

Even so, China and India, and emerging markets as a whole, are still overshadowed by the bull run in US stocks, which make up two-thirds of the world index. About $4.6tn in assets were benchmarked to MSCI’s All-Country World Investable Market index as of the start of 2024.

“This is very meaningful,” said Martin Frandsen, global equity portfolio manager at Principal Asset Management.

“In India we have seen and recognised the significant improvement from a value creation perspective, we see significant innovation as in China, a lot of opportunities . . . to invest in some great companies.”

Goldman Sachs analysts expect the Nifty 50 to advance 8 per cent and reach 27,500 by the end of September 2025. Those gains will be fuelled by corporate earnings growth in its mid-teens, according to the US bank.

However some analysts are cautioning over valuations in the Indian market. Goldman strategists said the 12-month forward price/earnings for the MSCI India index have hit a record high of 24.7 — making it the most expensive it has ever been.

Thurston warned that the positions of China and India could reverse again if the “depressed” valuations of Chinese companies recovered in the future.

Despite lofty equity valuations, Rajat Agarwal, Asia equity strategist at Société Générale, said flows into India would probably continue amid a more favourable outlook for emerging markets with the US Federal Reserve expected to cut interest rates on Wednesday.

“There is no one on the street not saying that valuations in India are not high,” Agarwal added. But domestic “money is coming in regardless . . . in the near term the flow situation is not going to reverse unless we see some kind of an external shock”.



Since a student-led uprising last month forced Bangladesh’s authoritarian leader to flee, it has been a topic at New Delhi dinner parties: where is Sheikh Hasina?

As protesters were marching on her Dhaka residence on August 5, Hasina resigned and flew to an air force base near Ghaziabad, India, on a Bangladeshi military aircraft. Narendra Modi’s government has since confirmed she is in India, but is declining to say more. That has not stopped tongues from wagging.

With various degrees of credibility, members of India’s chattering classes have privately claimed that the deposed strongwoman is in an Indian government safe house; staying with her daughter Saima Wazed, who took a Delhi-based regional job with the World Health Organisation in February; or has even been glimpsed strolling with her entourage around one of the capital’s poshest parks, Lodhi Garden.

The Modi government, Hasina’s top foreign backer when her Awami League party ran Bangladesh, is maintaining a decorous silence on the topic. Delhi’s local and foreign press have mostly stopped pretending they will get Hasina’s first post-overthrow interview.

There are a few reasons for this. Muhammad Yunus’s acting government, which took power after Hasina was toppled, has accused her of responsibility for hundreds of killings during the past summer’s unrest. India and Bangladesh have an extradition treaty — signed by Hasina’s own government in 2013 — which could in theory be used against her should the new regime seek her arrest.

“According to the extradition agreement with India, we may demand her extradition to Bangladesh,” Asif Nazrul, minister of law, justice and parliamentary affairs in Yunus’s interim cabinet, tells the Financial Times. “For now, we expect India not to allow her to instigate instability in Bangladesh, which she is trying to do by spreading lies and misinformation.”

Following recent press reports relaying controversial remarks attributed to Hasina, Yunus himself said (in words that in turn ruffled some in the Indian establishment): “If India wants to keep her until the time Bangladesh wants her back, the condition would be that she has to keep quiet.”

India has a history of offering refuge to fleeing regional leaders. The Dalai Lama settled in India after fleeing the Chinese takeover of Tibet in 1959. Though he has handed over political affairs to a civilian exile administration (also based in India), the Tibetan spiritual leader recently received a US Congressional delegation, a move that riled Beijing and which analysts say would not have taken place without the Modi government’s assent.

Afghan leader Mohammad Najibullah’s family fled to India in 1992, where his wife Fatana Najib and children still reportedly spend much of their time. (They keep a low profile; Najibullah himself was kept from fleeing and, after years sheltering in a UN compound, was killed and strung from a traffic light pole by the Taliban as they swept into Kabul in 1996).

Hasina herself, along with her sister Sheikh Rehana, took refuge in India for several years after 1975, when their father Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and most of their family were murdered in Dhaka in a coup. “There has been a host of precedents of leaders coming to India from the neighbourhood,” says Shivshankar Menon, a former foreign secretary and national security adviser under Manmohan Singh’s government. “We have always allowed them to stay, and in most cases they respect our wishes that they stay clear of political activity.”

Hasina is widely supported across the Indian political spectrum, where she is seen as a bulwark against Islamist extremism, and remembered with respect for her late father’s pivotal role in Bangladesh’s 1971 war of independence, in which Indira Gandhi’s government supported the winning side, at huge human cost.

The theory that Hasina’s ousting and Yunus’s installation as acting prime minister was a “colour revolution” or a regime change backed by the US, which supported Pakistan in 1971, has broad currency in India, and not just in pro-Modi circles.

The sensitivities of Hasina’s sojourn in India, say analysts, also mean a cloak of discretion is likely to surround her whereabouts for now — and by New Delhi’s design.

“These are the problems of intimacy, and things are delicate when it comes to our neighbours,” says Menon. “It’s not like we’re dealing with countries on the other side of the world.”

john.reed@ft.com



This article is part of FT Globetrotter’s guide to power dining

While the pull of the West End remains strong, the banks, law firms and other offices around the Square Mile are increasingly flocking to a reinvigorated Farringdon, where Mayfair’s asset managers can now blast in from Bond Street along the Elizabeth Line. A slew of new restaurant openings in recent years has transformed this area once famed for its historic meat market and 12th-century church into one of London’s most desirable places to dine. Choice spots include Brutto, the late Russell Norman’s Florentine affair, and the traditional French bistro Bouchon Racine, if one can get a table — a partner I know has their PA batch-book these restaurants whenever reservations open. Cloth, which opened in April this year, has become a fast favourite for its well-priced prix-fixe lunch, while Origin City, a new farm-to-fork joint on the edge of Smithfield Market, skilfully caters to carnivores. Longer-running establishments remain perennially popular too: St John, the nose-to-tail pioneer (it celebrates its 30th anniversary this year) might as well be one neighbouring law firm’s staff canteen; Quality Chop House (and its confit potatoes) needs no introduction; and Luca, with its Michelin-starred Italian fare and excellent wine list, offers ample temptation to test the limits of the company card.— Niki Blasina, deputy editor, FT Globetrotter

Sydney’s restaurant scene often takes a back seat to the foodie hub of Melbourne, but the Emerald City has plenty of hotspots for business lunches, including the burger and steak stalwart Rockpool Bar & Grill and newcomer Shell House, with its louche dining room and impressive terrace. Yet the “top end” of Sydney has started to show its more modish side in recent years, with places such as modern Cantonese-style restaurant Mr Wong providing an alternative to the leather-seated comfort of more traditional business hotspots. Mr Wong, hidden down an alleyway near Circular Quay, is a bustling two-storey affair and is the marque restaurant run by the Merivale company, a 1960s fashion house turned hospitality business, that has opened most of the trendiest places in town. Mr Wong is an energetic place with the kitchen operating in full view of the tables upstairs and Peking ducks artfully displayed in rows. Famed for its dumpling options and an impressive wine (and sake) list, Mr Wong has rapidly become a business lunch favourite for many. — Nic Fildes, Australia and Pacific correspondent

Time was, if you wanted a decent working lunch in the grey streets that hug the European Commission’s Berlaymont headquarters in Brussels, your options were limited to bog-standard Italian or Greek fare. But this summer’s favoured haunt of Eurocrat expense accounts has been Portuguese relative newcomer Puro, for cod and vinho verde to wash down the diplomatic gossip. Located in a space formerly inhabited by a dive bar of undistinguished reputation yards from the EU’s car-park-esque HQ, Puro leans heavily into seafood and Portuguese tradition (even if the caricature pen portraits of Cristiano Ronaldo and Eusébio on the walls are a bit much). Brussels’ Portuguese community is long-standing, and you can find their kitchens on every corner in some parts of the city’s now-hip St Gilles neighbourhood, but Puro is the first to take a stab at the EU bubble. Like most of its rivals, it understands that crowd’s penchant for a two-course, one-hour, half-a-bottle approach to lunch. But those with time to kill and a taxpayer-subsidised credit card should enjoy both octopus to start and pineapple carpaccio to finish. — Henry Foy, Brussels bureau chief

The Central district, where lots of the city’s bankers, lawyers and accountants are based, has remained for years the most buzzing location for business dining. Here corporate lunches can include one of the territory’s best Hainan chicken rice dishes at Mandarin Oriental’s Café Causette, or a memorable Japanese izakaya-style experience at the hotel’s The Aubrey.

Chinese fine-dining restaurant China Tang, which serves excellent dim sum, remains particularly popular for work lunches. The members-only China Club, an alternative nearby choice, offers a more exclusive environment in which to chat over exquisite traditional Cantonese cuisine that has received the stamp of approval from the city’s elite for years. As the day ends, Cardinal Point with its stunning view of the dazzling skyline is perfect for talking business over drinks — and to take in Hong Kong’s signature skyscrapers at night.— Chan Ho-him, Hong Kong reporter

Langosteria is a buzzy seafood restaurant that locals, fashionistas and business people have long been obsessed with. The city is full of great high-end eateries, but some of the classic choices have lost traction or shut down, paving the way for Langosteria’s success. However, the venue — co-owned by founder Enrico Buonocore and the Moncler-controlling Ruffini family — has an extra ingredient that makes it particularly appealing to business people and big spenders: the cool factor, which is reflected in everything from the design and the bar to the endless wine list. It recently opened in Paris and has other locations in St Moritz and Portofino. But in Milan, where Langosteria first set up shop and where it currently has three locations serving similar menus, it continues to be the top choice for business diners, which can mean long waiting lists, especially at peak times on Thursday and Friday evenings. — Silvia Sciorilli Borrelli, Milan correspondent

Nigeria is experiencing its worst economic crisis in three decades. But you wouldn’t know it when you walk into Farfallino, a new Italian restaurant in the business district of Victoria Island whose popularity has soared since its April opening. Its menu offers the usual Italian fare and wine that would win a nonna’s approval. The pizzas are a must-have. In a city with limited high-quality dining options and a constant search for the next big thing, it’s no surprise the well-heeled throng to Farfallino. Reviews have been mixed, and the prices are eye-wateringly high, but there’s a consensus that it is the place to be.— Aanu Adeoye, west and central Africa correspondent

Set on the grounds of the massive former Carlsberg brewery, Copenhagen’s newest district has deliberately placed food at the heart of its offering and is drawing business diners (and many others) in droves. Carlsberg Byen, situated to the west of the city centre, is home to some of the biggest and buzziest names from the capital of Nordic cuisine, as well as still hosting the brewer’s headquarters and a new exhibition about the beer. Surt makes some of Copenhagen’s best pizzas, Hija de Sanchez does fabulous tacos and at Aamanns Genbo you’ll find innovative smørrebrød, the open-faced sandwiches that are a must for a business lunch. Hart Bageri, Københavns Bageri and Coffee Collective all offer delectable pastries and decent coffee.— Richard Milne, Nordic and Baltic correspondent

It is perhaps precisely because of Frankfurt’s gastronomical commitment to pork, potatoes, and apfelwein that it in recent years has become fertile ground for ambitious vegan restaurants. Trailblazers such as Michelin-starred Seven Swans, with its plant-based menu made from seasonal and regionally sourced roots and leaves (and chic neighbouring cocktail bar The Tiny Cup, located in the narrowest building in Frankfurt), set the stage for this shift more than a decade ago. Now, newcomers such as the hip, tapas-inspired Leuchtendroter and the (aesthetically at least) more traditionally German Hohenheim & Söhne are joining the scene, turning Frankfurt into an unexpected hotspot for inventive vegan cuisine — a vibrant counterpoint to its traditional culinary tapestry.— Patricia Nilsson, Frankfurt correspondent

In Brazil’s financial capital, a gastronomic hub has emerged in the past few years on Rua Ferreira de Araújo, in the Pinheiros neighbourhood. The street is a 10-15 minute drive from the big banks and investment firms on Avenida Faria Lima, the nation’s version of Wall Street. Among its dozens of restaurants and bars, there’s Italian at Più, Modern Mamma Osteria (MOMA) and Tartuferia, which specialises in dishes with truffles. Canto do Picuí offers cuisine from the north-eastern Brazilian state of Alagoas. For Middle Eastern street food in a relaxed setting (and plenty of vegetarian options), try Shuk Falafel & Kebabs. — Michael Pooler, Brazil correspondent

New York’s love affair with Italian food has taken a more curated twist in recent years. Stuck in Midtown? Try the classic Casa Lever, a space-age cathedral with your choice of private booth or main-floor dining, which is best known for its crudos and osso bucco alla Milanese. Venturing downtown, dine at the recently opened Roscioli in SoHo. The tasting menu of Roman delights or cacio e pepe will bring you back to the restaurant’s origins in Campo dei Fiori in the heart of Italy’s capital. Seafood perhaps? Then Santi may be worth the wait. Michael White, the former executive chef of Marea (a longtime classic) is opening this new haunt this autumn, and it’s already being hyped as a hotspot for New York’s power brokers. — Sophie Spiegelberger, US audience engagement journalist

The Kronenhalle is that rarest of things: a restaurant as microcosm. This grand dame of the Zurich restaurant scene survives all attempts of flashier, more on-trend, more novel, more — frankly — delicious restaurants to unseat it. Perhaps because, with its starchy but friendly mix of formality and egalitarianism, its heavy röstis and cream sauces on the table, thick china plates below Mirós on the wall (and Braques and Chagalls and Bonnards), its intimacy and its openness (they’ll get you in if they can), not to mention its epic timelessness, it is as if this restaurant is mainlining Zürchers ur-conception of self and Swissness.

Everyone is here. (Everyone who has of course, vaulted the high financial bar of this most expensive to live in or visit of cities.) Eating here is like being on the Orient Express of old, in the Christie conception, only without the murder. The dark wood and brass and the booths of the downstairs “brasserie” room add to the sense of a wagon-lit. But what really does it is the cast of fellow diners: princesses and swindlers and bank CEOs and DJs and ruby-wedding celebrants down from the mountains and jobbing poets and you. “Ceci n’est pas un musée,” the restaurant declares on its website, paraphrasing Magritte with a wink. Of course it is (cliché incoming): a living one. — Sam Jones, FT correspondent

Much of Mumbai’s business dining remains in the unimaginative confines of high-end hotels where you’ll see a mix of suited locals and foreign visitors at the often-excellent in-house Indian restaurant or less-exciting western equivalent. Others head to international Asian chains such as Hakkasan and Yauatcha. But more restaurants have drawn the after-work crowd with less-bloating modern takes on Indian or fusion-type cuisine. A powerful Mumbai corporate lawyer recommends the recently opened Ode in Worli, whose menu including pizza and spiced buffalo tenderloin draws on the Maharashtrian and European heritage of Rahul Akerkar, one of the city’s most renowned chefs. More established favourites include the nearby Bombay Canteen and its sibling restaurant O Pedro in the glitzy BKC district, known for their seasonal and Goan delicacies. — Chris Kay, Mumbai correspondent

The exquisite demands of Madrid’s power lunchers have helped make the city a global gastronomic hub, and today the business crowd flocks to Calle de Jorge Juan in the chichi Salamanca neighbourhood, a narrow thoroughfare of towering trees and whitewashed apartments, its terraces bubbling over with conviviality. Celebrity chef Dani García does seafood at Lobito de Mar. Amazónico is a jungle-themed place with a gonzo playfulness. The starched tablecloths of El Paraguas frame Asturian cuisine of classical refinement. Luxury shopping abounds too, including down the secluded Callejón de Puigcerdà, where there is Roman food at SottoSopra and thick-cut sushi at Robata. All told, says one veteran expat, the street is the centre of Madrid’s “CNBC scene”. — Barney Jopson, Spain and Portugal correspondent

Head to Valois in the eighth arrondissement for classic French bistro fare adjacent to leafy Parc Monceau. It is stone’s throw from Lazard and Morgan Stanley, so bankers abound. Le Bristol for breakfast (the fruits rouges are a delight, if wildly pricey) and for drinks in the evening — the martinis are among the city’s best. Matsuhisa’s Japanese-Peruvian fusion in Le Royal Monceau-Raffles Paris is a welcome reprieve when you’ve had your fill of beef and butter, and the airy setting allows for privacy. Au Petit Riche (ninth arrondissement) is an institution for a reason, and everything you could wish for in a classic French restaurant. Across the river, Jaïs (seventh arrondissement) offers a lobster salad worth crossing the city for and is heavily frequented by Left Bank lawyers. Finally, if you want to impress with your cultural nous, Ogata’s immaculate Japanese set menus in the Marais should help you close the deal. — Adrienne Klasa, Paris correspondent

Rome is beloved for its classic pastas, from amatriciana to cacio e pepe, but it can be rather hard to go back to work after partaking of such rich fare. Hence the popularity of Ginger Sapori e Saluti, with its health-conscious menu focusing on seasonal organic ingredients. Roman ladies who lunch and business diners flock here for its gourmet panini and generous salads laden with Italian treats such as Parma ham, fresh buffalo mozzarella and Parmigiano Reggiano; Ginger’s own take on more classic fare including pastas, grilled meats and burgers; and more unexpected offerings such as a quinoa or tuna poke bowl. Vegetarians and vegans are well catered for, while fresh fruit smoothies are an antidote to the typical Italian carb overdose. Don’t miss the amazing vegan raspberry cheesecake, even if you aren’t a vegan. Ginger has expanded to three prime sites in the historic centre, the latest of which opened a year ago in the courtyard of an 18th-century palazzo.

Those searching for greater tradition can opt for the old Roman favourite Ciampini — in the nearby Piazza di San Lorenzo in Lucina — where Italian political power brokers famously go to see and be seen, as much as for the food. — Amy Kazmin, Rome correspondent

What’s your favourite city for business dining? Tell us in the comments below. And follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter



India is the rising nation of world chess. It possesses a trio of young grandmasters in the world top 10, the 2024 world title challenger Gukesh Dommaraju, strong financial support, and a large and enthusiastic public following. Its team narrowly missed gold at the 2022 Olympiad in Chennai, but is well-placed for success at Budapest 2024.

The United States headed the initial seedings, but is below full strength. Fabiano Caruana, the world No2, began in fine form but Hikaru Nakamura, the No3, already has Olympiad gold from 2016 so gave priority to his streaming career, while Hans Niemann’s results surge in recent weeks came too late for the team selection. Four of the five Americans previously played in Olympiads for other nations.

Banned Russia is absent, while China, which won gold on its last appearance, has been handicapped by the continuing poor form of Ding Liren, the reigning world champion, who began with a series of four tame draws and a loss while his challenger Gukesh started with four wins and a draw. India’s fast improving world No 4 Arjun Erigaisi is the only player to win all six games.

After six (of 11) rounds on Tuesday’s rest day, India leads the open Olympiad with a maximum 12 points, followed by Vietnam, China and Iran with 11. If both field their best teams, India v China on Wednesday will be a preview of  the Ding v Gukesh world title match. England is 10th with 10 points, but has yet to meet any of the leaders.

India leads the women’s Olympiad with 12 points, followed by Georgia and Poland with 11. England is 28th with nine. To view the Olympiad games with live commentary from Budapest, go to the Fide site, where games start at 2.15pm BST daily. Click on to Open or Women and you can watch any game you choose, with an evaluation bar to show who has the advantage.

The Fide congress, which takes place during the Olympiad, will include a controversial motion to restore full voting rights to Russia and Belarus, who were banned in 2022 when the Olympiad was switched at short notice from Moscow to Chennai. The motion is believed to have enough votes for a majority, despite strong opposition from Ukraine and its allies. Meanwhile, Fide has scored a marketing success. Google will be the title sponsor of the Ding v Gukesh $2.6mn world title match in Singapore, the first such by a major international company since Intel in the 1990s.

The Olympiad traditionally accepts entries from the smallest and weakest nations in the interests of a huge entry of nearly 190 teams, and this policy is guaranteed to continue at its next two renewals at Tashkent 2026 and Abu Dhabi 2028.

The resulting organisational strains would arguably diminish if the Olympiad had a qualifying standard, as does the Olympic Games. A minimum level per team of around 2000 rating points, expert level, for the Open event and 1800 for the Women’s Olympiad would make the numbers more manageable. Half a century ago, when the legendary Soviet, American and Yugoslav teams ruled the event, there were few weak entrants. As it is now, there are games on the lowest Olympiad boards which would shame a novice.

Puzzle 2590

Vasyl Ivanchuk v Wesley So, Ukraine v United States, Budapest Olympiad 2024. White to move and win.

Click here for solution



The UK government has approached consultancies about taking the role of special administrator in a sign that ministers are bracing themselves for the imminent renationalisation of Thames Water.

Consultancies including Teneo, Interpath and EY are among the potential candidates to run a so-called special administration regime, according to people familiar with the process. A SAR is a temporary measure designed to keep services running, and suppliers and staff paid, in the event of a corporate collapse.

“We are ready now, we could do one [SAR} today, if we had to,” said one official. “Incidentally, being ready for a SAR is also the strongest lever that we as government can have to make sure that another market-led, private-led solution is found.”

Thames Water is struggling under its £19bn debt pile and has warned that it will run out of cash in March unless the High Court signs off a controversial £3bn loan at a hearing in early February.

Another government official said that there had been “informal engagement” with certain consultancies over a special administrator role but no formal interview process.

Steve Reed, the environment secretary, said in October that he had “ruled out nationalisation”.

Officials insist that taking the company into SAR would not technically be a nationalisation despite it being a big state intervention.

But plunging Thames Water into special administration may be unavoidable if the court blocks the loan agreed with its senior creditors, or if the company runs out of cash earlier than expected. The £3bn loan is controversial because it would carry an interest rate of 9.75 per cent as well as fees and incentives for the existing Thames Water management.

The agreement is being challenged by a separate group of Thames Water’s junior creditors — which have proposed a cheaper deal — and by environmental campaigners who argue that the company would be better off in special administration.

The loan would buy the company time to raise at least £3bn of equity in a parallel process. Companies including Castle Water, Covalis and CKI Infrastructure are among investment groups lining up to put in potential bids for the utility.

Bidders and creditors are waiting to see if the company appeals to the Competition and Markets Authority over regulator Ofwat’s decision last month on the level by which water companies can hike customer bills over the next five years. Thames Water has not yet made a decision whether to appeal Ofwat’s decision to the CMA, according to people familiar with the matter.

Ofwat has said that Thames will be allowed to raise bills 35 per cent — much lower than the 59 per cent increase it had sought — taking average bills from around £436 now to £588 between now and 2030.

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Thames Water and Ofwat did not respond to requests seeking comment.

EY, Teneo and Interpath declined to comment.

In an update to the market on Wednesday, the company’s chief restructuring officer, Julian Gething, said: “Our plan delivers for customers and stakeholders by unlocking up to £3bn of new money and securing a total of £3.5bn of debt maturity extensions over the next two years and cash releases, so we can continue investing the billions of pounds required to improve our network’s resilience.

“We believe it is the only implementable solution to enable the equity investment required to provide stability and certainty in the longer term and will not impact customer bills.”

The government’s choice of administrator may be complicated by potential conflicts of interest. Teneo is already an adviser to Thames Water and has received £5mn in fees since August 2023. It had also received at least £60mn from running the special administration of collapsed energy supplier Bulb, according to the National Audit Office.

It has also written a report to the High Court supporting the senior creditors’ £3bn loan, while Interpath has written a separate report on behalf of the junior creditors.

Sir Dieter Helm, professor of economic policy at Oxford university, has argued that a SAR would enable Thames Water to focus on a restructuring and on delivering improvements, rather than on negotiating a deal with creditors.



A teenager has been handed one of the longest jail terms in UK history for the “sadistic” and “meticulously planned” murder of three small children in Southport last July.

Axel Rudakubana, 18, was sentenced to life with a minimum of 52 years in prison on Thursday after admitting to the murder of Bebe King, six, Elsie Dot Stancombe, seven, and Alice Da Silva Aguiar, nine, at a Taylor Swift-themed dance class.

He had also pleaded guilty to 10 attempted murders, as well as possession of an al-Qaeda training manual and the toxic substance ricin.

After time already served, the minimum sentence was 51 years and 190 days. Sentencing, Mr Justice Goose said: “It is highly likely that he will never be released.”

Rudakubana is said to have shown no remorse since the attacks six months ago, which prompted riots across the country and questions about how authorities failed to spot multiple warning signs about his behaviour.

Liverpool Crown Court heard that he had gloated about the killings at a police station after his arrest, saying: “It’s a good thing those children are dead . . . so glad . . . so happy.”

The court heard harrowing details about the attack itself, and that Rudakubana, who was 17 at the time, had planned his rampage for several weeks beforehand.

Six minutes before leaving his house at 11.10am on Monday, July 29, he searched the social media platform X for footage of a terror attack that had taken place in Australia a few months earlier, in which the bishop Mar Mari Emmanuel was stabbed at a church in Sydney.

Doorbell footage then shows him pacing up and down outside his house with his hood up.

Armed with a 20cm kitchen knife, he caught a taxi to the workshop in the Hart Space centre, Southport, where 26 children had gathered to dance, sing and make friendship bracelets.

The court heard that Rudakubana went upstairs to the class and 30 seconds later began stabbing children wordlessly.

He stabbed some victims in the back as they tried to escape. Alongside the three murdered children, eight other children and two adults were also injured.

Police found Rudakubana silently standing over a child’s body on the landing, still holding the kitchen knife he had used to carry out the attack.

Later searches of the house he shared with his parents in Banks, Lancashire, uncovered a machete, a set of arrows, bottles with matches attached, and an Apollo Cerbera knife identical to the one used in the attack. Both knives had been bought on Amazon on July 13, using a virtual private network to encrypt his internet address.

Police also found a plastic box containing a “pulp”-like substance under his bed. Tests by the UK government laboratory Porton Down confirmed it to be the deadly substance ricin, which he had made in his bedroom.

Police also seized 43 electronic devices from his home, 32 of which they were able to access.

While his internet search history had mostly been deleted, they uncovered more than 164,000 downloaded documents spanning a vast range of extreme violent imagery and information. Subject matter included beheadings, genocides, wars in Iraq, Rwanda, Gaza and Sudan, and images of weapons.

Rudakubana had also downloaded an academic paper containing an excerpt from an al-Qaeda training manual.

Mr Justice Goose concluded that Rudakubana had followed the instructions it contained in order to carry out the killings.

“I am satisfied that for some time, he had planned to kill as many people as he could,” he said, adding that anyone who had heard the evidence in the case “would describe what he did as evil”.

Merseyside chief constable Serena Kennedy said the murders had amounted to a “sadistic” rampage carried out by a teenager with an “unhealthy fascination with violence”.

“Having researched atrocities committed by others, the evidence suggests that he set out to emulate them on July 29,” she said, adding that there was no evidence he ascribed to “any particular political or religious ideology”.

“He wasn’t fighting for a cause,” she said. “His only purpose was to kill and he targeted the youngest, most vulnerable in order to spread the greatest level of fear and outrage, which he succeeded in doing.”

Rudakubana — who had been diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder and had been known to children’s and mental health services, as well as the anti-extremism programme Prevent — said nothing in formal police interviews.

During Thursday’s hearing Rudakubana shouted over the prosecutor and demanded to see a paramedic.

The court heard he had stopped eating while on remand. He was taken away for medical checks and did not return to court, after promising to continue disrupting proceedings.

The attack last July helped to spark a wave of riots across the UK, including in the Merseyside town of Southport itself, after misinformation spread online that the attacker was an illegal immigrant.

Rudakubana, who was born in Cardiff to Rwandan immigrants, was not charged with an act of terror, although he was convicted of possessing terror-related material. Police and prosecutors said that current legislation did not allow for a terror charge due to Rudakubana’s apparent lack of ideology.

They said there was no evidence he had been working with others, or of activity in online chats or forums.

However, he had been known to the government’s anti-extremism programme Prevent, to whom he was referred three times between 2019 and 2021.

On the first occasion, in November 2019, he was referred by his school after searching for information on school shootings during an information technology class.

In February 2021, he was referred after a fellow pupil raised concerns over his Instagram posts about former Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi. Two months later he was referred by a teacher who noted he had two tabs open on his computer about the London Bridge terror attacks of 2017.

In each case, the programme took no further action, noting a lack of overriding ideology.

Ahead of the sentencing Vicki Evans, senior national co-ordinator for Counter Terrorism Policing, said the Prevent programme’s understanding of such extremism had still been “evolving” at the time.

Earlier this week Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer announced a public inquiry into the killings, as well as a review of the Prevent programme.

Lancashire police were contacted five times about Rudakubana between 2019 and 2022.

In March 2022, he went missing and was found by police in possession of a knife. He told officers that he wanted to stab someone and had thought about poisoning people.

Rudakubana had also been convicted under the youth justice system after attacking a fellow pupil with a hockey stick in 2019. He had taken a knife into school 10 times previously.

Lancashire police said prior to sentencing that it had reviewed each of its call-outs to Rudakubana but could not discuss the details further, due to the forthcoming public inquiry.

In court, victims and their families read out harrowing accounts of the impact last July’s attack had on their lives.

Leanne Lucas, who had organised the dance class in Southport, was stabbed by Rudakubana and helped many of the children escape.

“As a 36-year-old woman,” she said, “I cannot walk down the street without holding my breath as I bypass a person and then glance back to see if they’ve attempted to stab me.”



Good afternoon. It’s been hard to know where to look this week, what with the second Trump administration’s opening salvo on taxes and tariffs alongside Rachel Reeves’ increasingly aggressive demands on regulators to deliver growth, but I choose the home front.

The ousting of Marcus Bokkerink as chair of the Competition and Markets Authority on Tuesday evening — pour encourager les autres — was part of a concerted attempt by the government to shift the narrative on growth.

Reeves let it be known that growth — including potentially expanding Gatwick and Luton airports and adding a third runway at Heathrow — must trump all other priorities, including the drive to net zero.

At the same time, the government announced the next raft of planning reforms, including establishing a ‘Nature Restoration Fund’ where developers can pay into a pot for projects that offset the damage caused by developments.

As you’d expect, there are already complaints and objections from this apparently gung-ho approach, including from backbench Labour MPs who are reportedly “holding their heads in despair” at the sight of a Labour chancellor pedalling a Tory narrative on deregulation.

But I suspect Reeves won’t mind that too much, because there really is a need to change the narrative — not just of this government, which has had a wretchedly flat-footed beginning, but of the entire post-Brexit period.

Turning the page, telling a story

Last week Labour Together, the party’s in-house think-tank, published a timely report setting out how post-Brexit UK needs to get its mojo back, in a “more dangerous and competitive world”, as evidenced this week by Trump’s return to the White House.

The report’s author, Jonathan McClory of strategy firm Sanctuary Counsel, assembled a panel of UK and international diplomats, academics and investors to create a semi-structured focus group to try to identify a new way forward.

Even though none were asked specifically about Brexit, almost all brought it up. This is not about trade barriers, per se, but about the reputational damage caused to the UK as a place to do business and the failure to build a compelling new national narrative outside the EU.

As one interviewee noted:

“The chaotic political handling of Brexit has left an impression of a country that doesn’t know what it wants, doesn’t have the capacity to think about its interests, and is consumed by slogans rather than strategy”.

Three other key takeaways: firstly, the UK interviewees were gloomier than the international ones, which tells you that too much self-flagellation over Brexit is counterproductive. As Sir Keir Starmer keeps saying, “we need to move on”. But it’s actions that matter, not words.

Secondly, that the UK’s future softpower advantage should be centred on “science, technology, and innovation” — AI, green technology, bioengineering — at least as much as traditional cultural advantages.

This is not to dismiss our traditional values around history — the UK invented most of the world’s sports, for example — and we’re good at the flummery that comes with an active royal family. But in this new ground zero world of AI, rampant tech, pandemics and climate change, the argument is that “it’s time to move on”.

And thirdly, and most importantly, that the rebirth starts at home. We can tie ourselves in knots over the ‘EU reset’ and how to handle Donald Trump (“Heaven help us”, as one senior government insider put it to me this week) but the foundations that need fixing first are here.

As another interviewee said, “The UK needs to put its domestic affairs in order first,” adding, encouragingly: “once [the UK] manages that, it could really be a leader on many of the areas the global community is struggling with.”

Saying is not doing, but it’s a start

Obviously, putting domestic affairs in order is not just about giving speeches in Davos to please corporate investors, but that’s not a bad place to start if you’re trying to stem the tide of relentlessly negative reactions to a Budget that has weighed on hiring and investment.

The next step is to join the dots. As a reader pointed out after last week’s newsletter, it sends a powerful signal that Angela Rayner overruled the Environment Agency to green-light a Cambridge housing development last December that had been blocked over water scarcity concerns.

But that needs to be accompanied by an actual plan to reduce water consumption, release finance for a new water pipeline and, ultimately, deliver a new reservoir after a period of 35 years when the UK has failed to build a single one.

As well as long-term investment, that requires lining up all the strategic regulators, from Ofwat to the Environment Agency and to actually get it done — and have it seen to be done. Reeves made a start on that this week.

It also means, for example, that if you’re going to have an industrial strategy that draws talent from all across the world, prevailing on the Home Office to make visas easier and more plentiful — and daring to make the political argument why this is necessary.

And it means, if you’re going to have a ‘trade strategy’, actually injecting some urgency and ambition into the EU-UK ‘reset’ (still not too late), which leads to another argument over immigration and the repeated failure of a homegrown skills strategy.

Or it could mean, according to Chris Southworth at the International Chamber of Commerce, taking aggressive steps to remove what he calls the “over zealous regulation” that makes it so difficult for SMEs in particular to obtain trade finance.

So while there probably isn’t much in the coming EU ‘reset’ that will fix things for SMEs who’ve been hammered by Brexit, Southworth argues there are steps — on access to finance and trade digitisation — that the UK can do at home to get UK companies exporting.

He’s not convinced that the Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority is going far enough to remove barriers that are a legacy of 9/11 and the 2008 financial crash and are stifling the ability of SMEs to obtain low risk, short-term working capital.

“I would have liked to see far more radical and ambitious ideas such as removing capital requirements for SMEs altogether. This would inject far more confidence into the market that the PRA are getting serious on supporting growth,” he says.

Make no mistake, the mood is pretty grim. But as I heard while chairing the annual Executive Survey for MakeUK, the manufacturing body, this morning, it’s far from terminal if the government can build a compelling narrative for Britain.

Business is labouring under heavy additional costs as a result of the Budget but as the CEO of medical products maker Vernacare Alex Hodges said, there is also a well of optimism waiting to be tapped — they just want the government to lean in a bit.

So I can think of lots of reasons why various growth-enhancing measures (some examples above) won’t happen; but after making such a desperately low-key start to their term in office, ousting a prominent regulator and promising to ‘build baby, build’ is at least sending a strong signal that you intend to have a serious go at it.

This week’s chart comes from a thought-provoking report by the Centre for Cities think-tank which maps the link between places engaged in exporting activities and higher wages and productivity.

The report uses national data to show that exporting activities are the drivers of UK productivity growth, with sectors like IT, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and finance leading growth since 1997.

This is because exporting activities, particularly in the new industries, have a “greater ability to absorb new innovations and use creativity to create value”, and also have greater resilience because they can access more markets and ride out cyclical downturns.

This is the mechanical link between trade and growth. So as the Centre for Cities chief executive Andrew Carter observes, the report highlights the need — political constraints aside — to deepen that relationship as far as possible.

“We clearly need to have the most advantageous relationship and arrangement with Europe as we can possibly get. There’s the difficult politics of that but the further we move away from the best version of an arrangement, the harder it gets,” he says.

For all that, the government remains committed to a deeply limited EU ‘reset’ strategy, hemmed in by its red lines on single market and customs union membership.

We’ll see if the fallout from Trump leads to a pinking of those red lines in a bid to unlock areas that would help attract investment, via improved access to the UK’s largest export market for both people and goods.

We are now approaching the point, as the agenda is drawn up for the first EU-UK ‘reset’ summit in March or April this year, when we’ll start to see how ambitious the UK is prepared to be.

Even keeping to the red lines, there are things to be done: the youth mobility deal (which could bleed into elements of professional mobility), full alignment with the EU’s carbon-markets (to reduce carbon border tax friction) and maybe even some fixes on customs.

One area that is being flirted with in London is the UK joining the Pan-Euro Mediterranean convention. This is a customs agreement between the EU and 20 countries, including several in the Middle East and the Balkans, where all countries share the same ‘rules of origin’.

For now, ministers are officially saying that the UK is not interested, but sectoral analysis and some business consultation is ongoing. Trade minister Douglas Alexander left the door open this week by telling MPs that the convention “is an issue that we are open to looking at” and the UK approach would be “pragmatic”.

It’s complicated. It’s not a silver bullet and will do nothing to address regulatory frictions. But if you want to understand the possibilities (and some of the trade-offs) then a paper by Anna Jerzewska of the consultancy Trade & Borders, is a really clear piece of work on a tricky subject. Well worth your time.

The State of Britain is edited by Gordon Smith. Premium subscribers can sign up here to have it delivered straight to their inbox every Thursday afternoon. Or you can take out a Premium subscription here. Read earlier editions of the newsletter here.



The UK government has launched a review into the “loan charge” in a bid to “bring to a close” the row over the tax-avoidance crackdown since linked to multiple suicides.

Treasury minister James Murray told the Financial Times that the impetus behind the review, announced on Thursday, was to resolve outstanding tax debts related to avoidance schemes.

But he added that the review, to be led by former HM Revenue & Customs inspector Ray McCann, would also “maintain fairness [to] the public purse” and other taxpayers who had not engaged in tax avoidance.

“Some of the people affected by the loan charge find it hard to imagine a way out of this situation they’re in . . . For me trying to resolve and bring the matter to a close for them is a driving force for this review,” Murray said in an interview ahead of the announcement.

In 2019, the then-Conservative government introduced the “loan charge” in an attempt to clamp down on “disguised remuneration” schemes, which involved workers across a range of sectors being paid in loans via offshore trusts and had proliferated in the previous two decades.

HMRC has previously said about 50,000 people were estimated to be affected by the loan charge and that users’ income was “on average twice as much as the average UK taxpayer”.

The loan charge originally required people affected to pay tax on up to 20 years of income in one financial year, sparking a public outcry and accusations that the government was issuing unreasonable demands.

The previous Tory administration later softened the policy, halving the 20-year timeframe and making it easier to spread repayments.

But six years on from the policy’s launch, tens of thousands of people have yet to settle their affairs with HMRC. The tax authority has reported that the policy has been linked to at least 10 suicides and 13 attempted suicides.

Labour committed to a new independent review of the loan charge before the general election last year. A previous report by Lord Amyas Morse in 2019 was criticised by MPs and campaigners for involving Treasury and HMRC officials.

Murray said the government had “gone to some lengths” to ensure public confidence in the review, which will run until the summer and be staffed by civil servants who have no connection with or experience working on loan charge policy. They will work in a building separate to the Treasury.

McCann, a former president of the Chartered Institute of Taxation, said he was “pleased to be asked to help find ways” to resolve the dispute.

McCann previously criticised how HMRC has sought to engage with loan charge campaigners, noting that “all the people [within the agency] who are working on loan schemes could be working on customer service”.

In a statement, the government said the review would probe “the barriers preventing those subject to the loan charge from reaching resolution with HMRC and recommend ways in which they can be encouraged to do so”.

Campaigners who have demanded a wide-ranging probe — looking at the role of scheme developers, umbrella companies, recruitment agencies, accountants and tax advisers who recommended the schemes, as well as HMRC — hit out at the announcement.

Steve Packham, of the Loan Charge Action Group, said the proposed review was “a betrayal” and would “not resolve the matter”.

“We are deeply worried about the impact on mental health that the announcement of this sham non-review will have,” he added.

Murray said his meetings with loan charge campaigners last year had alerted him to the policy’s impact and that the government wanted the McCann review, to which it will respond by the autumn Budget, to “provide a way for taxpayers affected to come to a settlement”.

Despite some asking “for a review with a different scope”, Murray added that his priority was “to help those people who feel stuck”.



The UK Competition and Markets Authority is planning to cut staff numbers by close to 10 per cent following a “budgeting error”, as the agency reels from the ousting of its chair by the government.

Chief executive Sarah Cardell told staff at a town-hall meeting in December that the CMA was starting a voluntary exit scheme to cut staff numbers by about 100 because of an overspend, according to people familiar with the matter.

Cardell referred to the overspend as a “budgeting error”, the people said. The CMA has a total headcount of nearly 1,200 and its budget from the Treasury for this year is £139mn.

At another town hall meeting on Monday, Cardell said certain areas of the agency, such as mergers and the new digital markets unit, would be protected from the cuts, the people said.

The watchdog was seeking to avoid forced job cuts by starting with voluntary departures, one of the people added.

The cuts come as the regulator has found itself in the Labour government’s crosshairs, with CMA chair Marcus Bokkerink ousted this week by ministers after complaints from business about the regulator.

Ministers wanted to send a signal to the CMA and other independent regulators that the government wanted to prioritise growth, according to officials.

Bokkerink’s exit has led antitrust lawyers and lobbyists to question whether the CMA will now take a softer approach towards Big Tech. Bokkerink has been replaced in the interim by former Amazon UK head Doug Gurr.

In a staff meeting on Thursday, Cardell sought to reassure employees that they did not need to be concerned about Bokkerink’s departure and that the government had given assurances of its confidence in the agency, one person said.

While the staff exit scheme was in train before Bokkerink’s ousting, some employees are concerned that in light of the government’s frustration with the agency there could be further staff reductions.

Staff numbers at the antitrust regulator have grown considerably over the past eight years from about 600 staff in 2017 to 1,185 as of October 2024, according to the most recent disclosure.

The CMA has expanded its presence from London to a number of hubs across the UK. Part of the growth is down to its suite of powers under the new digital markets regime, which came into effect this month, and led to the creation of the digital markets unit at the agency to enforce it.

Under the new regime, the CMA will designate a number of Big Tech companies with a large presence in certain digital markets as having “strategic market status” and force them to abide by certain conduct rules.

Google and Apple became the first companies this month to face investigations to determine if they should be handed the status.

The CMA said: “This is an historic budget issue which has been addressed swiftly and appropriately. The CMA is fully focused on its priorities for the coming year including working with the government and the new interim chair to help deliver growth.”

The Treasury said it was “aware of this historic issue and worked with the CMA last year to resolve it”, adding: “We are now moving forward with the second part of spending review discussions, as we are with all government departments.”



J Sainsbury is axing 3,000 jobs, including senior managers, as the UK’s second-largest supermarket chain accelerates cost-cutting after the Labour government increased taxes on employers in its October Budget.

The redundancies, which amount to 2 per cent of the group’s workforce, will result from the closure of its 61 remaining in-store cafés and sweeping changes at management level.

About 20 per cent of senior management roles are expected to be axed, Sainsbury’s said on Thursday.

The decision comes after dozens of large UK retailers, including Sainsbury’s, warned in November that the higher costs arising from the Budget would feed through into job losses and higher prices for customers.

The move by one of the UK’s biggest private-sector employers will make for awkward timing for the chancellor, Rachel Reeves, who is meanwhile attempting to woo business leaders and foreign investors at the World Economic Forum in Davos.

More than half of UK retailers said they would reduce the number of hours for their workers, as well as head-office headcount, according to a survey of finance chiefs earlier this month by the British Retail Consortium.

Sainsbury’s job cuts follow an announcement by the company last year that it would cut a further £1bn in costs over the next three years.

The reorganisation also comes amid what chief executive Simon Roberts called “a particularly challenging cost environment” as retailers battle rising costs and taxes.

The retail sector has forecast bigger annual costs of up to £7bn, largely stemming from increases in national insurance contributions and the national living wage.

Sainsbury’s is facing a £140mn hit to its tax bill from the Budget. Some of the changes to its workforce were partly driven by this, according to one person familiar with the decision.

In October, Reeves announced that the rate of employers’ national insurance contributions would rise 1.2 percentage points to 15 per cent from April while the earnings threshold at which the tax kicks in would be reduced from £9,100 to £5,000.

The minimum wage is also set to rise, adding to employers’ cost pressures.

Andrew Griffith, the shadow business secretary, said: “This news from one of Britain’s biggest retailers is devastating but no surprise. Thanks to Labour’s budget 3,000 jobs will be lost and 3,000 families will suffer without the security of regular pay.”

The grocery chain said it was overhauling the structure of its central management teams “to support faster decision making and drive performance” at both Sainsbury’s and Argos, which is also owned by the group.

This would lead to fewer, bigger head office roles with clearer accountability, the company said, adding that the changes would take effect in coming months.

Roberts said the business “had to make tough choices about where we can afford to invest and where we need to do things differently to make our business more efficient and effective”.

Clive Black, head of consumer research at Shore Capital, said Sainsbury’s had unveiled “further, increasingly necessary steps post the autumn Budget, to manage its cost base to enable ongoing investment”.

“Whilst very difficult, such steps are necessary to us, especially in the face of very considerable UK government-sourced cost expansion,” he added.

Separately, the finance chief of Associated British Foods, which owns fashion chain Primark, warned that consumers were holding back from buying clothes partly because of increasing uncertainty over the security of their jobs.

On Thursday, the company blamed cautious consumers in its core UK market as it cut Primark’s sales forecast for 2025.

Chief financial officer Eoin Tonge said “other businesses — not us — start to talk about employment levels and recruitment, and the recruitment of temporary workers” and “the spectre of unemployment seems to rise”, having a knock-on impact on consumer sentiment.

He added: “We’re seeing, especially in those lower income brackets, consumers being more [selective] around their purchasing habits.

“We need a different narrative, we need more upbeat, positive, front-foot narrative to get some energy back into the system.”



Rachel Reeves is set to make a change to the UK government’s crackdown on non-domiciled residents in an attempt to allay concerns about the tax reforms announced in October’s Budget.

The chancellor told a fringe event at the World Economic Forum in Davos on Thursday that the government would soon table an amendment to its own finance bill.

This will enable easier access to the temporary repatriation facility, which allows non-doms to bring foreign income and gains made before April 2025 into the UK and pay tax at a discounted rate of 12 per cent in the 2025-26 and 2026-27 tax years, rising to 15 per cent in 2027-28 — compared with the maximum income tax rate of 45 per cent.

The change planned by the government would make it easier for certain funds to access the facility’s flat tax rates. But while the measure may be useful for some non-doms, it is unlikely to move the dial for many.

Reeves said at The Wall Street Journal’s Davos event on Thursday the government had been “listening to the concerns that have been raised by the non-dom community”, responding to a question about an increase in the net number of millionaires leaving the UK in recent months.

Business secretary Jonathan Reynolds later confirmed the planned change, first reported by The Times, telling journalists in the Swiss mountain resort: “There is a tweak to the finance bill . . . when you’re changing a tax regime, people will want to know, and there’ll be some uncertainty there, so we’ve got to get that message out.”

Reeves announced in the Budget that she was abolishing the non-dom regime, which allows UK tax residents whose permanent home or “domicile” is overseas to avoid paying British tax on their foreign income or capital gains for 15 years.

It will be replaced from April 6 2025 by a four-year residence-based scheme to offer “internationally competitive arrangements for people coming to the UK on a temporary basis”.

Downing Street said the change would not lead to a fall in the tax take from replacing the non-dom regime, and the Treasury still expects to raise £33.8bn over the next five years from the reforms.

Non-doms have been most concerned about changes to inheritance tax on existing trusts, with the issue often mentioned as the key factor driving them to leave the country.

Rachel de Souza, tax partner at RSM UK, said that while an increase to the temporary repatriation facility was “a good move”, it was “woefully inadequate” to prevent wealthy non-doms from leaving the UK.

“The way to stem this exodus would be to maintain the exemption from IHT to offshore trusts, but also reverse the proposed changes to agricultural and business property relief which impacts the farmers and entrepreneurs.”

Robert Brodrick, a partner at law firm Payne Hicks Beach, said: “It’s reassuring to see that they are at last responding to the concerns of the many people who are affected by this, but I don’t think this is going to be enough to stem the tide . . . It’s helpful but the inheritance tax exposure is the biggest nail in the coffin.”

The chancellor also said on Thursday she wanted to allay concerns from countries including India that the rules changes would not affect double-taxation agreements: “That’s not the case: we are not going to be changing those double-taxation conventions.”

A Treasury figure said: “We’re always interested in hearing ideas for making our tax regime more attractive to talented entrepreneurs and business leaders from around the world to help create jobs and wealth in the UK.”



UK ministers are looking at joining an EU trade arrangement with neighbouring countries as part of post-Brexit “reset” talks which begin in earnest this year, as Brussels confirmed it would be open to the idea.

Maroš Šefčovič, the EU’s trade chief who is leading talks with Britain, said on Thursday a “pan-European [customs] area is something we could consider” as part of talks between London and Brussels.

Šefčovič referred in a BBC interview to the idea of Britain joining the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean convention, a customs agreement between the EU and 20 countries, including several in the Middle East and the Balkans, where all countries share the same “rules of origin”.

UK trade minister Douglas Alexander hinted at the possibility of Britain joining PEM when he told MPs this week: “It’s something we are open to looking at. We want to take a pragmatic view on where the national interest lies.”

However, officials said that discussions of the idea within government are at an early stage. Alexander told the House of Commons’ business and trade committee: “There are some stakeholders who would argue there would be disadvantages to some business sectors in the UK.”

The rules of origin in trade deals require exporters to demonstrate their products are sufficiently locally made, usually about 45 per cent, to qualify for tariff-free access to the market.

Under the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, the UK agreed a set of rules of origin with the EU. But joining PEM would allow UK companies to use inputs from those countries in their supply chains in order to be able to export goods into the EU tariff-free.

Joining PEM would not, however, remove other elements of red tape, such as veterinary certificates, licences and some compliance documents.

Asked about the idea on the BBC Today programme, housing minister Matthew Pennycook said: “As for this particular arrangement, we’re not seeking to participate in it at the present time.”

The idea of Britain joining PEM has been promoted by Labour MP Stella Creasy. “Red tape from Brexit hits British business in many ways,” she said.

“Joining PEM would help cut the paperwork connected to rules of origin requirements which is why we have long argued it should be a priority for the UK as one way to undo the damage to trade leaving the EU has done.”

The British Chambers of Commerce, the trade association, has said the government should consider rejoining the convention on the basis it “could provide additional flexibility” to businesses trading with the EU.

“The UK should propose rejoining the Pan-Euro-Mediterranean convention to offer greater cumulation in rules of origin for manufacturers,” the group said in its 2023 trade manifesto, based in part on survey data from members.

Industry insiders also said the government had been consulting some sectors over whether they would benefit from joining PEM, but added that no decisions had been made and quantitative analysis of the pros and cons was still needed in Whitehall.

Since the signing of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement, the EU has indicated that it would be open to the UK joining PEM in the absence of a decision by London to rejoin a full-blown customs union.



Good morning. The biggest story in Westminster this week? The British government has revealed that the Russian spy vessel Yantar had been tracked in the English Channel. (Our story is here.)

Donald Trump’s posts over on his social media network, Truth Social, have raised hopes that he will not, as feared, force Ukraine into a peace deal that leaves Kyiv worse off and Europe’s security at risk.

I’m not going to pretend to be versed either in the ins and outs of naval espionage or Trump’s thinking: but one way or the other all of this further tightens the government’s room for manoeuvre when it comes to fiscal policy. Some more thoughts on that below.

The future is unwritten, but it is likely that over the next year the British government will have to navigate either a still more acrimonious relationship with Vladimir Putin’s Russia and an unreliable US president. In all likelihood, I think it will face both. It just seems probable that there will be direct consequences for the UK from some kind of disaster that comes out of the Trump presidency. As Janan Ganesh writes in his column this week:

All of which is going to put further pressure on government spending. I know I am becoming a stuck record on this, but it remains true: the UK has a rising number of old people, which puts upward pressure on health spending. And the UK faces a highly uncertain global backdrop which increases upward pressure on defence spending.

Now, you can also spend money in a smarter way — over at Reform (the think-tank, not the political party), Rosie Beacon has a smart blog about what the government should be doing on hospital building. And if you modernise and improve the UK’s defence procurement then your money will go further.

But neither the health nor defence department is going to be able to deliver what it needs to on reform alone. In a terrific column, Chris Giles sets out the big challenge for Rachel Reeves (that the UK hasn’t run a budget surplus for nearly a quarter of a century). There is a reward to be had for the Labour administration if it can demonstrate it has a path to doing so at a time when few governments can. But both the party’s MPs and Labour voters want and expect improvements to public services.

Reeves and Keir Starmer hope that “growth” can sand off some of those edges, which is part of why the chancellor is making such warm noises about a controversial third runway at the UK’s largest airport. But I think it’s the other way around: we’ve stress tested whether you can meet British voters’ expectations of the state and control public spending through spending cuts. The Labour government must make tough choices on raising income tax on “ordinary” taxpayers, and difficult choices on reforming public services to do more with fewer public sector workers (staff being among the biggest of the government’s costs).

Reforming planning and trying to shift the balance in how UK regulators balance risk and return are important steps. But such moves on their own are not going to give the government a way out of overseeing a series of difficult budgets if they want to achieve the fiscal consolidation, improved security and a better running NHS that are vital both to their own electoral prospects and to the UK’s hopes of a better tomorrow.

I am really enjoying Joe Hisaishi’s second symphony, which you can listen to here.



For a Labour chancellor it was a bold move: Rachel Reeves went to Davos and told an audience of global plutocrats that she wanted to make their lives easier by creating a riskier regulatory environment for UK consumers.

Far away from the Swiss Alps, Reeves’ offensive against regulators was cheered on by right-wing Conservatives, but some Labour MPs despaired that their chancellor’s quest for growth was taking the party into dangerous territory.

“People are holding their heads in disbelief,” said one senior Labour MP.

Reeves, speaking at the World Economic Forum, was adamant: “You have got to get the balance right. I think the balance has moved too far in regulating for risk. You have got to be able to protect consumers but people should be able to take risks as well.”

Marcus Bokkerink, chair of the Competition and Markets Authority, on Tuesday became the highest-profile casualty of Reeves’ new approach, as ministers forced him out of his job over his allegedly lukewarm appetite for growth-focused reforms.

His sacking was intended to serve as a warning to other regulators, according to government officials. This month, Reeves demanded that 17 watchdogs produce action plans to boost growth and has warned them she will be watching.

John McDonnell, former Labour shadow chancellor, said Reeves could hand a propaganda victory to Nigel Farage, leader of the populist Reform UK party, if she aggressively pursued her agenda at the expense of consumers.

“I’m becoming increasingly worried that this will all provide our opponents, in particular Reform, the opportunity to portray the Labour party as defending corporate abuse and profiteers,” he said.

Reeves’ efforts to protect business from what is seen in government circles as a damaging “compensation culture” has taken many forms in recent months, with a common theme: less money for allegedly wronged consumers.

This week, Reeves sought to intervene in a Supreme Court case to shield banks and other car loan providers from multibillion-pound payouts in a landmark mis-selling case, arguing that it would “adversely affect the UK’s reputation as a place to do business”.

Last year, the Treasury successfully put pressure on regulators to slash a proposed compensation limit for victims of payment fraud from £415,000 to £85,000, amid fears the new regime could seriously damage some fintech companies.

Reeves has also pushed for a review of the Financial Ombudsman Service to prevent more mass consumer compensation events, such as the £50bn paid out by banks over the payment protection insurance scandal.

The Conservatives find themselves in a curious position, egging Reeves on to push further with an agenda that began in 2023 under Rishi Sunak, when regulators were given a “secondary objective” to promote economic growth and competitiveness.

Andrew Griffith, shadow business secretary, wants to see a broader clearout of regulators and has been a critic of the Financial Conduct Authority, the City watchdog. He thought sacking Bokkerink was “a curious place to start”.

Bim Afolami, former Tory City minister, said: “The chancellor is doing exactly the right thing on the regulators. My advice to her is to keep going.” Another former Tory Treasury minister said simply: “I think she is probably right.”

But Conservatives also believe Reeves, presiding over a stagnant economy, is using regulators as a scapegoat. Harriett Baldwin, a senior Tory, said the chancellor should “acknowledge some of her own mistakes rather than blaming everyone else”.

Given that Sir Keir Starmer’s government is in the process of introducing a wave of employment regulation, many business leaders agree with the Tory critique that deregulation should start closer to Number 10. Ministers may yet water down that package.

Regulators say that in return for focusing on growth, Reeves has given a clear signal she will stand by regulators when things go wrong — as they inevitably will. “We feel she has our backs now,” said one.

Nikhil Rathi, FCA chief executive, told the House of Lords on Wednesday that proposed rule changes — such as easing controls on mortgage lending — could lead to more defaults. “One or two things are going to go wrong here,” he said, arguing that parliament should give the watchdog a “metric of tolerable failure”.

Consumer groups have expressed alarm. “The combination of anti-regulation rhetoric — and now the firing of the CMA chair — signals to consumers that the government stands ready to peel back the protections that were built for them,” said James Daley, head of the Fairer Finance research group.

Rocio Concha, a director at consumer group Which?, said the government was “absolutely right” to focus on growth and the role of regulators. But she added: “Strong consumer protections are not an impediment to growth. They are vital for economic growth because they help to create level playing fields for dynamic competition, while ensuring consumers are protected from being ripped off.”

Professor John Thanassoulis of Warwick Business School, who is also an independent CMA panel member, said the government should “resist the temptation to beat up on the CMA”.

He added: “It will not drive marketwide productivity growth. It will instead reward some well-connected firms to the detriment of the countless, but silent, majority who want a market which is not expensive, which is fair, and whose firms put the consumer first.”

Dame Meg Hillier, Labour chair of the Commons treasury committee, said that while she supported Reeves’ aim of pushing regulators to promote growth, it was “critical that economic stability and protections for consumers are not unduly put at risk”.

For now, most Labour MPs are not mobilising against Reeves. “There’s a bit of muttering about not going back to 2008,” said one Labour grandee, referring to the “light touch” regulatory landscape before the financial crisis. “But it’s not in the mainstream of the party yet — it’s still seen as a bit niche.”



Elon Musk has privately downplayed the chances of making a donation to Nigel Farage’s Reform UK, telling an associate it would not be easy to give money to the British party after he joined the US government.

The associate said Musk told them earlier this month that Donald Trump’s inauguration would complicate his ability to donate to Reform because of the tech billionaire’s role running a waste-cutting unit in the new administration.

Though Musk met Farage in December at Mar-a-Lago, the pair did not meet again when the Reform leader travelled to Washington, DC, for Trump’s inauguration, said two people familiar with the matter.

Musk has dramatically intervened in UK politics in recent months, proclaiming Reform as the country’s “only hope” and frequently criticising Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer.

Last month, Farage said the X owner and Tesla boss was giving “serious thought” to a donation to Reform. The UK’s lax rules on political donations allow foreign-owned entities — such as Musk’s X subsidiary in the UK — to give unlimited amounts to British parties.

But the pair have since clashed over Musk’s support for the far-right agitator and convicted criminal Tommy Robinson, who is in prison for contempt of court in relation to Robinson’s libel of a Syrian refugee.

Earlier this month, Musk called for Farage to be replaced as leader of Reform, posting on X that the veteran politician did not “have what it takes”, and suggesting alternatives, including Rupert Lowe, another Reform MP.

Farage has cultivated ties with Trump, appearing at his rallies in the past. Though he was not invited to the Capitol Rotunda for Monday’s ceremony, he did attend several parties around the event, including an official post-inauguration ball.

Musk did not attend an inauguration party hosted by Brexit-backing businessmen Arron Banks and Andy Wigmore — allies of Farage — in Washington on Friday, sending a close associate instead.

Musk has been tasked by Trump with leading the cost-cutting “Department of Government Efficiency”, or DOGE, which will sit inside an existing federal agency.

There is no US law preventing Musk from contributing financially to Reform, and he still may decide to make a donation. However, a financial gift by a senior figure within the Trump administration to a British opposition party would potentially generate diplomatic tensions between the US and UK, which are close allies.

Speculation that Musk could make a donation of up to $100mn, following a media report in November, has given the UK rightwing party momentum as it rises in the polls and attracts some low-level defections from the Conservatives, the UK’s largest rightwing party and official opposition.

A spokesperson for Reform confirmed that Musk had not made a donation to date, and said: “We have a good relationship with Elon Musk and will continue to do so.” Musk did not respond to a request for comment.



The number of young people admitted to general hospital wards in England with a mental health concern jumped 65 per cent in the 10 years to 2022, according to research that suggests thousands of children may not be receiving the specialist care they need.

The surge in admissions of those aged five to 18 for mental health — from 24,198 to 39,925 — compared with a 10 per cent increase in “all cause” admissions between 2012 and 2022, according to the study published on Wednesday.

Around the world, most countries have been grappling with big rises in demand for mental healthcare, an issue thrown into sharp relief by the coronavirus pandemic. The substantial increase in patients in England comes as the NHS is struggling to meet record demand across its services.

The researchers at University College London said their findings “provide important messages for health policy internationally on delivering care for children and young people admitted in acute settings due to mental health concerns”.

Increases in mental health admissions in England were biggest among girls between the ages of 11 and 15, rising from 9,091 to 19,349, or by about 113 per cent, said the study, the first to analyse national trends in acute medical wards.

A surge of almost 515 per cent in admissions related to eating disorders was one of the biggest drivers behind the overall increase, according to the paper in The Lancet Child and Adolescent Health journal.

The researchers also identified steep rises in the admission of children between the ages of five and 10, “with striking rates of self-harm in females” in this group, although absolute numbers were still low.

Lee Hudson, senior author of the study and clinical associate professor at UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, said acute medical wards were important places for caring for young people with mental health concerns, especially those who also had physical health problems such as starvation from an eating disorder.

“However, the increased intensity we describe is presenting real challenges for acute wards, both for patients and their families and the staff supporting them,” he said.

The researchers cited recent findings from the Health Services Safety Investigations Body, an arms-length body, that in 13 of 18 paediatric units surveyed, the ward environment was “not safe” for caring for children and young people with “high-risk behaviours related to mental health concerns”.

The researchers suggested that while Covid-19 had contributed to deteriorating mental health among young people, annual increases were registered across the entire 10-year period they had studied.

Further work was needed “to examine how trends have evolved as the pandemic has subsided, although early data suggest there has not been a reduction to pre-pandemic levels”, they added.

In an attempt to protect mental health expenditure, all of NHS England’s integrated care boards, which manage budgets in different parts of the country, are at present required to ensure investment in mental health rises at a faster rate than their overall budget.

But Hudson called for “better co-working between physical and mental health professionals across hospital and community teams, including, for example, adequate provision of psychiatrists and mental health trained nurses to support physical medical care on the actual ward”.

Researchers did not reach a firm conclusion as to whether difficulty in accessing support at an earlier stage in the community, before mental health problems escalated, was partly to blame for the soaring admissions.

But “a population-level increase in mental health conditions” had emerged clearly from the data, Hudson added.

Claire Murdoch, NHS England’s national mental health director, said treatment and awareness of such conditions had vastly improved over the past decade, “but that also means the health service is treating record numbers as well as dealing with new issues like the negative impact and pressures that social media has on body image”.

The NHS had rolled out hundreds of mental health teams in schools and set up 24/7 crisis support “but sometimes an admission to hospital is in the person’s best interest” to reduce the risk of harm, she said. Despite the rise in demand for services dealing with eating disorders, more than four-fifths of children started urgent treatment within a week, Murdoch added.





Brussels has proposed extending EU banks’ access to UK derivatives clearing houses for another three years in a victory for the City of London.

The European Commission on Wednesday announced it had introduced a new “equivalence decision”, which would allow banks and other financial institutions in the bloc to use some of the world’s most critical market utilities in London until June 2028.

EU politicians have sought to capture the lucrative euro-denominated clearing industry since the Brexit vote in 2016 but have accepted its financial system still depends on the UK, which dominates the global business of derivatives clearing.

Clearing houses reduce market risk by standing between two parties in a trade.

London frequently handles deals nominally worth about $3.5tn a day. It is a global centre for trading interest rate derivatives and Brent crude oil, with clearing of deals handled at London Stock Exchange Group’s LCH and at Intercontinental Exchange.

European derivatives traders had lobbied hard to extend the City’s permit, which expires on June 30 after three years. Member states have five days to object to the commission’s proposal to let it run until June 2028, but such opposition was highly unlikely, officials said.

The commission said UK-based clearing houses were vital to its plans to build a single market in savings and investments.

“Two [clearing houses in the] UK have been identified by the European Securities and Markets Authority as systematically important for the EU’s financial stability,” said Olof Gill, spokesman for financial services, referring to LCH and ICE.

“An extension of the equivalence decision is therefore needed to avoid any risks to our financial stability in the short term, and give certainty and clarity to EU financial market participants,” he added.

But he added that Brussels was committed to building up a rival industry. Last year it approved an updated European Market Infrastructure Regulation that will oblige EU banks to hold “active accounts” at EU-based clearing houses for some products, and if users cross minimum thresholds in others.

The regulation “contains measures that will improve the attractiveness and competitiveness of EU clearing markets. This will help reduce in the medium term the EU’s overreliance on UK clearing houses,” said Gill.

Pascal Kerneis, of the European Services Forum, which represents services companies trading internationally, welcomed the move.

“It will give a clearer perspective to operators in the EU financial market in the medium term.

“This will also give a good political signal for a proper ‘reset’ of the EU-UK relationship,” he said.

The two sides have begun talks to improve trade ties. UK chancellor Rachel Reeves met her EU counterparts in December and called for them to drop barriers to City firms. She said they could boost EU growth by funnelling international investment to the bloc.

Clearing is the only part of financial services that has been granted equivalence since Brexit.



Major supermarkets Tesco and Lidl have come out batting for UK farmers, calling for Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer to pause his inheritance tax reforms or else put the sector’s future at risk.

British farmers have taken to the streets in London in recent months to protest against the changes to inheritance tax reliefs announced in the October Budget, which will end decades of exemption from death duties.

The reforms mean landowners will from April 2026 be subject to a 20 per cent levy on agricultural land above a threshold of between £1.3mn and £3mn, depending on whether they are married and if they own a home.

Ashwin Prasad, Tesco’s chief commercial officer, on Wednesday said the UK’s biggest supermarket “fully understand[s]” concerns raised by “many smaller farms” that were reliant on agricultural property relief and business property relief.

“We’ll be supporting the National Farmers Union’s calls for a pause in the implementation of the policy, while a full consultation is carried out,” he added. “This is not just a debate about individual policies — the UK’s future food security is at stake.”

Lidl said it was “concerned that the recent changes to the IHT regime will impact farmer and grower confidence and hold back the investment needed to build a resilient, productive and sustainable British food system”.

Meanwhile, Co-op Dairy Group, a group of milk suppliers, told members in a letter that it had “directly contacted relevant government departments to communicate our hope that they will look again at the impact of the . . . changes” and said it backed calls to pause implementation of the policy.

Supermarkets themselves have drawn fire from farmers, with tractors this month parked at a number of major retailers around the country to raise awareness of the impact of the tax changes. On 16 January, supermarket Morrisons was granted a High Court injunction to block further protests.

Prior to the October Budget, farm campaign groups slammed supermarkets for squeezing their margins with low food prices and undercutting them by not backing homegrown produce.

Earlier on Wednesday, the Office for Budget Responsibility released a short costing of the IHT policy, estimating that it would raise an extra £500mn for the Treasury annually between 2027 and 2029, in line with the government’s estimates.

But the fiscal watchdog noted that receipts would probably taper off after seven years as farmers increasingly gifted their properties to children and modified their tax planning strategies.

The OBR also suggested that it would be “more difficult for some older individuals to quickly restructure their affairs” in terms of inheritance planning to adjust to the new measures.

Victoria Atkins, Conservative shadow environment secretary, said the government had “chosen to destroy British family farming for little return. The OBR is clear that it will be near impossible for older farmers to restructure their affairs quickly in response to this vindictive tax.”

Farmers say the sector was struggling with the pressures of climate change, real-term cuts to subsidies, high inflation, wafer-thin margins and the prospect of increased competition as the UK strikes post-Brexit trade deals before chancellor Rachel Reeves announced the IHT changes.

The exemption was introduced in the 1980s to allow farms to remain in the same family after the death of an owner, a trend that many have warned will become much harder. However, it has helped push up the price of fields as wealthy individuals have bought agricultural land as a form of legal tax avoidance.

Farmers looking to pass on their estate, and their spouses, are each eligible for £1mn of relief before they start paying IHT on their land, on top of the usual inheritance allowances.

Given that couples already enjoy a threshold of £1mn on their estates that means that two spouses would enjoy a threshold nearer to £3mn, officials have noted.

A government spokesperson said: “Our reform to agricultural and business property reliefs will mean estates will pay a reduced effective inheritance tax rate of 20%, rather than standard 40%, and payments can be spread over 10 years, interest free.

“This is a fair and balanced approach, which fixes the public services we all rely on, affecting around 500 estates next year.”



The writer is an honorary professor at UCL and former CEO of Digital Catapult

There has been much excitement at the UK government’s plan to invest in artificial intelligence. The country’s reputation as a global research and talent developer is proof of the immense contributions made by our leading universities. However, recent economic and social changes have put the business model of universities in crisis. This threatens their ability to maintain the country’s reputation for developing AI pioneers such as Alex Kendall of Wayve and Sir Demis Hassabis of Google DeepMind.

Funding PhDs is a cornerstone of our track record. Unfortunately, PhD students with UK Research and Innovation funding in the UK fell under the previous government from 6,835 in 2018-19 to 4,900 in 2022-23, according to Times Higher Education.

The flow of gifted researchers from around the world is a key revenue driver for our leading research universities. For one thing, UK universities are heavily reliant on these students to deliver teaching. The average stipend for a UK PhD student is around £20,000. These low-paid PhD candidates therefore bring enormous value to the UK. Quite simply, without a healthy PhD student population in this country, our capacity to deliver university teaching and carry out research will collapse.

Better still, talented PhD students and their start-ups are the hunting ground of global technology companies, attracting investment into the UK. The research that these individuals deliver under the tutelage of established academics is producing the foundational algorithms that play a key role in the global AI revolution.

If that hunting ground dries up because the flow of PhD students declines, big global tech players will look elsewhere. International academics will give up and move abroad. The economic value of our universities will decline in turn.

This is a challenge that UK universities have been facing since Brexit, which reduced the number of international students from the EU, and the previous government’s* lack of industrial strategy.

The truth is that the business model of universities is poorly understood by many in government, even those who fund the sector. The majority of the population tends to only think about universities as places that teach undergraduates. But the engine of their innovation, growth and value lies in the work that is delivered by postgraduates, both PhDs and postdoctoral researchers.

These two areas are rarely examined together. Their funding is divided. The Office for Students is an independent non-departmental public body that reports to the Department for Education. It manages the viability of undergraduate teaching programmes and certifies degree-awarding powers in England. It also distributes an average annual budget of about £1bn in grants. But research, development and innovation are funded by UKRI, a separate body overseen by the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology. Because they are split apart, it has been rare for anyone in government to look at the whole model.

Too often the disbursement of PhD funding is driven by the politics of levelling up — redistributing funds to underperforming and neglected regions. This leaves the powerhouses of research and innovation that have brought significant economic benefit to the UK struggling to remain viable. Indeed, the whole innovation landscape is littered with different kinds of institutions attempting to collaborate despite various layers of regulation and governance policies that in effect keep them apart.

Government tech adviser Matt Clifford’s excellent AI action plan references many of the technology’s opportunities for the country. But if we really want to build an AI growth programme for the UK over the long term, then we need to realise that the UK university business model is in urgent need of reform.

We can learn much from the way in which US universities such as MIT and Stanford fund their PhD programmes by encouraging greater numbers of external funders to offer scholarships and support. We also need to streamline the academic pipeline from research to development to innovation so that all those involved — from universities to technology centres known as “catapults” to start-ups to major industry — work together and not in competition.

If the UK is to capitalise on its existing institutions, we need a root-and-branch examination of PhD funding, including whether the current agencies are optimal for disbursing precious government resources. AI provides a catalyst for change. A new strategy cannot come soon enough.

*an editing error incorrectly identified the industrial strategy as the work of the new government



UK chancellor Rachel Reeves has said the pursuit of growth “trumps” the government’s net zero commitments, as she prepares to signal her support for airport expansion in the London region, including at Heathrow.

Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos, the chancellor called growth the UK government’s “number one mission”.

Asked what she would do if faced with a choice between economic growth and the UK’s 2050 net zero target, Reeves said: “If it’s the number one mission, it’s obviously the most important thing.”

Her comments come as the government weighs up backing expansion plans for Luton and Gatwick airports, as well as deciding whether to signal its approval for a controversial third runway at Heathrow.

The possibility of Heathrow’s expansion threatens to split the cabinet, and will force the government to choose between its stated aims of backing growth and reducing the UK’s carbon emissions.

The chancellor on Wednesday said the government had already signed off the expansion of City and Stansted airports, which also serve the UK capital, signalling “the commitment of this government to make Britain an important trading nation”.

Speaking earlier at an event in Davos, Reeves said: “When we say that growth is the number one mission of this government, we mean it. That means it trumps other things.”

She is expected to signal in a speech next week that the government favours the expansion of Gatwick and Luton airports, whilst reaffirming her support for a third runway at Heathrow.

Heathrow’s expansion was previously opposed by Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer and several senior Labour figures.

Some Whitehall officials believe Reeves is attempting to bounce Starmer into publicly endorsing a third runway. “That’s not my assessment,” said one ally of the prime minister.

Starmer, asked about the issue in the House of Commons on Wednesday, refused to comment on “speculation”, adding: “We as a government are committed to growth. We’re committed to the aviation sector and to our climate obligations.”

Reeves’ support for Heathrow’s third runway could be the political signal the airport’s management needs before deciding whether to push ahead with proposals this year — it has been reluctant to revive the scheme without clear political backing.

The chief executive of British Airways’ owner said it would not back Heathrow expansion unless the government changed how landing charges were set.

Luis Gallego, chief executive of International Airlines Group, said Heathrow’s regulatory model was “not fit for purpose”, as he pointed to the high landing charges the UK’s only hub airport levies on its airlines.

“The government has a growth agenda and we support that . . . but before we talk about Heathrow expansion or redevelopment the situation at Heathrow needs to change,” he told an industry event.

The UK aviation regulator last year forced Heathrow to slightly lower these charges, to £23.73 per passenger for 2025, but both sides were left dissatisfied.

BA is by far the largest airline at Heathrow thanks to its historic rights to more than 50 per cent of the airport’s landing slots.

This has allowed the airline to build a highly profitable business, particularly on transatlantic flying. Analysts believe that any major expansion of Heathrow could hurt BA if its rivals gain more slots at the airport.

Reeves said any approval of the Heathrow scheme would “have collective cabinet agreement”.

In the last Commons vote on a third runway at Heathrow in 2018, seven members of the current cabinet voted against it, including Starmer. The others were Ed Miliband, Steve Reed, Lisa Nandy, Darren Jones, Anneliese Dodds and Hilary Benn.

Miliband, who is now climate change secretary, threatened to resign over the issue during Gordon Brown’s government, while London mayor Sir Sadiq Khan is still opposed.

Critics argue airport expansion is incompatible with the UK’s legally binding target to reach net zero carbon emissions, given that aviation is one of the most difficult industries to decarbonise.

Downing Street said this week that it still required a third runway at Heathrow to meet its four tests on carbon emissions, noise, air quality and growth. The issues of local noise and air pollution are considered by experts to be the hardest to meet on the congested west London site.

Meanwhile Reeves, who spent Wednesday meeting bankers and investors in Davos, repeated her backing for aggressive deregulation and the need to clear the way for more building.

“There is always a reason not to invest, not to build,” she said. “There are bats and newts. It might add something to carbon emissions in 20 years' time.”

Reeves has been attempting to reassure businesses that the UK has a clear growth plan following a damaging sell-off in government bonds this month.

She also promised to examine routes for high-skilled workers to come to the UK as the country attempts to attract talented individuals in sectors such as AI and life sciences.

The government is also drawing up a planning and infrastructure bill designed to speed up projects by making it harder for protesters to secure multiple judicial reviews on the same case.

The legislation will create a new “nature restoration fund” enabling developers to meet environmental obligations more quickly to accelerate home-building, and will include measures to accelerate the sign-off on projects under the Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects regime by cutting paperwork.



Investors in Britain’s motor finance industry slammed on the brakes last October when the Court of Appeals said it was unlawful for lenders to pay “secret” commissions. An unusual intervention by chancellor Rachel Reeves has reduced the risk that the sector becomes a total write-off.

It is not hard to see why Reeves has asked for permission to get involved in the case. The Supreme Court in April will decide whether lenders should be on the hook for tens of billions of pounds in compensation for historic loan agreements, which they thought to be legal at the time.

That would spook investors, not least because it is only five years since the saga of mis-sold payment protection insurance ended up costing more than 10 times initial estimates. One £50bn bill could be seen as an aberration, but two in quick succession may start to look like a worrying trend. Even in heavily regulated sectors such as financial services, investors should be able to expect some level of consistency and predictability around the rules.

Banks, too, can argue that they need predictability in order to lend money. Most restarted lending a few days after the October ruling plunged the industry into confusion. But it is difficult to make long-term investment decisions if you live in fear that policies currently considered standard will be retrospectively punished 10 years down the road.

Reeves is hardly alone in worrying that squeezing banks too hard could hurt the economy. American lenders squealed after regulators proposed a package of tough new rules known as Basel III, arguing that they would be forced to tighten the lending spigots.

UK banks are still pricing in a hefty slug of risk. Shares in Lloyds Banking Group, which has the UK’s largest car loan book, trade roughly in line with where they were last October — underperforming less-exposed NatWest and Barclays, which climbed 15 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively, over the same period. Close Brothers, which has higher exposure relative to its overall balance sheet, has even more ground to make up.

It is still too soon to put the foot on the gas — the court will have the final say, and there is a good chance lenders will end up paying at least some level of compensation.

Still, the fact that the Treasury has even tried to intervene could be seen as a positive for the industry more broadly. Few politicians would have dared to defend banks as the PPI scandal was building in the wake of the financial crisis; Reeves’ efforts suggest she is serious about making financial regulation more focused on growth.

nicholas.megaw@ft.com



The head of the UK financial watchdog has called for politicians to define an acceptable level of harm to consumers as he warned more would “go wrong” as a result of Sir Keir Starmer’s demands to slash regulation.

Nikhil Rathi, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, said on Wednesday the agency’s recent proposal for easing controls on mortgage lending could increase defaults and repossessions of homes.

“On mortgages, [what] if there are more defaults if we relax [rules]?” he told the House of Lords financial regulation committee. “One or two things are going to go wrong here and not everybody is going to play completely by the rule book, and is there acceptance of that?”

The FCA has also proposed cutting requirements for banks to check customers’ identities in an attempt to prevent money laundering through smaller transactions, after the prime minister called on regulators to suggest rule changes that could increase risk-taking and investment in Britain’s stagnating economy.

But Rathi said the change could lead to an increase in fraud, warning that “there could be more money mules that get through the system”. He asked how far “we want to trade off lower compliance costs with the fact that some people might abuse the relaxations that come”.

He called for the FCA to be given a “metric for tolerable failure” by parliament that defines how much consumer harm and financial wrongdoing is acceptable in its push to cut regulation in support of growth and competitiveness.

Accepting this was “hard” to achieve, he asked whether there would be “a range that would be seen as broadly politically acceptable in parliament and we would be able to be held to account on”.

Pressure to ease the regulatory burden on the City of London has prompted fears of a return to the “light touch” approach to financial supervision that was blamed for enabling the 2008 banking crisis.

But FCA chair Ashley Alder told peers that “we are not reverting to light touch”, while also accepting the need to ensure regulations were “proportionate” and properly “calibrated” to their risks.

The FCA said in its letter to the prime minister, published on Friday, that it would “begin simplifying responsible lending and advice rules for mortgages, supporting home ownership and opening a discussion on the balance between access to lending and levels of defaults”.

Chancellor Rachel Reeves has backed the proposal, telling the Financial Times this week that she was “absolutely open to looking at ideas that can boost home ownership and help working families get on the housing ladder”.

Rathi reminded peers that in 2023 the previous Conservative government had encouraged banks to allow borrowers to reduce their mortgage payments to avoid defaults and home repossessions after interest rates shot up. “That is not going to be compatible with relaxing lending standards,” he said.

“We can see the enormous challenge the country is facing on growth,” he said. “There are any number of things we can do. What we have struggled with in the past is to have a really open conversation about what the risks may be if we go in a particular direction.”

Mark Turner, a former official at the watchdog now working at consultants Kroll, said the government’s push to prioritise growth over soundness put the FCA in a “difficult situation” because it was “increasingly ‘damned if they do, damned if they don’t’.”

​Letter in response to this article:

How the FCA can support government growth goals / From Omar Salem, Partner, Fox Williams LLP, Solicitors, London EC2, UK



Shares in Trainline fell after the UK government outlined plans to launch a state-backed rival, triggering investor concerns that the London-listed company could lose its dominance of the domestic rail-ticketing market.

The government said on Wednesday that it planned to launch an online service that would bring together individual train operators’ ticket websites, as part of the wider reform and nationalisation of the UK railway.

Shares in Trainline fell 8.5 per cent in London on Wednesday, reaching their lowest levels since October.

The threat of government competition has hung over Trainline, which has built a £1.7bn business by offering passengers a simple way to book tickets on any part of the UK’s railways, which includes a bewildering 55mn different ticketing and fare combinations.

The company takes a commission on ticket sales but draws on the same open-access database as the booking apps of other railway companies.

In its announcement, the UK government said its new ticketing site would “work alongside a thriving private sector retail market, where all rail retailers can compete in an open and fair manner”.

“The private sector will continue to play a key role in driving growth through innovation and investment and encouraging more people to choose rail,” it added.

Jody Ford, chief executive of Trainline, said he welcomed the government’s “unequivocal commitment to a competitive retail market, underpinned by a level playing field, and recognition of the value and innovation that brings to rail users”.

Still, investors have for years feared that long-running government efforts to modernise the railway’s complex ticketing system could erode Trainline’s market dominance.

The company’s shares fell 40 per cent in 2021 when the previous Conservative government unveiled plans to create a new ticketing hub.

But the share price gradually recovered as the Conservatives’ reform agenda stalled. It was boosted further in December 2023 when the then-government said it would not launch a rival.

Mark Plowright, director of Trainline rival Virgin Trains Ticketing, said a competitive ticketing industry would “benefit rail passengers across the UK”.

“However, there’s still much more work to be done to simplify rail tickets and make train travel less confusing for passengers,” he said.



The UK government has been in something of a bind. As the cost of its borrowing has risen since the autumn, the chances of meeting its main self-imposed fiscal rule — to borrow only for investment by the end of the decade — have dwindled. The setback has been met with fierce rhetoric from the government. Whether from Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer, Rachel Reeves, his chancellor, or their spokespeople, the adjectives to describe the fiscal rules have tended to shuffle between “ironclad” and “non-negotiable”. Their attitude is always “absolutely committed”.

Sentiment has improved in UK government bond markets over the past week, but many are yet to be convinced. Ray Dalio, the billionaire founder of hedge fund firm Bridgewater Associates, is less than impressed, saying that gilts could be heading for a “death spiral”. Of course, this was overblown, but his comments reflect a broader concern in financial markets that a gap exists between tough fiscal rhetoric and the reality of UK budgetary policy — and it far precedes the current Labour government.

What is needed to provide the budgetary stability on which the rest of the UK economy can build is therefore simple. No more rhetoric. No more announcements of tighter fiscal policy either now or some time in the future. Instead, Reeves needs to implement the tax increases and spending plans outlined in October without any compromise on when they are due to come into force in April.

These are sizeable. Along with the large and messy increase in employers’ national insurance, there are continued income tax rises in the form of frozen allowances and far from lavish public expenditure increases. Together, the measures are set to reduce government borrowing significantly. The overall deficit is forecast to fall from 4.5 per cent of GDP in 2024-25 to 3.6 per cent in 2025-26, while the current budget deficit, excluding capital investment, is set to halve from 2 per cent of GDP to 0.9 per cent over the same period.

This will be an exercise in show, not tell. Reducing borrowing by this much is reasonably rare for UK governments — it will become clear by the summer whether Reeves and her policies are on track. Success would immediately demonstrate a difference between UK fiscal policy and that of similar countries.

In recent years, US administrations have shown no ability to run a deficit much under 6 per cent of GDP, and there’s no improvement in sight. The European Commission expects the French budget deficit to have exceeded 6 per cent of GDP last year, with little prospect of a political agreement to deliver much improvement. Underlying German public finances are strong, but its economy is weak. And debt levels in the UK, though high, are still far lower than those in Italy.

Bond markets often have a mind of their own, but it would be difficult to single out the UK for special punishment if it is the one decent-sized advanced country with the ability to pass legislation to impose fiscal consolidation and actually see it through. This is what Reeves must do. If growth suffers, the Bank of England would be in a strong position to ease monetary policy and offset the fiscal tightening.

There are no guarantees in the business of persuading financial markets that they have more to lose if they bet against you. The UK government must also hope that consumers begin to spend their recent real income gains and improve growth. It needs to demonstrate that any expansion will come with some recovery in productivity growth. And that the increases in employers’ national insurance must not have a much more damaging impact on jobs and prices than already expected.

None will be achieved with more speeches about non-negotiable commitments to ironclad fiscal rules.

chris.giles@ft.com



Antitrust lawyers have questioned the “extraordinary” decision by ministers to force out the chair of Britain’s competition watchdog, suggesting that it could have a “chilling” effect on other UK regulators.

The government confirmed the departure of Marcus Bokkerink as chair of the Competition and Markets Authority on Tuesday evening, after the Financial Times reported that business secretary Jonathan Reynolds had intervened.

Chancellor Rachel Reeves, speaking to Bloomberg in Davos on Tuesday, implicitly criticised Bokkerink: “He recognised it was time for him to move on and make way for somebody who does share the mission and the strategic direction this government are taking.”

This month, ministers ordered 17 of Britain’s biggest regulators to set out how they intend to help boost UK economic growth. Stephen Phipson, head of manufacturing lobbying group Make UK, on Wednesday applauded the government’s efforts to make regulation “fit for purpose”.

But a number of lawyers and lobbyists said Bokkerink’s resignation had come out of the blue.

“To be honest it was a bit of a surprise,” said one business lobbyist. “We’ve been in lots of discussions with the CMA . . . and they seemed to be really getting it and making changes.”

One antitrust lawyer at a London firm said the move would have a “chilling and intimidating effect” on independent regulators across the country.

“Although in the short term it seems reassuring for business, if competition policy is at the mercy of political fashion it becomes less stable and predictable, which undermines business confidence,” they said.

“It is an extraordinary move by the government to interfere so much in a competition authority,” they added.

Bokkerink’s departure raises questions over whether ministers are prioritising the demands of big business over competing priorities such as consumer rights and the environment.

The government has appointed as new interim CMA chair Doug Gurr, who ran Amazon’s UK business during the company’s tussle with the CMA over its minority investment in Deliveroo, which the regulator ultimately approved in 2020.

One person said the forced exit looked like a “desperate move from a struggling government” that was trying to win back popularity with business leaders after imposing extra regulations and taxes on corporations in last year’s Budget.

The move has also led to speculation about the fate of the CMA’s chief executive Sarah Cardell and whether she may also be replaced.

Andrew Griffith, shadow business secretary, told the House of Commons on Wednesday that the Conservative party wanted regulatory reform so businesses “carry less deadweight”.

“But dismissing the non-executive part-time chairman of the CMA seems a curious place to start,” he told the House of Commons. “He’s not responsible for day-to-day decision making at the CMA. That’s the job of the chief executive. Did they aim and miss?”

Cardell has been at pains in recent weeks to emphasise that the regulator is taking the government’s growth mandate seriously. In November, Cardell told the FT the agency was planning a review of its merger remedies, signalling more mergers could be approved based on undertakings such as price freezes rather than forcing the divestiture of assets.

One person familiar with the matter said Cardell had “positive discussions” about her role with ministers since Bokkerink’s resignation”.

Max von Thun, Europe director at the Open Markets Institute, said the CMA had been at the forefront of global efforts to push back against rising market concentration, particularly in the “monopolistic” tech sector.

“The government’s decision to replace the authority’s chair with a former Amazon executive, at a time when a handful of US tech giants are tightening their grip over the future of artificial intelligence, is a major strategic blunder,” he said.

Lawyers and competition specialists noted that Clare Barclay, until recently Microsoft UK head and now in another senior role at the company, is chairing the government’s new Industrial Strategy Advisory Council.

In a two-page statement released on Tuesday night, Bokkerink said he had helped to refocus the CMA to ensure it delivered on empowering “consumers and effective competition — instead of being held back by a few powerful incumbents setting the rules for everyone else”.

Business groups welcomed the government’s intervention. Craig Beaumont, executive director at the Federation of Small Businesses, said he hoped the CMA “will now do more on growth”. One banker said the CMA had been seen as an obstacle and the ousting of Bokkerink could be a way to send a message to the regulator’s staff.

His exit comes as the CMA has been handed new powers to regulate digital markets.

It announced last week that Google would be the first company the watchdog would investigate to decide if the tech giant warranted a special market status in light of its position in search services, which could see it bound by tougher conduct rules.

The government is due to issue a “strategic steer” to the CMA in the coming weeks, setting out its priorities for the regulator. However, beyond its desire for the watchdog to focus on growth, it was unclear what Labour actually wanted the CMA to do, lawyers said.

“The government is obviously unhappy with the CMA but doesn’t seem to have concrete views on what’s wrong,” said one senior antitrust lawyer.

Additional reporting by Ivan Levingston



Britain’s defence minister warned Russian President Vladimir Putin that “we will not shy away from robust action” after telling parliament that a Russian spy vessel had been operating in UK waters for the second time since November.

John Healey said the Russian spy ship, Yantar, had been tracked in the English Channel by a warship after loitering over critical undersea infrastructure. A Royal Navy submarine surfaced near the Yantar to warn that its every move had been monitored, he said.

“Let me be clear, this is a Russian spy ship used for gathering intelligence and mapping the UK’s critical underwater infrastructure,” Healey told the House of Commons on Wednesday.

“My message to President Putin is clear,” he said. “We know what you are doing and we will not shy away from robust action to protect Britain.

“We will continue to call out the malign activity that Putin directs, cracking down on the Russian shadow fleet,” Healey added.

Yantar, which means amber in Russian, had now left the Strait of Dover and was in Dutch waters, Healey said.

It was seen off the UK coast in November, when it had then sailed for the Mediterranean, returning to the Channel this week. As well as being warned by the Royal Navy submarine this week, it had been flanked by the frigate HMS Somerset and HMS Tyne, a patrol vessel.

Nato allies have stepped up surveillance of critical marine infrastructure to protect it against sabotage attempts after several power pipelines and data cables in the Baltic Sea were damaged recently.

Three ships have damaged underwater Baltic cables and pipelines in the past 15 months, all by dragging their anchors along the seabed.

Finland used a helicopter last month to board and seize the Eagle S, a Cook Islands-registered tanker that was suspected of sabotage as it transported oil from Russia to Egypt.

The UK has not had to take similar action, although Healey said he had relaxed the rules of naval engagement so that British warships could now get closer to suspicious vessels to inspect what they are doing.

“Like the surfacing of the submarine [this is] specifically to deter and to discourage the sort of activity that we simply don’t want to see in our waters,” Healey said.

He added that should there be any need to interdict a suspicious vessel the UK would “certainly be ready to take action”.

The increased western surveillance of suspicious Russian activity is the latest in a series of Nato-sponsored actions designed to bolster the military alliance following Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, and subsequent acts of sabotage against multiple countries.

Last week, Mark Rutte, Nato’s secretary-general announced a new mission called Baltic Sentry to monitor underwater infrastructure. Consisting of drones, submarines, ship and aircraft, the UK has also activated an AI-assisted computer system to help monitor key areas of interest.

Cartography by Steven Bernard



Rupert Murdoch’s UK tabloid newspaper business has apologised to Prince Harry and agreed to pay him “substantial damages” as it admitted for the first time that unlawful activities took place at The Sun.

David Sherborne, barrister for the Duke of Sussex, told the High Court in London on Wednesday that News Group Newspapers had offered the prince a “full and unequivocal apology” for intruding into his private life over 15 years until 2011.

The admissions are a blow to the Murdoch empire 13 years after it shut down the News of the World following a public outcry at phone hacking at the infamous Sunday redtop.

NGN has spent a decade denying any wrongdoing at The Sun, the News of the World’s daily stablemate, even as it paid more than £1bn in costs and settlements to cover almost all of the phone-hacking claims against the company.

The publisher did not acknowledge any culpability on the part of senior executives in the settlement, which people familiar with the matter said included an eight-figure payout to the prince.

The deal means the company will avoid what threatened to be a protracted and high-profile court case covering broad allegations of phone hacking and other unlawful activity, as well as claims of a cover-up involving current and former top executives.

The Duke of Sussex and former Labour deputy leader Lord Tom Watson were the only remaining claimants in the High Court case against NGN.

In a statement, NGN said it was sorry “for the distress caused to the duke, and the damage inflicted on relationships, friendships and family”, and apologised in particular to the prince for its treatment of Diana, Princess of Wales, his late mother.

The company said the apology covered “incidents of unlawful activities carried out by private investigators working for The Sun, not by journalists, during the period 1996-2011”. It agreed to pay him “substantial damages”, though terms were not disclosed.

The company also offered a “full and unequivocal” apology to Watson for “unwarranted intrusion” into his private life by the defunct News of the World between 2009 and 2011, when he served on parliament’s culture, media and sport select committee investigating media malpractice.

It acknowledged he was placed under surveillance in 2009 by journalists at the Sunday tabloid and also agreed to pay him “substantial damages”. Terms were not disclosed.

Speaking outside the court, Sherborne, who represented both claimants, described the settlement as a “monumental victory”. Murdoch’s company had been “finally held to account for its illegal actions and its blatant disregard for the law”, he added.

The settlement will bring considerable relief to some of the Murdoch executives who were expected to be named in the case.

They include Rebekah Brooks, former editor of The Sun and now chief executive of News UK, and Will Lewis, who previously worked for Murdoch’s UK newspaper business and is now publisher of The Washington Post.

Lewis’s position in Murdoch’s news group at the time has been closely scrutinised since he took the helm of the US newspaper more than a year ago.

NGN has always said illegal voicemail interception took place only at the News of the World, which was shut down after it was disclosed that journalists at the paper had hacked the voicemail of murdered British teenager Milly Dowler.

It had, until Wednesday, made no admission of unlawful activities at The Sun, although it has previously reached financial settlements with individuals about the paper’s activities without any admission of liability.

Forcing an admission of fault from NGN has been a primary motivation for the Duke of Sussex, who was facing considerable financial risk in pursuing the case.

The case was set to be the climax of the prince’s campaign against Britain’s tabloid press, which he blames for the death of his mother, who was chased by paparazzi photographers before her death in a car crash in Paris in 1997.

The prince previously secured damages of £140,600 from Mirror Group Newspapers and has outstanding claims against Associated Newspapers, publisher of the Daily Mail.

Emma Jones, board director at campaign group Hacked Off, said the settlement marked a “humiliating day for The Sun and the senior executives at NGN, who have finally admitted that allegations of illegality made against the publisher are true”.

“It is now clear that the public and parliament were lied to by the newspaper and its publisher, as part of the most extraordinary corporate cover-up in living memory,” she added.

The settlement will mean the need for a further payout by Murdoch’s US broadcaster Fox, which covers all the costs under the terms of the separation of News Corp and 21st Century Fox.

Fox, in a similar eleventh-hour deal in 2023, agreed to pay $787.5mn to settle a defamation case in which it was accused by voting machine maker Dominion of broadcasting false accusations of election fraud in the 2020 US presidential election.



My new year resolution for 2025 was to declutter our home before moving house later this year, so I began using an online selling service. However, HM Revenue & Customs’ guidance suggests people who trade second-hand items through online selling services may need to pay tax and register for self-assessment. How much tax will I need to pay if I continue to sell unwanted items online, and is it worth it?

Zena Hanks, private wealth partner at Saffery, says online platforms will soon start sharing sales information and the personal data of its users with HMRC. If an individual has sold a certain number of items, generated sales of £1,700 or more, or provided a paid-for service on a website or an app in 2024, they will be contacted by the platform in advance of their personal details and sales information being shared with HMRC. The principles of whether the sale of items or the provision of paid-for services is taxable remains unchanged.

The sharing of information is a move towards more transparency for the online platforms and underpins HMRC’s efforts to tackle what it perceives to be a tax gap. With that in mind we need to be clear what does and what does not need to be reported to HMRC.

Getting some money back for items no longer needed as part of a declutter is unlikely to qualify as an activity that generates a tax liability for two reasons. Under first principles there is likely to be a cost associated with the original acquisition of the item which would be taken into account when working out if any tax is due. In addition there needs to be an intention to make a profit. In the situation described here there is no suggestion that the sale is being motivated by a profit and it is likely the items sold would not generate sufficient proceeds to generate an overall profit.

You do however need to report sale activities when you are selling assets at a profit — for example you upcycle furniture, or you source clothes or furniture to sell on at a profit, or if you sell any personal possessions for more than £6,000. There is a reporting requirement if you provide paid-for services for example garden maintenance, dog walking, taxi driving, delivering food. In addition, income and free products received from social influencing may also generate a taxable activity — all of this depends on the numbers involved. If there is sufficient activity and income, that may generate an obligation to report the income details to HMRC and any associated tax will need to be paid.

The rules on how to tax trading activities haven’t changed and that includes the availability of the £1,000 trading allowance. What has changed is that online platforms are being compelled to provide sales information and the associated sellers’ personal information to HMRC. It is that information that HMRC will use to ensure that those generating income are paying the correct amount of tax. If you are in any doubt you should speak to a professional adviser as soon as possible. If income does need to be reported it is always better that an “unprompted” disclosure is provided to HMRC.

The management at the local golf club where my student son works part-time have told him that they are struggling to remain profitable, so they will not be replacing anyone who leaves. To ensure that my son keeps his job, could he offer to work as a self-employed contractor who invoices the golf club for hours worked?

Rachel Roberts, a partner in the employment and immigration team HCR Law, says the option of offering to work as a self-employed contractor may seem like a good solution but there are key considerations that your son may want to think about. First, and most important, it would not be possible for your son simply to switch from being a part-time employee to self-employed if, in practice, the nature of his role and his duties remain the same.

While your son and the club could agree to change the label of his employment, there is a real risk that HMRC would challenge this. HMRC would apply a variety of tests to determine if your son is providing his services as an employee under the “disguise” of self-employment.

The key difference between whether your son will be treated as a self-employed contractor or an employee is the degree of control the club has over him. For example, if your son is unable to choose his working hours, work for other businesses or appoint someone else to provide the services on his behalf, then there is a high probability that he will be treated by HMRC as an employee. This could have tax implications as HMRC could serve a demand for backdated PAYE and national insurance payments.

Even if your son’s work does meet the criteria needed to be deemed as self-employment, he will need to bear in mind that self-employed contractors accept a higher level of financial risk. Your son would be responsible for filing his own tax returns. There is also a risk of personal liability if your son provides his services directly to the club rather than through an intermediary, such as a limited company.

Another key consideration is that your son would be offering to give up his employment rights. Self-employed contractors are not afforded the same employment rights as employees. For example, your son would not be eligible for sick pay or holiday pay. The golf club could also terminate any contractual agreement with your son on relatively short notice if his services are not needed.

At this stage, it might be premature for your son to initiate discussions about working on a self-employed basis, particularly if his sole aim is to keep his job. The good news is that the club is considering alternative options to dismissal, such as freezing recruitment (as you have mentioned).

If the situation worsens, the club could consider other cost-cutting measures, such as reducing the number of working hours or shifts and possibly even reducing the rate of pay. Depending on how long your son has worked for the club, he could be entitled to a statutory redundancy payment if his role is terminated.

The opinions in this column are intended for general information purposes only and should not be used as a substitute for professional advice. The Financial Times Ltd and the authors are not responsible for any direct or indirect result arising from any reliance placed on replies, including any loss, and exclude liability to the full extent.

Do you have a financial dilemma that you’d like FT Money’s team of professional experts to look into? Email your problem in confidence to money@ft.com.





Of all the people to have entered the White House this week, it is Melania who still remains the blankest of blank slates. The first lady is only the second to serve non-consecutive terms of office: the Trumps follow Grover and Frances Cleveland, who served from 1885-89 and then again from 1893-97. But during her first time in office Melania barely registered in public, preferring to keep out of the spotlight while she raised Barron, the couple’s son who was 10 at the time of the inauguration. She made almost no speeches, and started few initiatives: her Be Best platform, to raise the issues of child welfare, promote “kindness” and crack down on online bullying, fairly failed to launch.

Still now, eight years on, she remains an enigmatic presence. The scant clues that have offered access to her inner thinking have been based on wardrobe semaphores and gestures as we attempt to understand the woman behind the sphinx-like gaze. In particular, the Trump marriage has been a constant source of speculation: is it real, an arrangement or a sham? When Melania finally conceded to move into the White House in June 2017, the couple reportedly became the first since Richard and Pat Nixon to take up separate rooms.

Often, one gets the impression that Melania can’t stand her husband, or can hardly tolerate his company. She wears an expression of barely concealed impatience when watching her spouse doing his peculiar “YMCA” boogies and recoils from the simplest physical advance.

Her cool aversion was noted once again, in front of billions, during this week’s inauguration when his attempts to plant a kiss on Melania’s cheek were thwarted by a piece of millinery sporting an outsize and spouse-repelling brim. Potus was left puckered, flailing and humiliated; Melania sat stock-still. Any emotion in her face was also screened as most of it remained in the hat’s shade.

For Trump, who likes to burnish his strongman image with a veneer of inviolable masculinity and power, Melania makes an extraordinary foil. While the Potus surrounds himself with yes men and supplicants, his own wife makes no secret of the fact that she often disagrees with Donald, and that her “first priority is to be a mom”.

Rare is the person in Trump’s orbit who describes him as being less than a first concern. But could the testy nature of the Trump union help temper his more alarming Maga views? Maybe for all her husband’s hubris, Melania holds more power than we realise. Just as Trump has “employed” Barron as an unofficial adviser on youth-think, he seeks his wife’s counsel, too. In his post-inauguration speech, made to supporters on Monday, Trump credited Melania with convincing him to tone down the list of grievances he had planned to air. In particular, she had “begged” him not to raise the subject of the “J6” insurrectionists who led the Capitol Hill riots, which he managed to stay mute on, at least until he left the stage.

During her conversation with Fox & Friends co-host Ainsley Earhardt last week, Melania spoke about their marriage, and how she sometimes holds a contrary point of view. The most significant point of difference, as revealed in her memoir, is that she supports abortion and a woman’s right to choose. “I’m standing on my own two feet, independent. I have my own thoughts,” said Flotus in the rare interview. “I don’t always agree [with] what my husband is saying or doing . . . I give him my advice and sometimes he listens.” For his part, Trump seems almost conciliatory and gentle when talking of his wife: when asked of her views on abortion, he told Fox News, that he had told her to “stick with your heart” and “write what you believe”.

Compared to the gusty exposition of her husband, Melania’s crisp exclamations seem almost erudite. And they indicate that behind the carapace of blankness there stirs a woman preparing to enter a new phase. Melania 2.0 has arrived in Washington in a different guise — and I don’t just mean The Hamburglar suit. She is making a documentary about the transition, she is releasing crypto, having shepherded her son and first priority through adolescence to university she has given him the wings with which “to fly”. (Good luck with that lift-off, incidentally; Barron is staggeringly tall.)

But, like her husband, she is nursing grudges against those who treated her poorly last time around. “People didn’t accept me,” she said of her first time in office, “they didn’t understand me the way maybe they do now.” This time, she continued. “I know where I will be going, I know the rooms.”

Such statements show signs of more ambition. She may only have been talking about how she prefers the decorative scheme. But if there is a microgram of hope for this new world order, one wonders if Melania will use her new resolve to try to use her influence for good. Imagine if she could actually get her Be Best platform off the ground. Last time she tried to engage the leaders of the “streaming platforms” with her concerns over online safety she “didn’t have much support”. Perhaps now those same folk are quaffing Maga Kool-Aid and Nazi-saluting their supporters (we see you, Elon), she might have a better chance.

Or perhaps she will simply elide any further public-facing duty and make house a second time in her new first home. That’s the riddle of Melania, it’s impossible to know.

jo.ellison@ft.com

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend on Instagram and X, and sign up to receive the FT Weekend newsletter every Saturday morning



Almost a hundred years ago, New York’s skyline became the scene of a bitter battle. The prize: displacing the Woolworth Building as the world’s tallest property. Such superlatives mattered to a growing, industrialised nation keen to flex its dominance. The winner was 40 Wall Street, swiftly pipped by the Chrysler Building, which in turn lost the title to the Empire State Building.

Today, there is a new superpower status symbol: data centres. The latest bid for digital supremacy is Stargate. This mammoth project led by artificial intelligence company OpenAI, and announced by US President Donald Trump, pledges to spend up to $500bn over four years to construct world-changing AI infrastructure — basically warehouses filled with clusters of microchips — on an unprecedented scale.

Trump’s endorsement, with a reassurance that no government money is involved, shows data-centre dominion is now a national priority. That is no surprise. New regimes love big gestures. Think of the “10 great buildings” with which Chairman Mao peppered Beijing in 1959, or The Line, a 106-mile sliver of a city under construction at the behest of Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed Bin-Salman.

Stargate is a trophy too. But it is also an arms race, because OpenAI is in effect building a weapon. Co-founder Sam Altman’s goal is to achieve “artificial general intelligence”, the kind that outflanks human beings. That this is now a White House-backed initiative reflects a superpower reality: whichever country reaches AGI first poses a significant threat, commercially and militarily, to the rest.

What does $500bn buy? First, assume the money can actually be raised; departed OpenAI co-founder and Tesla head Elon Musk is sceptical. The latest Blackwell chips from Nvidia could cost about $50,000 apiece, suggesting Altman’s budget could cover 10mn of them. The biggest AI supercomputer in the world today, Musk’s Colossus, has about 100,000. Size alone does not guarantee AGI success, but it is an important factor.

At its most mundane, OpenAI is following other big technology firms. So-called hyperscalers Amazon, Meta Platforms, Microsoft and Alphabet are collectively on course to invest $260bn in capital expenditure next year, according to Visible Alpha. Stargate’s plan of an average $125bn a year is big, but not substantially greater than theirs.

But Altman’s scheme is undeniably different. Alphabet, Microsoft, Meta and Amazon are building computing power customers can use, with a path to sizeable near-term revenue. OpenAI’s foray is more of a moonshot. Succeed, and vast profit awaits. Fail, and a surfeit of servers could push down prices and profit for the whole industry.

In the real world, meanwhile, traditional projections of power remain in fashion. China is planning 118 skyscrapers higher than London’s Shard, to add to the 100 or so it already has, according to the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. Saudi Arabia, keen to be an AI hub, is also eyeing what will be the world’s tallest building, the Jeddah Tower. It’s just that in the AI age, there are more ways to reach for the heavens.

john.foley@ft.com



The US withdrawal from the Paris climate accord for a second time under President Donald Trump will have a “huge impact” on efforts to curb global warming, the incoming head of the UN COP30 climate summit has warned.

André Corrêa do Lago, the experienced Brazilian diplomat and climate negotiator appointed this week, told the Financial Times that the exit of the US could also allow nations such as China, India and Brazil to take a bigger role in the world’s most important climate talks.

Trump fulfilled a pledge on his first day in office to once again pull the US out of what he described as an “unfair, one-sided Paris climate accord rip-off”. The US was the first country to withdraw during his first term as president in 2017, a move reversed by President Joe Biden in 2021.

Many scientists already say the world is way off track to meet the Paris accord goals of limiting the global average temperature rise to well below 2C and preferably no more than 1.5C from pre-industrial times. The UN has predicted that the temperature rise will reach 2.9C this century.

Corrêa do Lago said the US pivot “is going to make it much more difficult” to limit global warming and would “have an immense impact on efforts to keep temperature rises below 1.5C”. Developing nations could step up to fill the gap, however.

“The countries of the global south have made immense efforts in their own nations to contain climate change,” Corrêa do Lago said. “Take the case of China. China is constantly bringing forward its objectives, for example, this year it will sell more electric cars than internal combustion ones.”

The FT reported this week that Argentina’s libertarian President Javier Milei, among the few world leaders invited to Trump’s inauguration, was also weighing an exit from the Paris Agreement.

Corrêa do Lago said Argentina, while free to make its own decisions, could jeopardise its participation in the newly agreed trade deal between the EU and the Mercosur bloc of South American nations.

“You have to remember that to be able to benefit from the EU-Mercosur agreement, you have to be a member of the Paris Agreement”.

The 65-year-old veteran diplomat, who has served as ambassador to Japan and India as well as Brazil’s lead climate negotiator, also faces the task of finding ways to plug a trillion-dollar gap in climate change funding ahead of the COP30 to be held in the Amazon port of Belém in November.

“It’s very important that we think far outside traditional thinking on climate finance,” he said, citing reports by former US Treasury secretary Larry Summers and Indian economist NK Singh on the role of multilateral banks and by a G20 group of experts on “green growth”. “We have to make mainstream investment favour climate [finance].”

Brazil has one of the world’s greenest electricity grids, thanks to abundant hydropower, and has reduced Amazon deforestation sharply under the government of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.

But agriculture remains a large source of its emissions, as the country is one of the world’s biggest beef and soy producers.

Environmentalists have also criticised Brazil for boosting oil production, with the aim of becoming a top global exporter by the end of the decade.

Corrêa do Lago said Lula had been clear about the need for a “fair transition” away from fossil fuels that would not increase poverty or hurt living standards in a nation where many still live below the breadline.

“One of the things we can do in the preparation for COP30 is to restore confidence that climate change can be fought in a rational way.”

Additional reporting by Attracta Mooney in London



When scrolling social media, I often land in the world of private-chef-tok: TikTok accounts run by people who do the same job I do of cooking in homes. This genre is immensely popular, in part for how visually pleasing these videos can be: luxurious kitchens, pristine counters, a pace of work that is somehow both zippy and unhurried.

But cooking from a client’s home rarely looks like it does on social media. A kitchen is the heart of the home, the backdrop of groggy mornings, standing-up snacks and behind-the-scenes moments. I live and work in New York City, where the home is often the only oasis in the surrounding chaos. It didn’t take me long to learn that when I enter a client’s space as a person who is there to do a job, some of that tranquility gets unsettled.

Often, clients don’t totally know how to act. Should they talk to me? Can they speak frankly with one another while I’m there? Sometimes clients fire off mid-recipe requests (I won’t forget the diabetic who kept requesting bacon as I cooked him oatmeal). And I, of course, carry a low-level hum of anxiety with me. What if I break the heirloom knife? What if I spill flour all over myself? Am I meant to be keeping an eye on that toddler? I don’t blame my clients for one second. Why shouldn’t they move through their home freely?

All this has led me to an unconventional place: I am a private chef who prefers not to cook in my client’s homes. I know how that sounds. One would assume that part of the job is producing food quickly and at close quarters, but I interpret good personal cheffing as something intimate, as opposed to immediate.

To be clear, I’ll never say a hard no to cooking in someone’s home, but my preferred set-up holds surprising value for both of us. First, it removes the unnecessary hours of hauling around ingredients, knife kits etc that come with performing one’s work in another person’s space. Second, clients don’t have to see the less glamorous elements of how the sausage is made — me scaling fish or peeling garlic or pounding cutlets. People who have hired a chef are often looking for some extra support, and doing these tasks away from their intimate space allows for it to stay uncomplicated and uncompromised. In my own space, I work quietly and quickly. The food is my only focus. My attention can go towards making the best experience for the client, as opposed to worrying about how the process looks.

The choice is also practical (and a bit bittersweet). Private cheffing relies on a strange relationship, one built on care but, ultimately, transactional. When budgets tighten, the chef is often the first cut. Cooking off-site keeps it sustainable for both sides. The idea of cooking in a separate space, then, isn’t an avoidance of the intimacy that comes from the work; it’s in fact in the interest of protecting it.

I know personal chefs who have no problem showing up in someone’s home, cooking and leaving. For them, work stays in the kitchen, whereas I seem to carry it with me.

In many ways, this is why aspirational private-chef-tok is so attractive to consume. No mess, no heavy loading of ingredients in and out of space, and — crucially — no clients! Just someone cooking on camera, in good light, for someone invisible.

Find out about our latest stories first — follow FT Weekend Magazine on X and FT Weekend on Instagram



Donald Trump has made a lot of enemies over the years. He spent his first week back in the White House going after them — and is reshaping the federal government in the process. The FT’s Washington bureau chief James Politi and US legal and enforcement correspondent Stefania Palma join this week’s Swamp Notes to explain what the president’s first week signals about his plans for the next four years.

Mentioned in this podcast:

Donald Trump vs the ‘deep state’: president’s vendetta agenda takes shape

Trump’s pick for justice department to face scrutiny on vow to prosecute his opponents

Sign up for the FT’s Swamp Notes newsletter here

Swamp Notes is produced by Ethan Plotkin, Sonja Hutson and Katya Kumkova. Topher Forhecz is the FT’s executive producer. The FT’s global head of audio is Cheryl Brumley. Special thanks to Pierre Nicholson.

Read a transcript of this episode on FT.com



One of Donald Trump’s most controversial cabinet picks has been narrowly confirmed by the US Senate to head the Pentagon, despite allegations of sexual assault and alcohol abuse.

Pete Hegseth will become US secretary of defence after the Senate voted 51-50 in his favour late on Friday night, squeaking by after vice-president JD Vance broke the tie.

Republican senators Mitch McConnell, Lisa Murkowski and Susan Collins joined Democrats in voting against Hegseth’s confirmation.

Hegseth survived a last-ditch effort by Democrats to prevent his confirmation after his former sister-in-law, Danielle Hegseth, made a sworn statement accusing him of being so abusive to his ex-wife that she hid in a closet out of fear for her safety. She also alleged that he had abused alcohol for years.

The former Fox News host is a departure from the typical defence secretary. His predecessor, Lloyd Austin, was a retired army general who oversaw US Central Command, which encompasses military operations in the Middle East.

A vocal opponent of “wokeness”, Hegseth has vowed to bring a “warrior” culture back to the US military as the Trump administration moves to do away with the federal government’s diversity initiatives.

He also said one of his priorities will be to secure the US-Mexico border. The Pentagon on Wednesday said it would send an additional 1,500 active duty troops to the US’s southern border, a 60 per cent increase, on the president’s orders.

McConnell said he voted against Hegseth because the nominee lacks the “strategic vision” for how to address the US’s greatest national security challenges.

Hegseth “provided no substantial observations on how to defend Taiwan or the Philippines” and did not “articulate in any detail a strategic vision for dealing with” with China, McConnell said. The incoming defence secretary also failed to demonstrate he can manage the Pentagon effectively.

On Thursday, Murkowski said she could not vote for him “in good conscience”, while Collins said she was “not convinced that his position on women serving in combat roles has changed”.

Ahead of the vote, Trump told reporters on Friday that he “was very surprised that Collins and Murkowski would do that”, adding that “Pete’s a very, very good man”.

He also anticipated that McConnell would be a hold out too: “Of course, Mitch is always a ‘no’ vote, I guess.”

Trump shocked Washington and defence circles when he selected Hegseth, who served in the Army National Guard, for the role. He has since been dogged by allegations of sexual assault, alcohol abuse, misogyny, sexism and racism.

Hegseth said in written answers to questions that he paid $50,000 to the woman who accused him of sexual assault in a California hotel room in 2017, according to Senator Elizabeth Warren.

Hegseth dismissed the allegations about the sexual assault, his character and preparedness for the top Pentagon job as “a smear campaign” at his Senate confirmation hearing last week. He also tried to revise his previous statements about women soldiers, saying they would “have access to ground combat roles, given the standards remain high”.

On air Hegseth became known for denouncing diversity, equity and inclusive initiatives. DEI policies in the military were “dividing troops” and forcing “commanders to walk on eggshells”, Hegseth said at his hearing.

More Senate confirmation fireworks could come when two other contentious cabinet nominees, Robert F Kennedy Jr and Tulsi Gabbard, are grilled by senators on January 29 and January 30, respectively. Both ex-Democrats, Kennedy has been tapped for health secretary and Gabbard for director of national intelligence.



US secretary of state Marco Rubio has ordered an immediate halt to work on virtually all existing foreign aid programmes pending a review into whether they are consistent with President Donald Trump’s policies, according to an internal cable seen by the Financial Times.

The move will affect international assistance contracts administered by Washington, including through the US Agency for International Development, worth billions of dollars and spanning countries around the world.

In the cable sent to the state department and USAID on Friday, Rubio said that all new foreign aid disbursements were to be suspended, and contracting officers and grant officers needed to “immediately issue stop-work orders . . . until such time as the secretary shall determine, following a review”.

The review period is expected to last as long as 85 days, leaving the fate of hundreds of US foreign aid contracts, which were worth more than $70bn in the 2022 fiscal year, potentially in limbo for as long as three months.

Rubio also ordered that all foreign aid disbursed through any agency or department be approved by the secretary of state, centralising the vetting of all international assistance programmes within his office.

Rubio’s cable implements an executive order signed by Trump on his first day in office. In it the president bashed the “foreign aid industry and bureaucracy” as “not aligned with American interests and in many cases antithetical to American values”, and asked for assistance to be suspended.

In the first days of his second term in the White House, Trump has taken aggressive steps to reshape and redirect all agencies of the US government to implement his policies.

Scientific agencies such as the National Institutes of Health have also paused grant work pending review by the new administration, alarming researchers.

There are some exceptions to Rubio’s aid freeze order, among them “approved waivers” for military financing for Israel and Egypt, as well as foreign emergency food aid. But the cable said that in addition to pausing new and existing contracts, US government agencies, including USAID, must stop publishing proposals for foreign aid projects.

Earlier this week, Rubio said in a statement that Trump had asked him “to place our core national interest as the guiding mission of American foreign policy”, saying among his top priorities were curbing mass migration and scrapping climate policies that “weaken” America.

“Every dollar we spend, every programme we fund, and every policy we pursue must be justified with the answer to three simple questions: Does it make America safer? Does it make America stronger? Does it make America more prosperous?”

The state department has been approached for comment.



The televised image of Donald Trump towered over delegates in a conference hall in the ski resort of Davos on Thursday, embodying the outsized impact the new president has had just a few days into his second term in the Oval Office.

Prime ministers, business leaders and the president of the European Central Bank had queued up to see him address the World Economic Forum, his first speech to a global audience since returning to the White House. One attendee joked about fetching some popcorn for the show.

Trump did not hold back, provoking nervous laughter as he issued a series of demands and ultimatums to allies and rivals alike.

Saudi Arabia and other producers must cut oil prices, global central banks “immediately” needed to slash interest rates, and foreign companies must ramp up investments in US factories or face tariffs. The EU — which came in for particular opprobrium — must stop hitting big American technology companies with competition fines.

“We are going to be demanding respect from other nations,” the president said. His predecessor had “allowed other nations to take advantage of the US. We can’t allow that to happen any more.”

Trump’s demands came amid a frenetic first week in office in which the president launched a blitzkrieg of executive orders and announcements intended not just to reshape the state but also assert America’s economic and commercial supremacy. Tariffs of up to 25 per cent could be slapped on Canada and Mexico as early as February 1, riding roughshod over the trade deal Trump himself negotiated in his first term.

China could face levies of up to 100 per cent if Beijing failed to agree on a deal to sell at least 50 per cent of the TikTok app to a US company, while the EU was told to purchase more American oil if it wanted to avoid tariffs. Underscoring the new American unilateralism, Trump pulled the US out of the World Health Organization, as well as exiting the Paris climate accord for a second time.

Strikingly, Trump reached for an obscure, 90-year-old provision in the US tax code to threaten a doubling of tax rates for foreign nationals and companies if their home countries were deemed to have imposed “discriminatory” taxes on American multinationals.

This proposal throws a “hand grenade” at international tax policymaking, says Niels Johannesen, director of the Oxford university Centre for Business Taxation at Saïd Business School. The move suggests a determination to “shape other countries’ tax policy through coercion rather than through co-operation”, he adds.

The plans unveiled this week by the new president raise the spectre of a multi-front economic war as Trump uses the power of America’s resurgent economy to rebalance the international order in his favour.

The key question, say investors and policymakers, is whether this amounts to a more intense version of the transactional, dealmaking approach seen in Trump’s first term, or a shift towards unbridled unilateralism, where a White House unbound by the constraints of international law cajoles and intimidates foreign governments and businesses.

“He’s weaponising everything: trade, tax and energy. I’m worried that finance will get weaponised too,” says the head of one of the world’s largest sovereign wealth funds. “Most people are betting that he cares about the stock market — that’s the only check. That and the fact that he has said he wants to be a peacemaker.”

In Davos, leading US executives were eager to cheer Trump’s agenda — suggesting there is little anxiety within the corporate sector about the US potentially rupturing the global rules-based order.

Tariffs are an “economic tool. That’s it,” said Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan Chase, in a CNBC interview at Davos this week. “If it’s a little inflationary, but it’s good for national security, so be it. Get over it.”

The US stock market rallied this week as investors digested the prospect of an easing of regulations governing banks and high-technology companies, as well as the announcement of a massive $100bn artificial intelligence infrastructure project launched by OpenAI and SoftBank. By the end of the week (as of late Friday afternoon in New York), the S&P 500 index was up 1.8 per cent.

“Anecdotally, people talk to CEOs and say they all feel super-positive,” says Mahmood Pradhan, head of global macro at Amundi Investment Institute.

“If I ask myself what justifies the animal spirits, the banking deregulation stuff is real and the prospect of lower corporate taxes is real.”

Yet, outside the US, the threat of a widening array of trade barriers and conflicts over tax policies is weighing on the economic outlook. Valdis Dombrovskis, the EU’s economics commissioner, says a fracturing of global trade would be of particular worry to economies like Europe, where trade accounts for more than a fifth of GDP.

He cites IMF estimates showing that extreme geoeconomic fragmentation in trade could wipe out 7 per cent of global GDP over the medium run. “If this global economic fragmentation settles in — and there is a risk of that — it is going to have sizeable negative economic consequences.”

Even while bracing for a tariff onslaught, though, some European policymakers claim to see potential upsides.

“It is a new environment which is definitely less comfortable for Europe, but which also offers a lot of opportunities,” says Alexander de Croo, Belgium’s prime minister. “Europe can show there that we have stability and that you are in a predictable environment where investment can take place.”

European officials also say they could benefit from deeper trade ties with other countries that may be squeezed out of US markets. “Countries are coming to us because they want to diversify away from the US,” says a senior EU official.

“We need to keep on being open but not being naive,” says Spanish economy minister Carlos Cuerpo. “We need to have our companies competing under equal footing, equal conditions and a level playing field with respect to others. That was the case with China. That will need to be the case also with the US.”

While the US and Europe have long railed against Chinese trade practices, Beijing was quick this week to present itself as an upholder of the global, rules-based order rather than its nemesis.

Speaking the day after Trump was inaugurated, Chinese vice-premier Ding Xuexiang insisted that economic globalisation “is not a ‘you lose, I win’, zero-sum game”. The largest countries of the world needed to “lead by example” he said, praising international bodies including the World Trade Organization and UN.

The irony of China presenting itself as a free-trading paragon while Trump seeks to extract concessions from his closest allies by brute economic force was not lost on Davos attendees watching Ding’s performance.

Despite the barrage of measures and statements fired out by the White House this week, most global policymakers are taking a wait-and-see approach to Trump’s aggressive transactionalism, rather than leaping to conclusions about the longer-term ramifications for the global economic system.

“Why put my cards on the table before he has?” says the senior EU official.

Jonathan Reynolds, the UK’s business secretary, acknowledges there remain “lots of questions” about the president’s approach. “Is it about leverage around negotiations? Is it about revenue-raising in terms of tariffs?” The UK, he says, will continue to argue for a “much more open, global trading economy.”

There is little question, however, that Trump is signalling a significant escalation in how he will wield trade as a weapon compared with his first term.

“Those around Trump have had time to build up a systematic, methodological approach for protectionist trade policy and it shows,” says former UK trade department official Allie Renison, now at consultancy SEC Newgate. The approach will be to build up a case file of “evidence” against countries, she says, and then use it to extract concessions in areas of both economic and foreign policy.

The question remains how far Trump is willing to go. The danger of trampling on the rules-based order, says Jeromin Zettelmeyer, head of the Bruegel think-tank, is a complete breakdown in the diplomatic and legal channels for settling international disputes.

If Trump were to pull out of a wider range of international frameworks, such as the WTO or the IMF, he warns, then the arrangements that help govern the global economy could get “substantively destroyed”.

The extreme case, he adds, is that “they really do a Putin” — namely by violating the sanctity of international borders. Taking control of Greenland or the Panama Canal by force, as Trump has threatened, would amount to “the reintroduction of the law of the jungle”.

Michael Strain, director of Economic Policy Studies at the American Enterprise Institute think-tank, questions whether Trump will reverse the “fundamental forces” that drive global economic integration — and whether the president even wants to do so. But regardless, he says, the uncertainty about his true intentions “makes it hard for business to plan, creates a chilling effect on investment, and creates tensions with our allies.”

Some caution against being awestruck by Trump’s threats or his espousal of capitalism without limits, because his agenda was so incoherent.

“What we are seeing is huge doses of American hubris,” says Arancha González, dean of the Paris School of International Affairs at Sciences Po. “We are blinded by the intensity of all the issues put on the table and by Trump’s conviction. But we are not looking at the contradictions. It’s like we are all on an orange drug.”

Additional reporting by Harriet Agnew in Davos and Peter Foster in London

Data visualisation by Keith Fray



The dollar was on course for its biggest weekly fall in more than a year on Friday after US President Donald Trump suggested a potentially softer stance on tariffs against China and called for interest rates to fall.

The dollar slid 0.7 per cent against a basket of currencies after Trump said he would “rather not” hit China with tariffs. Over the week, it has lost 1.8 per cent, its worst performance since July 2023.

Trump also reiterated calls for looser monetary policy, saying he knew rates “much better” than the Federal Reserve and would like to see them fall “a lot”.

The euro, which has fallen sharply in recent months, jumped 0.9 per cent to $1.051, putting it on course for its largest weekly gain since November 2022. Sterling also gained 0.3 per cent to $1.249, on course for its strongest week in more than two years.

“The main driver of the reversal of US dollar strength this week has been the scaling-back of investor fears over disruption to global trade from Trump’s tariff plans,” said Lee Hardman, senior currency strategist at MUFG, adding that these fears had “eased further” overnight on the China comments.

Mexico’s peso, which has been hit hard by tariff worries, rose 0.6 per cent to 20.3 per dollar, poised for its best week in four months.

Adarsh Sinha, strategist at Bank of America, said there was a persistent gap between where interest rates suggested the dollar should trade, which would be below its current price, and the level if the risk of tariffs were priced in — a threat still expected to loom large despite Trump’s latest comments.

“Even with tariffs delayed, they are likely to be a key policy pillar for the new administration,” Sinha added. “More importantly, uncertainty remains high with President Trump.”

The resilience of the US central bank to pressure from the new president is a core theme for this year, fund managers say.

“The pressure is going to be huge on the Fed,” said Olivier De Larouzière, chief investment officer for global fixed income at BNP Paribas Asset Management.

There were “good reasons” for investors in the coming quarters to start to price in rate rises for 2026, he added, and so the market would be “closely monitoring” the Fed’s communications over the coming months to see whether the Trump rhetoric was stopping that tightening bias coming through.

Trump’s remarks come just days before the Fed’s first policy meeting to be held during his administration.

However, markets have been betting since early October that Trump’s proposals for trade tariffs and tax cuts would stoke inflation, pushing the Fed to potentially hold off from further rate cuts.

The US central bank is widely expected to keep rates at their current level of 4.25 per cent to 4.5 per cent next week after lowering them by a full percentage point since September.

Investors priced in a slightly greater chance of earlier rate cuts this year after Trump’s remarks. Another quarter-point cut is expected in June or July.

Despite the president’s efforts to steer monetary policy lower, some investors believe the central bank will have limited room to cut further, with the dollar expected to continue its rally of recent months.

Dan Ivascyn, chief investment officer at $2tn asset manager Pimco, told the Financial Times this week that the Fed was poised to keep rates on hold “for the foreseeable future” and could even increase borrowing costs.

Asian currencies, including the Japanese yen and Indian rupee, strengthened against the dollar following Trump’s comments. The offshore Chinese yuan gained 0.5 per cent to Rmb7.25 to the dollar, its highest level since late November.

In early January the Chinese currency breached the 7.30 level as traders positioned for the impact of tariffs on Chinese exports to weaken the currency, but it has strengthened since Trump’s inauguration.



Mexico and Canada are putting aside their differences and forming a more united front as they try to head off US President Donald Trump’s threat to impose steep tariffs on them as soon as next week.

Since winning the election in November Trump has repeatedly threatened his country’s two largest trading partners with tariffs of 25 per cent on all exports to the US in retaliation for what he says are rising levels of illegal immigration and the trafficking of the opioid fentanyl into the country. He has warned the tariffs could apply from February 1.

“Trump is black and white about this,” said a person familiar with the Trump team’s plans. “We give you access to the US market, what are you giving us?”

Mexico and Canada send three-quarters of their exports to the US underpinned by a three-way trade agreement, USMCA, that was signed during Trump’s last presidency, making them vulnerable to demands from Washington.

Mexico relies on the US for about 70 per cent of its natural gas and has long been blamed by Trump for illegal migrants and drugs coming into the US.

The Canadian chamber of commerce predicts the country’s GDP would shrink 2.6 per cent or roughly C$78bn (US$54bn), if Trump made good on his threats, costing Canadians about C$1,900 per person annually.

Despite the shared threat from Trump, the Mexico-Canada relationship soured last year, initially over Ottawa’s ambassador raising concerns over an overhaul of the Mexican judiciary.

They worsened significantly in November after Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau hinted he would be open to cutting Mexico out of USMCA and agreed with Trump that Chinese investment in Mexico was problematic, in an apparent attempt to curry favour with the newly elected president.

These and other comments prompted fury in Mexico City but the two countries are coming together in the face of Trump’s tariff warning, with a flurry of calls between ministers taking place in the past month, officials said.

“Political noise may have caused delays and clouded judgments in Ottawa, but Canadians might have finally realised that better co-ordination with Mexico is crucial,” said Diego Marroquin Bitar, the Bersin-Foster North America Scholar at the Wilson Centre think-tank.

A key aim of the rapprochement has been to align the countries’ narratives of how US tariffs would be a lose-lose proposition that would push prices up for consumers in all three countries.

Trudeau this week said: “Trump has announced he wants a ‘golden age’ for the American economy. That means they’re going to need more energy, more minerals, more steel and aluminium, more lumber, more concrete, more of the things Canada is already sending them.”

Ottawa and Mexico City have also have drawn up separate lists of retaliatory tariffs, while simultaneously sending public and private olive branches to the Trump team on border security, said people with knowledge of the matter.

Mexico has readied tariffs dubbed locally as a “carousel” of products squeezed for a few months before they are switched to other states targeting key Republican lawmakers.

Canada has also signalled it is preparing tit-for-tat sanctions that would create “the greatest amount of angst in the US with the least amount of pain in Canada”, said Jonathan Wilkinson, minister of energy and natural resources.

A review of USMCA set for 2026 is under way, with Trump pressing for changes to reduce China’s footprint in the region. Public consultations began this week in Washington and the president has asked the US trade representative to make recommendations on the pact’s future by April 1.

Ottawa and Mexico City are bracing for Trump to push for a renegotiation of USMCA — which the president renegotiated during his first term in what he called a “colossal victory for American workers” — rather than the loosely defined but narrower “review” scheduled under the pact.

“It is his to play with, it is his to refashion,” said Andrew Shoyer, a former USTR official and now trade lawyer at Sidley Austin.

People familiar with the White House’s plans say the US wants to make changes to limit foreign content in cars and to curtail growing Chinese links to Mexico’s economy.

Trump has also raised the US’s high trade deficits with the two USMCA partners, warning Ottawa that Washington could use “economic force” to make Canada the country’s 51st state.

Canada “can always become a state, and if you’re a state, we won’t have a deficit”, he told the World Economic Forum in Davos on Thursday.

“We don’t need their lumber, because we have our own forests. We don’t need their oil and gas. We have more than anybody,” he added.

In fact, the US imports about 40 per cent of the crude it refines, with 60 per cent of that coming from Canada and 11 per cent from Mexico.

“Imposing tariffs will adversely affect not only American consumers but also American energy security interests,” said Mark Scholz, the chief executive of the Canadian Association of Energy Contractors.

Canada has responded to Trump’s border demands, pledging to spend more than $1bn on security with helicopters, drones and increased manpower — although Trudeau on Thursday noted only 1 per cent of the illegal migrants and illicit drugs entering the US come from Canada.

Mexico has also stepped up immigration enforcement and will now take back asylum applicants waiting out their US claims.

Trump has threatened to deploy the US special forces to Mexico to take out drug cartels, and said in Davos that the US was also “dealing with Mexico very well”.

His approach has had a dramatic effect on what are usually routine amendment procedures in most trade deals, Shoyer said.

“This is maximum chaos, shock and awe . . . he’s using all this as leverage,” he said.

Data visualisation by Alan Smith



Donald Trump insisted he was serious in his determination to take over Greenland in a fiery telephone call with Denmark’s prime minister, according to senior European officials.

The US president spoke to Mette Frederiksen, the Danish premier, for 45 minutes last week. The White House has not commented on the call but Frederiksen said she had emphasised that the vast Arctic island — an autonomous part of the kingdom of Denmark — was not for sale, while noting America’s “big interest” in it.

Five current and former senior European officials briefed on the call said the conversation had gone very badly.

They added that Trump had been aggressive and confrontational following the Danish prime minister’s comments that the island was not for sale, despite her offer of more co-operation on military bases and mineral exploitation.

“It was horrendous,” said one of the people. Another added: “He was very firm. It was a cold shower. Before, it was hard to take it seriously. But I do think it is serious, and potentially very dangerous.”

The details of the call are likely to deepen European concerns that Trump’s return to power will strain transatlantic ties more than ever, as the US president heaps pressure on allies to give up territory.

Trump has started his second term musing about potentially taking over Greenland, the Panama Canal, and even Canada.

Many European officials had hoped his comments about seeking control of Greenland for “national security” reasons were a negotiating ploy to gain more influence over the Nato territory. Russia and China are both also jostling for position in the Arctic.

But the call with Frederiksen has crushed such hopes, deepening the foreign policy crisis between the Nato allies.

“The intent was very clear. They want it. The Danes are now in crisis mode,” said one person briefed on the call. Another said: “The Danes are utterly freaked out by this.”

A former Danish official added: “It was a very tough conversation. He threatened specific measures against Denmark such as targeted tariffs.”

The Danish prime minister’s office said it did “not recognise the interpretation of the conversation given by anonymous sources”.

Greenland, home to just 57,000 people, is an entry point to new shipping routes gradually opening up through the Arctic; it also boasts abundant but hard to access minerals.

“President Trump has been clear that the safety and security of Greenland is important to the United States as China and Russia make significant investments throughout the Arctic region,” a White House National Security Council spokesperson said.

“The President is committed to not only protecting US interests in the Arctic but also working with Greenland to ensure mutual prosperity for both nations.”

Trump threatened in early January to impose duties on Denmark if it opposed him on Greenland. He also declined to rule out using military force to take control of the island.

“People really don’t even know if Denmark has any legal right to it but, if they do, they should give it up because we need it for national security,” Trump said at a press conference days before taking office.

“I’m talking about protecting the free world,” he added. “You have China ships all over the place. You have Russian ships all over the place. We’re not letting that happen.”

Múte Egede, Greenland’s prime minister, has repeatedly stressed that the island’s inhabitants want independence rather than US — or Danish — citizenship. But he has welcomed US business interest in mining and tourism.

Frederiksen held a meeting with chief executives of large Danish companies including Novo Nordisk and Carlsberg last week to discuss Trump’s threats, including potential tariffs against her country.

On the day of the Trump call, she told Denmark’s TV2: “There is no doubt that there is great interest in and around Greenland. Based on the conversation I had today, there is no reason to believe that it should be less than what we have heard in the public debate.”



Now would be a good time for investors to curb their enthusiasm, just a little. This year has begun with the bulls largely in control. Already, US stocks have risen about 4 per cent, making this one of the stronger opening months to any year in the past decade.

The re-inauguration of Donald Trump as US president has ushered in a new period of “animal spirits” among business executives, as veteran investor Stan Druckenmiller put it this week. Chief executives are “somewhere between relieved and giddy” at the election result, he told CNBC. Meanwhile, US banks are in “go-mode”, a senior JPMorgan executive told the Davos crowd, while crypto is on the cusp of entering the “banana zone”, according to its boosters. (Nope, me neither. Apparently that’s good, though, indicating prices are about to surge.)

HSBC is sticking with the good vibes. Its multi-asset team this week outlined an “extremely positive” backdrop for risky assets in the first half of this year — a scenario it described as “Goldilocks on steroids”, quite the mental image.

At the risk of spoiling all the fun, some market watchers — including some of the optimists — are getting a little nervous. The first big reason is the global government bond market, which has got off to a wobbly start to the year. This is not entirely a bad thing — it reflects a continuation of the US economic growth miracle. But it also reflects an expectation that inflation will continue to stick around and that the Federal Reserve will therefore struggle to keep reducing interest rates — no matter how much Trump would like it to. On the margins, it also suggests asset managers demand a somewhat higher rate of return for feeding government coffers.

Whatever your preferred narrative here, the point is that bond investors have been wrongfooted (again) and that the resulting drop in prices has pushed yields up (again). The most important benchmark of them all — the US 10-year yield — is sitting well above 4.5 per cent. That marks a recovery in prices since mid-January but is still high enough to undermine the case for loading up on stocks.

As my colleagues reported this week, US stocks have now reached their most expensive point relative to bonds in a generation. It is becoming ever harder to justify venturing further into stocks when their expected profits compared with earnings have sunk so far below the risk-free rate.

Peter Oppenheimer, chief global equity strategist at Goldman Sachs, noted at an event at the bank’s swanky London office this week that stocks had largely shrugged off this competition from bonds so far — in large part because optimism around growth is so strong. But that leaves equities now “vulnerable to further rises in yields”.

It is mildly silly but nonetheless true that much here depends on round numbers, which act as useful psychological signposts to investors. The big test would be if US yields hit 5 per cent. At that point, one of two things would happen: the bond haters would capitulate and snap up some bargains to pull the yield back down again, or selling would intensify and every asset class would feel the pain. My strong hunch is the former.

We are not at that point yet, but as Lisa Shalett, chief investment officer at Morgan Stanley Wealth Management, put it this week, “we’re still at a critical level”.

“We’re really getting close to the zip code where slightly slower growth and slightly higher rates become a deadly combination for the markets,” she said. As a result, she is sceptical that equities in general, and highly concentrated, highly tech-dependent US stock markets in particular, can continue the spectacular run of the past two years. Shalett is anticipating gains in US stocks of between 5 and 10 per cent this year. That is not bad, by any stretch, but it would not be a repeat of the 20 per cent-plus performance in each of the past two years.

Another factor tapping on the alarm bells is the level of optimism itself, especially among retail investors. The American Association of Individual Investors reported that sentiment had “skyrocketed” in its latest monthly survey. Expectations that stock prices will rise over the next six months jumped by some 18 percentage points to January, the AAII said.

Even optimistic wealth managers, who advise a lot of these investors, are having a hard time holding them back. Ross Mayfield, an investment strategist for Baird Private Wealth Management, told me this week that he believes in the bull market, albeit with half an eye on bond yields, which have moved “up and to the right with no obvious reason”. But he sees anecdotal signs that the American exceptionalism theme is becoming overly entrenched among his clients. “I’m starting to get questions about whether you need to diversify at all,” he said.

None of this is a reason to run to the hills and shelter in the safest assets you can find. But the air is getting somewhat thin at these heights and the potential for slip-ups from the new US presidential administration is strong. Glassy-eyed optimism rarely ends well, no matter how muscly Goldilocks becomes.

katie.martin@ft.com



Wall Street’s securities watchdog has made it easier for banks to expand their cryptocurrency businesses by overturning a Joe Biden administration rule that made it prohibitively expensive to hold digital assets.

In one of the first pro-crypto moves of Donald Trump’s second presidency, the Securities and Exchange Commission late on Thursday reversed guidance known as SAB 121, which had called for institutions to treat digital tokens held for customers as liabilities on balance sheets.

The shift underscores expectations that Trump will take a far more welcoming approach towards the digital asset sector, undoing the more sceptical stance the SEC took during Biden’s administration.

Mainstream groups are taking more serious interest in crypto assets and technologies, with BlackRock chief Larry Fink this week calling on the SEC to “rapidly approve” the ability of companies to create tokens backed by stocks and bonds.

In a sign of Trump’s more supportive crypto strategy, the president on Thursday had also issued an executive order laying out his priorities regarding cryptocurrencies and calling for cabinet-level officials to report back several months from now with recommendations for regulatory and legislative proposals.

While Trump’s pick to lead the SEC, Paul Atkins, is still awaiting US Senate confirmation, acting chair Mark Uyeda and another Republican commissioner, Hester Peirce, have put the regulator on a more crypto-friendly track, forming a task force and dismantling SAB 121.

The SEC’s SAB 121 had “created a punitive framework that effectively prevented US banks from offering custody services for bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies”, said Mark Palmer, an equity research analyst at The Benchmark Company. “Traditional banks will now be able to offer crypto custody services without facing de facto penalties.”

Even before the SEC took action, big US banks were eagerly anticipating the ability to court crypto customers as Trump and his allies in the executive and legislative branches smoothed the road for digital assets.

“We do want to have the ability to offer spot crypto, and our expectation is that at some point, the regulations around crypto are going to allow us to do that,” Rick Wurster, chief executive at Charles Schwab, told analysts on a call this week.

The American Bankers Association and other industry lobbyists last year called on Biden to formally disapprove of the SEC guidance after measures to do so passed both houses of Congress in May 2024.

“This is a step in the right direction,” said Kevin Fromer, president of the Financial Services Forum, which represents the biggest banks.

Brian Daly, a lawyer at Akin Gump, noted custody services were “a predicate to everything” for financial institutions when offering crypto services to customers. The old rule “basically made it impossible for all the responsible banks and broker-dealers and financial intermediaries that we rely on to be crypto custodians”, Daly said.

The price of bitcoin rose more than 1.5 per cent on Friday to about $105,800, shy of its all-time high of roughly $109,000.



Donald Trump has started his second term as predicted: with a fusillade of executive orders, memos, vows, musings and overheated rhetoric. The world has had at least a year to brace itself for the return of the America First agenda to the White House. No one can say they are surprised by this approach, or by most of Trump’s initiatives — radical and divisive as some of them are. Even so, his full-throated unleashing of the animal spirits of American capitalism has unnerved some traditional allies. Now the world has to decide how to respond to the whirlwind that seems set to accompany, if not encapsulate, Trump’s second administration.

America, too, has a big question to answer. Much of the focus in the opening days of Trump’s new presidency has been on issues that secured his re-election, in particular reducing immigration and cutting back what his supporters call the “deep state”, otherwise known as the federal government. He is right to attend to the concerns of the voters who sent him back to the Oval Office. But how should Americans respond if, as his opponents fear, he indulges his baser instincts and starts undermining the pillars of its democracy?

There is a simple answer to both questions: values in addition to interests. Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris climate accord cannot, for example, become an excuse for the EU to slow its decarbonisation agenda; it should, though, ease the regulatory burdens and simplify its rules.

On the domestic front, too, now is the time to pick the right fights. US courts should be prepared for a battle royal over Trump’s more controversial initiatives, such as his bid to end birthright citizenship, which is enshrined in the 14th amendment of the constitution.

Trump’s opening foray has underlined a widespread sense that an era has ended. It has met a wearied response from America’s allies, who see it as intensifying the threats to the multilateral order. But it is important to note that many elsewhere in the world view Trump more favourably and like the idea of a more inward-looking America. It is possible, too, that some of his initiatives may have desirable outcomes. It will take more than Trump’s threat of tougher sanctions on Russia to bring Vladimir Putin to the table to negotiate a fair peace deal in Ukraine. But the president’s blunt — and unexpected — warning this week was a step in the right direction, as well as a reminder of how he sees unpredictability as an asset.

More broadly, allies have to accept that some of Trump’s prescriptions may prove a much-needed call to action. Just as in his last term he prodded Nato’s members to spend more on defence, this time his backing for less regulation and bureaucracy and lower taxes will force EU leaders to confront with greater urgency the continent’s problem of competitiveness.

These are early days. The fact that Trump has not started a new trade war with China or Europe does not mean one will not be under way next week. Whatever unfolds, it is a time for cool heads. Anwar Ibrahim, Malaysia’s prime minister, told the Financial Times this week that he and other east Asian leaders thought that, after an initial period of turmoil, the global trading system would survive intact. We have to hope he is right.

Trump is now at the height of his powers, controlling both houses of Congress, with a conservative majority on the Supreme Court and with the following wind of re-election. At home and abroad, it is vital not to be distracted by the more performative elements of his agenda, to accept that sometimes he may be right, but most of all to stand up for what matters. The political capital of second terms can dissipate rapidly — if rashness and hubris prevail.



At an inauguration-eve rally in Washington last weekend, celebrities took turns firing up the jubilant crowd of Trump supporters who had gathered to herald the dawn of a new American age — among them Jon Voight, Dana White and Kid Rock.

But it was not the Hollywood actor, the UFC frontman or the rock star who won the biggest roar from the Maga faithful. Instead it was a policy wonk, Stephen Miller, the architect of Donald Trump’s second-term policy agenda and anti-immigration ideologue.

“They were so sure they were going to crush this movement out of existence,” bellowed Miller as his fiery eight-minute address reached a peak. “And yet here we stand today and Maga is stronger, more powerful, more united and more determined than ever before.” The crowd went wild.

Since returning to the Oval Office, Trump has wasted no time in signing a blizzard of executive orders aimed at boosting oil production, curbing immigration, scrapping diversity initiatives and pardoning January 6 rioters, to name just a few. As the president put his name to the directives, Miller, the mastermind behind them, was standing just metres away.

“Stephen, like the president, believes that we have a finite amount of time to save our country,” says Jason Miller (no relation), a former Trump spokesperson. “For these early actions, I would say that Stephen is the key implementer-in-chief.”

Miller has been a Trump devotee from the early days of his first presidential campaign in 2016. Then a 30-year-old adviser, he crafted policy from behind a card table in a closet-sized office on the fifth floor of Trump tower.

Associates say his attention to detail stood out from the start. “During discussion on policy he always knew the most about any topic being discussed — from 150-year-old esoteric immigration provisions to international postal treaties,” says Hunter Morgen, his former deputy.

Miller’s loyalty has paid off. According to Mick Mulvaney, chief of staff during Trump’s first administration, “Stephen is probably . . . the closest to the president of anybody in the West Wing at this point, now that the family is not there. He’s going to be one of the critical players. He’s been with the president probably the longest of anybody who’s in there. The president trusts him implicitly.”

As he returns to the White House a battle-hardened policy veteran, Democrats are on high alert. “He’s the second most dangerous man in America after the president — and unlike the president he actually knows what he’s doing,” says Jim Manley, a former longtime aide to the Senate Democratic leadership.

Miller was born in Santa Monica, California in 1985. His rightwing zeal was apparent early. As a 16-year-old, he called into radio shows and wrote to local newspapers, railing against the “rampant political correctness” he said was consuming his high school.

In a 2002 letter published in the Santa Monica Lookout, he hit out at bilingual announcements, the availability of contraception, the “foster[ing]” of homosexuality, the failure to recite the pledge of allegiance and the negative depiction of US history. “Forget about being the nation that stopped Hitler, brought communism to its knees, and feeds more hungry people around the world than any other country — forget all of that, and let us just agree that we are a horrible nation. Or, we can raise our flags, lift our guns, and proclaim that we are Americans,” he wrote.

After studying at Duke University, he entered Republican politics, where he quickly made a name for himself. Former Tea Party congresswoman Michele Bachmann remembers him as a “serious, tireless communications director who quickly proved his intellect and talent”. Dave Brat, the economics professor who Miller helped oust House majority leader Eric Cantor in 2014, says he was a “straight shooter” who put “empirics” over “emotion”.

But it was with Alabama senator Jeff Sessions that he honed his skills as a hype-man. Sessions previously told the Financial Times that he had asked Miller, then a staffer in his Senate office, to introduce him at an event when someone pulled out. Miller was so good in the role, according to Sessions, that he became a regular fixture.

During the 2016 presidential race, Sessions was one of the first Republicans to endorse Trump and Miller soon joined the real estate tycoon on the campaign trail. Trump often used the young ideologue as a warm-up act.

But it was in policy that Miller would make himself invaluable, putting into action the president’s anti-immigration plans. During Trump’s first term he shaped nativist policies including the separation of families, the shortlived so-called Muslim travel ban and the ending of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) programme.

Groups representing immigrants fear his return to the heart of government. “We are deeply, deeply concerned,” says Vanessa Cárdenas, director of America’s Voice, an NGO. “It is incredibly troubling that he is back and frankly in charge of immigration policy — and also has tentacles all over our government.”

While immigration might be his driver, Miller plans to make his mark in other areas too — reshaping America’s relationship with the world and overhauling what he sees as a “corrupt and broken” system at home. “How is Stephen spending his days,” asks Mulvaney. “It’s immigration, immigration, immigration, then trade policy, then the deep state.”

myles.mccormick@ft.com



Europe may be able to attract disillusioned “talent” from across the Atlantic following Donald Trump’s election, the European Central Bank president has suggested, as she called on the continent to better recognise its economic strengths.

Christine Lagarde said Europe needed to get better at keeping its talent and savings at home, adding that the new US administration’s decision to freeze some funding for former president Joe Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act might remove one of the incentives to invest in the US.

Without making a direct reference to Trump, the French central banker indicated that some American residents might be attracted to Europe in the wake of the US inauguration.

“We need to keep the talent at home. We need to keep the savings at home. Maybe it is also time to import a few of the talents that would be disenchanted, for one reason or the other, from another side of the sea,” Lagarde said.

Trump’s re-election has led some US citizens and residents to consider leaving the country, with lawyers in the UK reporting a rise in interest from liberal Americans over relocating.

Lagarde’s words came on the closing day of the World Economic Forum in Davos, during which investors and executives highlighted the contrast between the upbeat mood about the US economy and deep pessimism about Europe’s weak growth prospects.

Speaking alongside Lagarde on a panel, Larry Fink, chief executive of BlackRock, said he believed that there was too much pessimism in Europe and it was probably time to be investing back into the continent.

Lagarde said that the EU faced “existential threats” but that this should act as a wake-up call for its leaders to take action to strengthen the bloc.

She said the positive scorecard for the Eurozone included a relatively low overall government deficit at about 3 per cent of GDP, and her “strong confidence” that annual inflation, which was 2.4 per cent in December, was more likely to decline than to reaccelerate.

Lagarde acknowledged that some executives were “not very upbeat” about European prospects, but she argued the continent could respond to its economic challenges if its leaders “actually get their act together”.

Among the changes that could benefit Europe are Trump’s decision to suspend the disbursement of some funds under the IRA, which has served as an important lure for European companies seeking to set up manufacturing projects in the US.

Andy Marsh, chief executive of Plug Power — a US clean hydrogen developer and parts manufacturer that secured a $1.66bn loan from the Department of Energy’s Loan Programs Office in the final hours of the Biden administration — warned that a prolonged pause in clean tech funding would force companies to move investments elsewhere.“We’re going to go where there’s markets,” said Marsh. “If there’s more interest for our products because of policy in Europe and Australia, we’ll spend more time in Europe and Australia. I think that would be the approach most companies would take.”

Despite an expected slowdown in investments in green tech, economists believe the US remains a more attractive destination for investors’ capital than Europe.

“You’ve got a relative growth story in the US, you’ve got subsidised or cheap energy for heavy industry, and you’ve got direct pressures on Europe — and a few other places — from Trump saying that to sell in America, companies will have to produce here,” said Adam Posen, director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics think-tank.

“Irrespective of anything, you’re going to have a huge surge of foreign direct investment [in the US] over the next year or two.”

European politicians in Davos have also been arguing that Trump’s vows to erect trade barriers open an opportunity for the EU to strengthen its ties with other countries around the world. Lagarde said that the Europeans had learnt after the second world war that “you cannot go alone” and they instead needed to sit at the table and co-operate.

She said: “What is happening outside Is a challenge but also a big opportunity for revisiting and deciding whether or not Europe wants to be a key player,” Lagarde said. “I am contending it has the talent, and it has the means and it has the ambition.”

Fink, despite his optimism that the investment case for Europe had grown, said Europe was a “myth” because the single market was incomplete, including in financial services.

Lagarde disagreed. “Europe is not a myth. It is not a basket case. It’s a fantastic case for transformation.”



Two days after Hurricane Helene made landfall on September 26 last year, Robert Sawyer, a 68-year-old retired airline pilot, returned to inspect his waterside home on Madeira Beach, on a barrier island abutting St Petersburg, Florida. Bridges from the mainland were closed, as police dealt with downed power lines and scoured homes for survivors, or the bodies of victims, so he hitched a lift on a motorboat. After 20 minutes dodging unmoored vessels and other floating debris, they arrived at his dock, from where he surveyed the damage.

The receding storm surge had left 20 or so giant rubbish bins littered on the lawn. His neighbour’s floating dock, detached in the storm, had become a battering ram, smashing a path through his patio doors for the oncoming water. Inside the house, where the toxic mess of gasoline, oils and sewage had reached nearly 4ft, furniture lay upended and strewn among seagrass and mud — a Baldwin upright piano, a grandfather clock, a refrigerator, broken precious glassware.

Florida’s increasingly savage hurricane season had been growing its financial burden for years. Sawyer’s insurance premiums, set at $4,000 per year when he arrived from Cincinnati 10 years earlier, had edged up to $7,500. Earlier in 2024, his fire and wind insurer had abruptly refused to renew his policy, precipitating a chaotic rush for a replacement before his lender arranged its own exorbitantly priced substitute or withdrew his mortgage.

Soon, the dent left by Helene would make those items look like small change. By one estimate, up to $30bn of US property damage from the hurricane would turn out to be uninsured. By October, a neighbour four doors down, whose home had been valued at $940,000 before the hurricane hit, would have agreed to sell it for $699,000, the garden still full of the detritus carried there by the storm, just to get out. By Christmas, only seven of the 65 surrounding homes would be occupied, and half of Sawyer’s immediate neighbours would have left for good.

All of this lay ahead of him, however. On that September morning, his mind was on the lost urn containing the remains of his mother and younger brother that he hadn’t got around to scattering; it was on the thousands of photos he had planned to digitise someday, strewn through the home, matted together in dense clumps, their dyes slowly leaking into the salty water — family weddings, holidays, nieces and nephews growing up.

From the boat, he contemplated the move from Cincinnati, the 10 years spent in the house, the damage its disfigurement would cause to the architecture of his memories. Surveying the desolation he wondered: had it been worth it?

Across the world, a slew of floods, wildfires and storms is shifting the balance of risk and reward attached to homes abutting forests, mountains, coasts and rivers.

The most visible impact is on those affected by catastrophe, who face the trauma and grief of a home’s partial or total destruction, the financial shocks from underinsurance and the growing risk that, once rebuilt, even a new, safer home could be uninsurable.

But increasingly, even in locations seen as safe, homeowners are confronting spiralling insurance premiums and the prospect of a fall in capital values if insurers scale back or withdraw.

Hurricanes, fires and other disasters caused $320bn in losses last year, 30 per cent more than 2023, according to Munich Re, the world’s largest reinsurance group. Insurers will be on the hook for $140bn of these, making 2024 the most expensive for the global industry since 2017, when the hurricane trio of Harvey, Irma and Maria struck the US.

Many property markets in regions devastated by natural disaster have stopped in their tracks. Nearly three months after Valencia’s devastating floods, mortgage approvals in the affected areas have almost entirely ceased as lenders await revised surveys to better understand the properties’ risk, according to Juan Villén, head of the mortgage arm of Idealista, the Spanish property website. “Banks have ordered new appraisals to ensure that properties have not been affected by [the storm], before granting the loan,” he says.

As insurers bear the weight of huge payouts across the world, the ripples are being felt in rising home insurance premiums in the safest locations.

Joanna Shipton, one of six owners, has a flat in Marden Hill House, a Grade II*-listed house in Hertfordshire, about 90 minutes north of London, which dates from the 17th century. Given the building’s particular risks — including its age and listing, which makes repairs expensive — only one insurer will cover it, and the premium has increased from £18,000 per year in 2019 to £25,800 today.

“They have us over a barrel,” says Shipton, who is also treasurer of the management company the residents formed to run the building. Her share of the annual service charge is currently £10,800; on top of that, higher energy prices mean bills for heating her poorly insulated home have rocketed in the past couple of years.

She and her husband listed their home for sale in August for £2.7mn. Today, with the price cut to £2.3mn, Shipton worries the high running costs may be putting buyers off.

“Household insurers have lost so much money they have become a lot fussier,” says Clare Blakely of UK insurance broker Weatherbys Hamilton. They are now more reluctant to take on those with risk factors — such as a thatched roof, tall trees or water nearby. Since heavy rains caused extensive flooding in London in July 2021, questions about flat roofs, a cellar, lower ground floor or a basement have become standard, she adds.

Last year, UK property insurance payouts hit their highest level for 20 years, according to Deloitte. Following years of underwriting losses, many are forecasting widespread premium increases: despite a surge for at-risk homes, the average price, adjusting for inflation, of a UK building and contents policy has not changed since 2017. In that time claims have increased by 72 per cent.

Before devastating wildfires erupted earlier this month in Los Angeles, the city’s residents had long walked the tightrope between the glamour of its location and the risks.

“Pacific Palisades, Pasadena, Santa Monica, these neighbourhoods have a charisma — storied, enchanting, so physically beautiful, so rich culturally and historically — despite being earthquake- and fire-prone,” says John Vaillant, author of Fire Weather: A True Story from a Hotter World, which tells the story of the 2016 Fort McMurray wildfire that tore through the bitumen mining area in Alberta, Canada. “That is a tension that west coast Americans are comfortable with.”

Even equipped with Vaillant’s account, however, my conversation with Alisa Ruby Bash is disorientating. For the 49-year-old, arriving in Los Angeles aged 18 was the fulfilment of a dream. “My entire childhood I wanted to be an actress and a singer,” she says. Fifteen years ago, her dream materialised into a home on Enchanted Way on the edge of Pacific Palisades. She had it all: a beautiful detached house in one of the city’s most desirable neighbourhoods, “safe from crime, surrounded by celebrities and successful people”.

But on January 7, with only Palisades Drive between it and Topanga State Park, the house was one of the first to burn. In the rush to evacuate, her family left only with their passports, computers and the cat. “My home of 15 years, every single thing we own, all my belongings from my entire life [are gone],” she says.

Already, she is counting the cost. Twenty-four hours after her family escaped the fire, she looked on Zillow. The website had valued her home at $3.7mn, now it had revised this to $3mn. Her insurer, has been exemplary, she says. But she can’t see the $1mn they are offering covering the cost of the reconstruction, or the $700,000 covering the personal possessions the family have lost.

Despite all this, she plans to rebuild her home next to the park, a location that’s one of the city’s most vulnerable to future wildfire. If she does leave LA, it will be because of concerns over social deterioration and fear of crime (changes she links to the pandemic), not because of the risk of more fires or an earthquake. And her favoured place to relocate to is Hawaii, where the last significant storm led to a major disaster declared in 2022.

Bash does not speak for every Angelino. But this seeming tolerance for future risk is a common feature of those who live in dangerous beautiful places, and humans more generally, according to Justin Angle, joint author of This Is Wildfire: How to Protect Yourself, Your Home, and Your Community in the Age of Heat.

A former bond trader, he compares our discounting of natural disaster risk to investors during asset bubbles, so preoccupied with gorging on present rewards, they ignore the possibility the feast could come to an end. “We have acclimated to the ease of not having to deal with the problem, so we don’t internalise how likely it is. It’s a failure of imagination. We’re just really bad at understanding these slow-moving risks,” he says.

Angle’s own case illustrates the tension.

His detached home on the edge of Missoula, a Montana mountain town, abuts a vast swath of forest running 200 miles to the Canadian border and beyond. Dotted with large cotton woods and ponderosa pines, a creek flowing through the property makes it popular with wildlife, including mountain lion, bear, deer, wolf and moose; a rich canopy of bushes and shrubs shelters his home from the summer sun.

Precisely what makes his plot attractive makes it dangerous, he concedes. “That is all material that can and will burn someday. But the sound of the water and the wildlife makes up a lot of why I chose to live here.”

Meanwhile, efforts to nudge each other out of the imaginative deficit that underlies our skewy risk radar are fraught with social hazard, warns Vaillant. His own home in Vancouver, Canada, combines with those of his neighbours to make a fire trap. The houses — around 100 years old and made predominantly of wood — provide excellent tinder; the roughly 2-metre gaps between them would provide an optimal wind tunnel to fan the flames.

Vaillant has fitted a rooftop sprinkler system that should stop nearby embers from igniting his structure for as long as the water supply lasts. But in 26 years, he has not had a single conversation about fire protection with a neighbour.

“We build bubbles around ourselves. When a disaster occurs, we decide ‘that happened to them but it won’t happen to me’. It isn’t climate denial, it’s a psychological survival technique,” he says. To breach those bubbles — to force open another’s imagination to the prospect of losing their most precious possession — amounts to psychological trespass.

“It’s the infando, the unutterable, it’s like talking about cancer, you [thereby] admit to the possibility it could happen,” he says. His job requires he carry with him a sense of the danger he lives among — he calls it his “memento mori”. But to force it upon others would be a bridge too far.

Nearly four months after he surveyed the wreckage of his home from the motorboat, Robert Sawyer looks up at me on our Zoom call, from the sun-bathed terrace of a kava bar in downtown St Petersburg.

He wears a T-shirt, a wood-bead necklace and chain around his neck, and a contained smile that fades briefly at the more harrowing details of the ordeal, which he recounts in a measured, even tone. He is about to move out of the hotel provided to him by Fema, the US federal disaster response agency, into a static caravan in the drive of his old home. On his lawn, the pile of ruined interiors and furniture is 30ft long, 20ft wide and 10ft high.

There’s little to celebrate in his financial position. His mistake on his last insurance application left him with $30,000 of contents cover; his real loss will be closer to $130,000. With the street peppered with “for sale” signs, his home, worth $1mn before the hurricane, would sell for $800,000 today, he estimates. He doubts he’ll get all of the money he has just claimed from his insurer for renovations.

But there have been breaks, too. Three Persian rugs, his most expensive possessions, were due to be returned from the cleaners a few days before the hurricane hit; on a whim, he asked the company to store them until the end of the hurricane season. When the floodwaters receded and he rushed to strip his interiors before mould set in, 20 friends and neighbours worked full days to help. “Within a week of the disaster, the insurer cut me a check for $25,000,” he says. “It kept things moving.”

He plans to spend upwards of $200,000 of his savings on a renovation of the house, using concrete stilts to elevate the living space clear of the minimum height required by Fema to skip obligatory flood insurance. Even in the most extreme storms, his home should hold more of its value.

With a bit of luck, a room or two will be inhabitable by June, before the hurricane season starts in earnest. “I’ll hang some tapestries on the side of the wall and call it glamping,” he says, chuckling. “As far as being worried about putting myself in a similar situation, I don’t really think too much about that — it’s the cost of living in paradise and a lot of people had it a lot worse than me. In life every day you get up in the morning, take your chances and there’s all kinds of things that could go wrong and no guarantees, and that makes things more interesting . . . [The rebuild] will be another part of the adventure of life”.

Nothing can change his address, though. By 2050, St Petersburg will be underwater 42 days per year, according to Nasa. For now, it is a human victory, but nature will win in the end.

Find out about our latest stories first — follow House & Home on Instagram



Welcome back. The conservative campaign against corporate diversity, equity and inclusion policies has been on a roll recently, with US companies from Walmart to McDonald’s to Ford all retreating from pledges and programmes aimed at making their business more socially inclusive. But yesterday, the anti-DEI drive received a noteworthy setback.

At its annual meeting, Costco faced a shareholder proposal from the National Center for Public Policy Research, a conservative think-tank, arguing that the retailer’s DEI policies exposed it to legal and financial risks, and demanding a formal review.

The board resisted the demand, telling shareholders that the policies would “attract and retain employees who will help our business succeed”. Investors agreed: over 98 per cent of shares were voted against the NCPPR proposal. If companies stand up for their diversity policies, it seems, they may get more investor support than they realise.

Meanwhile, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Donald Trump appeared by video link to take questions from a panel that included the chief executives of Blackstone, TotalEnergies and Santander. Trump took the chance to upbraid Bank of America chief executive Brian Moynihan for supposedly not doing business with conservatives, while emphasising his destruction of Joe Biden’s “Green New Scam”, and determination to exploit US fossil fuel reserves.

“Nothing can destroy coal — not the weather, not a bomb — nothing,” Trump said. But financial companies exposed to the coal sector face some important long-term questions, as we explore in today’s newsletter.

For financiers seeking to reduce their portfolio carbon emissions, cutting exposure to thermal coal — used mainly for power generation — has been a popular choice. Far fewer have moved to cut their financing of metallurgical coal used in steelmaking — even though it packs a bigger carbon punch.

While financial institutions are now coming under pressure from environmental groups to correct this odd imbalance, it reflects a wider problem — underscoring the need for expanded investment in green technology that will reduce steelmakers’ reliance on the black stuff.

Yesterday, the Berlin-based non-profit group Urgewald published a new data set that sheds light on the expansion of metallurgical coal mines all over the world. It features 160 companies that are expanding 252 “met coal” projects in 18 countries, with growth plans that would increase global production of the commodity by 50 per cent.

Metallurgical coal is turned into coke and burnt with iron ore in blast furnaces, in an integral part of the conventional steelmaking process, which — despite the widespread adoption of coal-free electric arc furnaces — still accounts for the bulk of global production of the metal.

Because of its typically larger methane content, and generally higher emissions from its extraction, metallurgical coal accounts for nearly triple the carbon emissions of thermal coal on a tonne-for-tonne basis, according to analysts at Wood Mackenzie. This is the main reason why the steel sector accounts for roughly 11 per cent of global carbon emissions.

Among the companies with the biggest met coal expansion plans is BHP Mitsubishi Alliance, jointly owned by Australian mining company BHP and Japan’s Mitsubishi. For BHP, this presents a stark contrast with its plans for a managed exit from its thermal coal business. Similarly, London-listed Glencore has been doubling down on met coal — notably through last year’s $6.9bn acquisition of a majority stake in Elk Valley Resources — even as it pursues what it calls a “responsible decline strategy” for thermal coal.

By way of explanation, Glencore says that it expects steelmakers’ demand for coal to decline more slowly than demand from power plants. It is far from alone in that belief. In a major report on the coal sector last month, the International Energy Agency noted that investors appeared much more willing to finance new met coal projects than thermal coal mines, in part because public “resistance to met coal investment is somewhat less pronounced”.

This is certainly reflected in financial companies’ public policies on coal. Of 386 major financial institutions tracked by Paris-based non-profit Reclaim Finance, 183 (mostly European) have announced policies restricting their financing of thermal coal. Only 16 have done the same for the metallurgical variety: 11 banks including Lloyds and ING; four asset managers including Nordea; and insurer Zurich.

Urgewald argues that financiers’ failure to turn their backs on metallurgical coal amounts to a “blind spot” in their policies. Yet, it reflects the fact that the world — and especially Europe, which accounts for most of the financial institutions with strong climate-related exclusion policies — has done a far better job of shedding its reliance on coal for electricity than it has for steelmaking.

In the EU, coal accounted for less than 10 per cent of electricity generation last year, after a strong rise in generation from increasingly cheap renewables over the past decade. More than half of the EU’s steel, in contrast, was made using coal-guzzling blast furnaces. In part, that reflects the EU’s gentle treatment of the steel sector under its carbon pricing system, which has imposed far lower costs on the industry relative to others.

So for European banks, cutting support for the fading thermal coal sector is a far easier step than taking the same step for metallurgical coal, which remains central to one of the region’s most important industries.

But it is unlikely to retain that central role forever. Technological advances are enabling electric furnaces to produce higher grades of steel from scrap metal, decreasing the need for coal-burning blast furnaces. Many sorts of steel still require the use of “virgin iron” derived from iron ore rather than scrap. But well-funded start-ups like Sweden’s Stegra and Boston Metal of the US are developing new approaches to treating iron ore without coal, using hydrogen or electrolysis.

If European financial institutions were to tighten their met coal policies to match their thermal coal ones, it’s unclear how much short-term impact this would have on miners’ cost of capital. US institutions hardly look likely to take a corresponding move in the near future. The majority of expanding met coal companies profiled by Urgewald are in China, Russia, India and Indonesia, with limited reliance on European financing.

Still, there are sound reasons to reconsider long-term financial exposure to the met coal sector. Even as producers race to increase output, the IEA predicts that demand for the commodity will decline over the next three years, as steel demand in China suffers from its chronic property market malaise. The industry’s gradual evolution towards coal-free alternatives is set to continue and perhaps accelerate with steeper carbon pricing — notably through the EU’s phasing out of free carbon permits for European steelmakers, and the carbon border tariff it will impose on steel imports.

A crucial factor in the pace of this transition will be the amount of finance that companies are able to raise to develop and deploy green steelmaking technologies — pushing them down the cost curve, and destroying the economic logic for coal-based steel production.

The calls for western banks to commit to restricting funding for metallurgical coal are understandable. But they will probably have more impact by focusing on increasing their financing of those low-carbon alternatives.

Future foods Australia’s vulnerability to climate change has helped make it a test bed for farming innovation, from experimental fungi to ‘robotic bees’.

Eyeing the exit President Javier Milei of Argentina is considering a proposal for the country to leave the Paris agreement on climate change.

Tough times BP’s financial travails reflect its years of wishful thinking on fossil fuels, writes John Gapper.



A couple of days ago, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, I heard a flock of global luminaries parsing this week’s inauguration of Donald Trump. Solemnly, over a dinner of grilled trout, they shared their fears about economic, political and geopolitical upheaval. Then one world leader turned to Ancient Greek.

“We have an epistemological crisis,” he declared, referring to the Greek words episteme (“knowledge”) and logos (“study of”). More specifically, different social tribes are now interpreting knowledge in such different ways that he fears “democracy is being undermined”.

Quite so. Never mind that Trump has haunted Davos this week with his deliberately provocative hyperbole that “weaves fact, fiction and fantasy” together, as Graham Allison, a Harvard professor, told me.

What is more notable are the findings of two recent surveys. One, conducted by the WEF, shows that for the second year in a row the meeting’s (mostly) elite delegates consider “disinformation” the biggest short-term global threat, above war and weather disasters. The issue did not even feature on the worry list before 2024.

The second poll, from the Edelman public relations group, shows that 61 per cent of people (in 28 countries) feel grievance towards governments, business and the wealthy — and 40 per cent support hostile action to force change.

Moreover, two-thirds think that business leaders, governments and the media deliberately lie to them, a sharp increase from recent years. The fact that Trump is lashing out at elites and experts — including scientists at the National Institutes of Health — reflects this. As one pro-Trump CEO told me after the US president delivered a bombastic address to WEF: “people are angry.”

So how should elites and experts respond? Judging from the Davos chatter, two responses predominate. Some business leaders (such as those in tech) are simply ignoring Trump’s “fictions” to cut deals. Others (like outraged progressives) are dismissing him and his supporters as deluded, stupid or evil — and wishing that Trump would disappear and/or regulators and Big Tech would “correct” lies.

However, I would suggest there is another route: leaders should ponder what they themselves can do to help heal this epistemological divide. How? There are several possible steps. The first is to engage in “deep listening”, to cite the concept championed by the journalist Emily Kasriel. That means hearing what Trump’s supporters are saying with as few preconceived filters as possible. We need empathy to understand why public grievance has exploded.

We also need this to grasp another point: many of Trump’s supporters believe that they are in a battle to save western civilisation — and with the same emotional intensity as, say, climate activists. That can’t be dismissed or scorned.

Second, if leaders want to restore public respect for expertise they must embrace the “error bar”, the long-standing scientific principle that researchers should honestly indicate their level of confidence in research results. This was forgotten during the pandemic, when politicians made dogmatic statements about medical issues (vaccines, for instance) — and sometimes curbed debate — even when the science was provisional.

That was understandable, perhaps, amid the panic. But it has contributed to public cynicism about “experts”, as the entrepreneur Peter Thiel recently noted in the FT. So leaders of all political stripes must embrace the error bar in future if they want to restore credibility.

Third, leaders must (as I have often written before) acknowledge that vertical trust — in authority figures and institutions — is collapsing today. Instead, people are increasingly relying on peer groups or local communities as sources of advice (in other words, on lateral trust relations). Leaders might hate this, but they must work with it — not wish it away.

Fourth, if you believe in the enlightenment principle of critical reasoning, you must put your money behind that. That means paying for quality journalism, backing intellectual inquiry at think-tanks and universities and promoting this in policymaking. For inspiration, look at 314action.org, a political action committee created by American scientists which aims to put more scientists into public office. It has already rallied thousands of volunteers. But far more could be done.

Fifth, leaders should champion initiatives to counter online misinformation. That does not mean using hierarchical power to crush free speech. But it does mean installing guardrails against violent activism and supporting community fact-checking platforms. These crowd-focused tools are now the main recourse against online lies, since Meta and others have decided to cut content moderation.

These steps are not a magic wand. But they are better than appeasement, despair and blame. The hard truth is that neither Big Tech nor government can or will fix the epistemological crisis. The responsibility sits with us all.

gillian.tett@ft.com



President Donald Trump’s call for a new oil boom will be thwarted by Wall Street’s reluctance to approve another drilling binge, shale bosses have warned.

Total US oil output in Trump’s second term will rise by less than 1.3mn barrels a day, said Rystad Energy and Wood Mackenzie, well below the 1.9mn b/d rise achieved under Joe Biden and much less than in the shale bonanza years in the previous decade.

Executives said investor pressure on companies and the economic realities of a sector always beholden to oil prices would be obstacles to Trump’s quest to launch an era of “American energy dominance”.

“The incentive, if you will, to just drill, baby, drill . . . I just don’t believe that companies are going to do that,” said Wil VanLoh, chief executive of private equity group Quantum Energy Partners, one of the shale sector’s biggest investors.

“Wall Street will dictate here — and you know what? They don’t have a political agenda. They have a financial agenda . . . They have zero incentive to basically tell the management teams running these businesses to go and drill more wells,” VanLoh said.

The reality on the ground could be a disappointment for Trump, who is betting that a big jump in oil supply can beat back US inflation by making goods and fuel cheaper.

“We will bring prices down . . . We will be a rich nation again, and it is that liquid gold under our feet that will help to do it,” the president said in his inauguration speech on Monday.

In Davos on Thursday he called on the Opec cartel to slash oil prices, suggesting this would allow central banks to cut interest rates around the world “immediately”.

But lower oil and gas prices would make shale companies less profitable — and less likely to follow Trump’s command to “drill, baby, drill”, executives warned.

“Prices will be a bigger signal than politics,” said Ben Dell, managing partner at Kimmeridge, an energy investment firm that owns shale assets including in Texas’s Permian Basin, the world’s most prolific oilfield.

After US oil production hit a record high last year, the Energy Information Administration expects output will grow just 2.6 per cent to 13.6mn b/d in 2025 before rising by less than 1 per cent in 2026 due to price pressures.

Some shale producers are also concerned that the best locations have been tapped after more than a decade of breakneck exploration across states such as Texas and North Dakota.

After his swearing-in ceremony this week, Trump signed executive orders to “unleash” new oil and gas supplies and declare a “national energy emergency”. He has also moved to eliminate Biden-era regulations that drillers say increased their costs and restricted activity.

But executives warned that even Trump’s full-throated support for fossil fuels and deregulation could have limited impact.

“As much as the incoming administration is very favourable around energy and power . . . we don’t see a significant change in activity levels going forward,” said David Schorlemer, chief financial officer of ProPetro, an oilfield services company in the Permian.

Producers’ reluctance comes after two decades of soaring growth — and sometimes punishing oil price volatility.

US oil and gas production exploded in the past 15 years as drillers found ways to unlock vast deposits locked in shale rocks. Wall Street funded a headlong drilling race that made the US the world’s biggest oil and gas producer.

But brutal price crashes in 2014 and 2020 triggered widespread bankruptcies, a more cautious approach from investors and a change in producers’ behaviour — especially in the face of softer crude prices.

A recent Kansas City Federal Reserve survey found that the average US oil price needed for a substantial increase in drilling was $84 a barrel, versus about $74 a barrel today.

JPMorgan predicts that US oil prices will drift down to $64 a barrel by the end of this year and shale activity will “slow to a crawl” in 2026.

“If prices are anaemic, you can remove all the red tape you want. It’s not going to move the needle on production,” said Hassan Eltorie, director of companies and transaction research at S&P Global Commodity Insights.

America’s second-biggest oil producer Chevron — a huge shale investor — plans to cut spending this year for the first time since the pandemic oil crash, budgeting $14.5bn to $15.5bn for 2025, down from $15.5bn to $16.5bn last year. Exxon, by comparison, will raise its capex in the coming years.

ConocoPhillips expects to lower spending by $500mn from last year, and Occidental Petroleum and EOG Resources are to hold activity levels roughly flat — decisions designed to please Wall Street.

“The shareholders of these energy stocks . . . if you do more [capital spending] than they would allow, they will scream bloody murder and sell your stock,” said Cole Smead, chief executive of Smead Capital Management, which invests in a handful of oil companies, including Chevron and Occidental Petroleum.



As bonus season gets under way for those who work in the City, we want to know if your payout will be bigger or smaller than last year’s.

The financial rewards, usually handed out between mid-January and mid-February, have the potential to be even more lucrative than in previous years after UK and US banks lifted EU-imposed bonus caps. The measures were introduced in 2014 to help curb the risk-taking culture that preceded the financial crisis.

The removal of the cap, which limited bankers’ bonuses to twice their base pay, came into force in October 2023 — yet this is the first year we expect to see the changes fully borne out in the pay of top earners.

Banks such as Barclays and JPMorgan have already loosened their bonus limit — awarding material risk takers up to 10 times their fixed pay. Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs — the first to lift their bonus cap last May — has increased their payouts up to 25-times base salary.

The legal profession is also expected to see higher bonuses, following a record number of senior lawyers moving jobs in London in 2024. Many US law firms — including Kirkland & Ellis and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison — have expanded their UK operations, which fuelled fierce pay wars last year.

So, tell us, if you work in the City, how do you expect your bonus payout to compare to last year’s award? Will it be significantly bigger? Or more or less the same?

Vote in our poll, comment below the line or fill out our anonymous bonus survey to share your views.



Cutting red tape, unleashing, debottlenecking — these are all great business-friendly policies. They work wonders on industries previously fettered by regulation. But there is little evidence that this has been the case for US fossil fuels. That suggests President Donald Trump’s efforts to expedite oil and gas projects will deliver a trickle, not a flood.

Oil producers have been “drill, baby, drilling” for quite some time. In 2024, US oil production averaged 13.2mn barrels a day, making it the largest oil producer in the world. That’s two-and-a-half times what the country was producing in 2008. The supply of US gas, too, has roughly doubled during that period.

True, this breakneck pace cannot continue forever. The industry will add an extra 270,000 barrels a day on average in 2025 and 2026, according to consultancy Argus Media, roughly a quarter of what it squeezed out in 2023. But that largely reflects the fact that a lot of the best acreage has already been exploited.

Trumpian policies, like encouraging drilling in US coastal waters, will open up new territories. Even if they contain exploitable resources, though, the time it takes to develop a project extends beyond the length of a single four-year presidential term. This is no short-term fix.

Unfortunately for Trump, what inhibits the flow of oil is not red tape, but low prices. Producing oil from US shale formations is relatively expensive. Companies need prices to be somewhere between $60 and $80 a barrel if they want to cover all their costs and pay dividends, estimates Christopher Wheaton at Stifel.

Shale is also highly sensitive to commodity price moves because, unlike traditional projects in which much of the cost is sunk upfront, maintaining shale output requires constant spending. By way of example, the record low price for US natural gas in 2024 has already caused production to nudge lower.

That rather limits Trump’s room for manoeuvre, at least with oil. Gas may be a bit more responsive, given there is some hope that strong demand, not least from data centres, and the resumption of LNG export permitting might raise domestic prices. That would help producers justify more supply.

As it stands, the oil market is hardly undersupplied. A spluttering China translates into weak demand. Opec+, which wants to see prices stay high, is sufficiently worried that it is actively holding back supply. That means that any increase in US oil production is likely to push down prices and thus be shortlived. The only thing gushing in the oil patch is rhetoric.

camilla.palladino@ft.com



Tech group Tencent and the world’s dominant battery maker CATL are among a swath of Chinese companies that have been designated by the Pentagon as having alleged military links, in a move that sent the industry giants’ shares tumbling.

Tencent’s US-listed shares closed down 7.8 per cent following the news and were down the same amount in Hong Kong trading on Tuesday. The company is China’s largest by market capitalisation.

Shares in CATL fell as much as 6 per cent in Shenzhen, their biggest decline in about three months. CATL is an important supplier to US carmaker Tesla and has a global EV battery market share of about 38 per cent.

The list is part of Washington’s broad efforts to counteract the rise of China as a military superpower. The Pentagon cannot contract with companies on the list from June 2026, and from 2027 will not be able to procure goods or services that include those companies in their supply chains.

The US defence department has described the list as a way to highlight and counter what it calls China’s “military-civil fusion strategy”, which bolsters the Chinese military’s modernisation efforts by ensuring it can acquire advanced technology from Chinese companies, universities and research programmes that are masked as civilian entities.

The US has imposed multiple rounds of sweeping export controls designed to curtail China’s ability to make an advanced semiconductor industry and make it more difficult for Beijing to develop artificial intelligence for military use.

In retaliation, Beijing has been tightening its own export controls. Last month it banned shipments to the US of certain minerals and metals used in semiconductor manufacturing and military hardware.

China’s foreign affairs ministry said on Tuesday that Beijing had “always firmly opposed the US’s generalisation of the concept of national security, the establishment of discriminatory lists of various names, [and] the unreasonable suppression of Chinese companies”. It warned China would “resolutely safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese companies and safeguard its legitimate right to development”.

Being added to the Pentagon’s Chinese military companies blacklist has no direct legal ramifications and does not result in sanctions. However, it does carry reputational risks.

Tencent’s addition to the list “is clearly a mistake”, a company spokesperson said.

“We are not a military company or supplier. Unlike sanctions or export controls, this listing has no impact on our business. We will nonetheless work with the Department of Defense to address any misunderstanding,” the spokesperson added.

CATL, which has been working with Tesla and Ford to license its battery manufacturing technology for factories in the US, also called its inclusion on the list “a mistake”.

“CATL is not engaged in any military related activities,” the company said. “We welcome responsible discourse on our business operations and take questions about our business seriously.”

Chip manufacturer ChangXin Memory Technologies, drone maker Autel Robotics and IT equipment maker Quectel Wireless Solutions were also added to the list.

Cosco, one of China’s largest shipping companies, joined the list for the first time. Several of the group’s ferries, along with those of other commercial companies, have participated in People’s Liberation Army exercises to practise an amphibious invasion of Taiwan, according to ship tracking data and appearances in Chinese state media reports.

Beijing in recent years has been requiring civilian shipping companies to build their new vessels to military-capable standards. The use of civilian ships is a key part of the PLA’s strategy because it lacks sufficient capacity of its own to transport troops and armoured vehicles across the Taiwan Strait.

Additional reporting by Joe Leahy in Beijing and Kathrin Hille in Taipei



China’s regulators sought to reassure markets on Monday as equities and the renminbi extended losses in a rocky start to the year, following weak economic data and geopolitical uncertainty ahead of Donald Trump’s inauguration.

Mainland China’s benchmark CSI 300 index edged down 0.2 per cent on Monday and has declined 4.1 per cent in the first three trading days of the year, marking the worst start to 2025 among major Asian indices.

Small-cap stocks on the CSI 2000 have fallen 6.6 per cent since the start of the year. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index shed 0.4 per cent on Monday and is down 1.2 per cent so far this year.

The declines came as China’s stock exchanges held meetings with international investors and the central bank reaffirmed its determination to keep the currency stable, with Trump’s threat of dramatically increased tariffs on Chinese exports looming.

“At the moment everyone is wondering what Trump 2.0 will bring,” said Jason Lui, head of Asia-Pacific equity and derivative strategy at BNP Paribas. “It’s reasonable for investors to try and take some profit.”

China’s currency slid to a 15-month low of Rmb7.33 to the dollar on Monday, despite the People’s Bank of China holding steady its daily trading band for onshore renminbi. Selling pressure on China’s currency tends to be correlated with downward pressure on Chinese equities, said analysts.

Weak manufacturing data, a two-year high for the dollar index and Trump’s impending return all contributed to outflow pressure on Chinese stocks, said Kevin Liu, strategist with CICC.

The Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges sought to reassure investors that China’s economy was supported by “solid fundamentals and resilience” during a weekend meeting with foreign institutions “to solicit opinions and suggestions” on recent moves in Chinese equities, they said on Sunday.

The central bank on Monday kept the daily fixing rate — the midpoint around which the renminbi is allowed to trade 2 per cent in either direction against the dollar — at Rmb7.19, in spite of selling pressure on the currency.

Its newspaper, the Financial News, said the central bank would “resolutely guard against the risk of exchange rate overshooting and maintain the basic stability” of the renminbi.

It added that the central bank’s past “experience of multiple rounds of appreciation and depreciation” showed it had “sufficient” tools to keep the exchange rate “basically stable”.

In another sign of weak sentiment, investors continued to purchase long-dated sovereign debt, as concerns over weak domestic consumption bolstered bets that the PBoC would further ease monetary policy.

The yield on 10-year Chinese government bonds fell 0.015 percentage points to 1.61 per cent on Monday, after hitting its all-time low below 1.6 per cent last Thursday. Bond yields move inversely to prices.

The weaker opening to the year comes despite announcements from Beijing that it wants to boost domestic consumption following a prolonged property crisis.

China’s rubber-stamp parliament is set to meet in March to unveil its economic policy agenda for what is expected to be a difficult year.

“In terms of key things to look for in 2025 . . . we think investors need to see more regarding consumption,” said Winnie Wu, chief China equity strategist at Bank of America, adding that government support for the private sector and youth employment would be essential.

Despite the rough start to 2025, analysts noted that Chinese equities had a strong 2024 after a protracted slump, with the CSI 300 ending the year up 14.7 per cent.

“We do think the worst of derating is over,” said Wu.



The world is an increasingly fragmented and complex place, but everyone I meet appears to be obsessed with just one person: Donald Trump. All projections about the coming year assume Trump will dictate global economic and market trends.

A single factor is never a solid foundation for forecasting. The world is not unipolar and does not revolve around one personality, not even one as big as Trump’s. Historically, the impact of US presidents on markets has often been surprising, and at times minimal.

Investors were braced for a negative shock when Trump came to power in 2017, but that year turned out to be one of the least volatile for US stocks ever. Trump constantly threatened to undermine China with tariffs and yet, during his first term, the best-performing major market in the world was China, outpacing even the US.

If past is prelude, Trump 2.0 will not play out as most investors expect. Ironically, continuing faith in “American exceptionalism” assumes that under Trump the world will see more of the same trends it saw under Joe Biden: US dominance of the global economy and markets, led by its big-cap tech businesses. But those trends are already very extended and vulnerable to forces larger than the US president-elect. For a variety of reasons, competitive churn could return to global markets in 2025 and lead to seismic shifts.

History shows that the global economy and markets move in cycles, not straight trend lines. Contrarian investing is rooted in these patterns. The hot investment theme of one decade typically gets overcrowded, sowing the seeds of its own demise, and does not stay hot the next. But here we are halfway through the 2020s, and the hot bet of the 2010s — big US tech — is still paying off.

In the past, the list of global top 10 companies by market cap has changed dramatically with each new decade. Now seven of the 10 are holdovers from the 2010s, including Apple, Microsoft and Amazon. The trends of the past 15 years are stretched thin amid the growing manias for America and AI, which are supercharged by excessive US stimulus, the gamification of investing and the rise of algorithmic trading and passive money managers.

Creative destruction has been a defining and indeed necessary feature of capitalism since its roots in the 18th century; either it’s dead, or dormant and poised for a comeback. My bet is on the comeback. That would herald a (belated) return for contrarian investing, starting with a shift away from the US and its top tech companies.

Momentum traders are the polar opposite of contrarians, believing that winners and losers of recent months will continue on the same paths in coming months. Last year was a great one for this class: momentum mania swept beyond big US tech to lift stocks in the financial and other sectors as well.

A turning point looms. Since the 1950s, according to Empirical Research Partners, stocks that lead the market for nine months outperform over the next 12 months by 3 per cent on average. Rarely have they outperformed by more than 20 per cent, as they did in 2024. And after a run that strong, momentum stocks underperform by nearly 10 per cent over the next 12 months on average.

Momentum runs tend to reinforce the assumption that good times will roll, pulling in retail investors in the late stages. That’s happening now. American consumers have not been more bullish on US stocks since surveys began tracking this sentiment. Momentum investing looks poised to crash in a way that could hit many investors hard.

Under Trump, cuts in taxes and regulations will send the US economy and market to new heights, or so the conventional wisdom goes. Though the pandemic is over, and jobs have recovered, the US deficit is still strikingly high at around 6 per cent of GDP. In fact, adjusted for the low unemployment rate, the US deficit is five times the previous record high for a post-second world war recovery. And Trump’s agenda threatens to push it from extreme to even more so.

The bulls wave off warnings that fiscal recklessness will trigger a crisis, since no obvious calamity has come despite decades of similar warnings. They overlook the fact that, compared with other developed nations, America’s government debt has increased more than two times faster as a share of GDP in this decade and its interest payments on that debt are now three times higher.

Given the amount of new longer-dated US Treasury bonds set to hit the markets in the coming months, 2025 could see the moment when bond vigilantes take notice. In recent years, traders have punished profligate governments from Brazil to the UK and — albeit less aggressively — France. Many observers assume that the US, as the premier economic power, is invulnerable to such attacks, but its increasingly precarious finances could shatter that assumption soon.

Buzz about “American exceptionalism” overlooks the artificial boost the US is getting from state support. Following the pandemic, government spending rose sharply as a share of GDP. More than 20 per cent of new US jobs are now created by government, up from 1 per cent in the 2010s. Public transfers including Social Security account for more than a quarter of residents’ income in more than 50 per cent of US counties — up from just 10 per cent in 2000.

The overstimulated US economy is growing at a pace near 3 per cent, but the fiscal stimulus is set to diminish in 2025 and so is the pace of monetary easing. If the new administration tries to further stimulate the economy, an already elevated inflation rate could surge, forcing the Fed and the bond market to raise interest rates.

In turn, bond market pressure would finally compel spending restraint, hurting economic growth and corporate profits, at least for a while. Interestingly, expectations for US growth are now so bullish, economists see only a 20 per cent probability of recession, down from near 70 per cent a year ago. While there is no visible catalyst for a recession, fading stimulus effects suggest the US economy is likely to slow in 2025 to a rate closer to its long-term potential of about 2 per cent, if not lower. America will look much less exceptional then.

Many countries now languish in the shadows — but that is where the next stars are usually found. Recall that a decade ago, investors dismissed much of southern Europe as hopeless, until crisis forced them to reform. The nations formerly dismissed as “Pigs” now include some of the continent’s bright spots, led by Portugal, Greece and Spain. The dark spots — Germany and France — could also find themselves unexpectedly compelled by their weak economies to change for the better.

Today, global investors ignore most of the developing world. Among the large developing economies, fewer than one in two saw faster per capita GDP growth than the US in the last five years. In coming years, however, that share is expected to rise to more than four out of five, with big boosts coming from investment in plants and equipment, and resilient consumer spending.

Disciplined government spending helps explain why credit rating agencies are now more sanguine on developing nations, with upgrades outnumbering downgrades by margins not seen in years, including positive turns on recent basket cases like Argentina and Turkey.

For the most part, global investors have yet to react, but locals have. Domestic equity cultures are propping up markets from Saudi Arabia to South Africa. India is already something of a unicorn — as the one global market star outside the US — but it may not be so unusual by the end of 2025.

The bear case is hard to argue against. No country with a shrinking population and a heavy burden of debt has ever been able to grow at even half Beijing’s target rate of 5 per cent. Still, any contrarian has to be curious about a market most global investors now dismiss as “uninvestable”, even though it is the world’s second largest.

Diamonds can be found in this rough, for example by looking for profitable publicly traded companies with high cash flows. There are now about 250 companies in China with a market cap more than $1bn and a free cash flow yield above 10 per cent — roughly 100 more than in the US, and 60 more than in Europe. Yet sentiment is as bearish on China as it is bullish on America.

Compare their leading electric car companies, BYD and Tesla. Both generate similar revenues and offer a similar return on equity, but sales volume is growing twice as fast at BYD, which is rapidly expanding its share of the global market. Yet BYD stock sells at a price-to-earnings ratio of 15, compared with around 120 for Tesla. Its market cap is just over $100bn, Tesla’s is more than $1.2tn. In the coming year, investors may come to see China as investable again, at least in its profitable parts.

Big Tech’s supernormal profits and massive cash flows have been a significant draw for investors. But that advantage is shrinking fast. Taken together, Apple, Microsoft, Google, Meta and Tesla are on pace to invest nearly $280bn in artificial intelligence this year, up from $80bn five years ago. The race to dominate AI is on, and as a result, free cash flow growth for the biggest tech companies recently turned negative.

AI mania may be getting ahead of itself. Fewer than one in 20 workers say they use AI daily. Fewer than one in 10 US companies have incorporated AI into their operations. That does not mean they won’t, just that it is far from clear how this technology will be applied — much less how strictly it will be regulated or which mega firms will make money on it. Remember, few if any established firms emerged as big winners of the internet or shale oil revolutions.

Though it is tough to imagine what could derail Big Tech firms, one answer is overspending on data centres and other AI infrastructure. One of the biggest capital spending booms that America has seen since the second world war may be great for the consumer, but could be the straw that finally breaks the supernormal profits of Big Tech companies and inspires investors to question their lofty valuations.

If Trump’s tariff threats are a negotiating tactic, as his aides say, they are already working to bring other countries to the table — but without the US. After 25 years of talks, last month representatives of 31 nations agreed on plans for the world’s largest trade union, linking the EU with the Mercosur group in Latin America. If ratified, it would cut tariffs by 90 per cent among member states, which account for 25 per cent of global GDP.

Spooked by America’s use of sanctions to cut off rivals from the dollar-based international finance system, many countries are making deals to promote trade with regional neighbours, or without the dollar. India has agreements with 22 countries to conduct trade in rupees; 90 per cent of India-Russia trade is transacted in local currencies. Petro states including Saudi Arabia have cut deals to sell their oil in currencies other than the dollar as well.

In recent years global trade has shifted, and today its biggest channels are within the developing world. Eight of the 10 fastest-growing trade corridors do not include the US, but many of them do have one terminus in China. The more the US threatens tariffs and weaponises the dollar, the harder its erstwhile partners will work to promote trade without America.

As a haven for investors fleeing from regulators, the booming private markets for equity and credit are no longer just a niche alternative. Since 2000, the number of public US companies has fallen by nearly half to about 4,000, while the number of private ones nearly quintupled to about 10,000.

Private markets are becoming the first choice for companies trying to raise money. Private lending is growing at twice the pace of bank lending. The volume of capital raised in private markets recently surpassed the volume in public markets worldwide.

Meanwhile, the often-opaque risks are growing. The falling quality of some private credit issuers is showing up in high default rates for their leveraged loans. Others are repackaging certain products for sale in ways that “test the limits” of risk safeguards. A few big firms are considering plans to offer private credit in exchange traded funds open to daily public trading — as if the general public were equipped to weigh the risk of assets that need to report results once a quarter, if at all. The mainstreaming of private markets and the resulting excesses could come under greater scrutiny in 2025.

Americans are exceptional in another way, with an adult obesity rate that at 44 per cent is the highest in the developed world. So it is no surprise that American TV is full of ads for the relatively new class of “GLP-1” weight-loss drugs, suggesting they offer a bright and easy path to weight loss.

Last month came a new study detecting a tiny dip in the US obesity rate. Its authors suggested this unexpected turn may be explained in good part by GLP-1 drugs such as Ozempic, which is likely to generate even more buzz around these wildly popular weight-loss remedies.

However, in the growing body of GLP-1 research, not all the news is so sunny. Once people stop the injections, many of the pounds come back. In suppressing appetite, these treatments can also destroy muscle, paralyse the stomach and impair vision. Rapid fat loss can leave sagging skin in embarrassingly visible places, which is why internet searches for “Ozempic butt” and “Ozempic legs” are mounting steadily.

No doubt, these drugs have some useful benefits, and contrarians are not doctors. They do, however, know that what sounds too good to be true probably is. And as a quick fix for obesity, this could turn out to be just another diet fad.



Chinese venture capitalists are hounding failed founders, pursuing personal assets and adding the individuals to a national debtor blacklist when they fail to pay up, in moves that are throwing the country’s start-up funding ecosystem into crisis.

The hard-nosed tactics by risk capital providers have been facilitated by clauses known as redemption rights, included in nearly all the financing deals struck during China’s boom times.

“My investors verbally promised they wouldn’t enforce them, that they had never enforced them before — and in ’17 and ’18 that was true — no one was enforcing them,” said Neuroo Education founder Wang Ronghui, who now owes investors millions of dollars after her childcare chain stumbled during the pandemic.

While they are relatively rare in US venture investing, more than 80 per cent of venture and private equity deals in China contain redemption provisions, according to Shanghai-based law firm Lifeng Partners estimates.

They typically require companies, and often their founders as well, to buy back investors’ shares plus interest if certain targets such as an initial public offering timeline, valuation goals or revenue metrics are not met.

“It’s causing huge harm to the venture ecosystem because if a start-up fails, the founder is essentially facing asset seizures and spending restrictions,” said a Hangzhou-based lawyer who has represented several indebted entrepreneurs and asked not to be named. “They can never recover.”

Lifeng, in its recent report on redemption rights, said they had turned entrepreneurship into a “game of unlimited liability”. In 90 per cent of investor lawsuits, the firm said, founders were named as defendants alongside companies, with 10 per cent of the individuals ultimately added to China’s debtor blacklist.

Once blacklisted, it is nearly impossible for individuals to start another business. They are also blocked from a range of economic activities, such as taking planes or high-speed trains, staying in hotels or leaving China. The country lacks a personal bankruptcy law, making it extremely difficult for most to escape the debts.

With Chinese funds and VC firms now struggling to return capital to their outside investors, a growing number have turned to redemption clauses to recoup as much money as possible. Lifeng estimates that 20 per cent of all investor exits in 2021 and 2022 came from companies repurchasing their investors’ shares and that more than 10,000 VC or private equity-backed Chinese groups face redemption issues.

A start-up adviser who did not wish to be named said the situation was perversely incentivising VCs to pursue portfolio companies that were doing well but lacked an immediate path to a sale or an IPO.

“VCs are putting pressure on the start-ups that can pay,” he said. “It’s not venture — it’s debt.”

The number of entrepreneurs caught up by the legal actions continues to grow. They include Wang Ziru, who a decade ago grabbed attention as a brash young founder and raised tens of millions of renminbi for his tech media and review platform Zealer.

By 2021, with traffic waning, Wang left for an executive role at home appliance giant Gree. Then, on August 9 last year, a Shenzhen court imposed spending restrictions on Wang for failing to pay a Zealer investor Rmb34mn ($4.7mn). The amount that had snowballed with interest from the VC’s initial Rmb19mn equity investment, according to a lawyer briefed on the case. Wang lost his job a few days later.

The founder is contesting the judgment and said on social media he was not notified of the lawsuit and that the deal’s redemption provision was not triggered.

One of China’s most famous entrepreneurs, Luo Yonghao, turned his struggle to repay debts from his failed smartphone start-up Smartisan into a spectacle, eventually hawking enough iPhones and office chairs in online video livestreams to pay off suppliers and remove his name from the debtor blacklist in 2020.

Then some of Smartisan’s investors demanded Luo pay hundreds of millions more in renminbi to buy back their shares.

“Investment is not a loan,” Luo wrote on the social media platform Weibo in August last year. “When a venture capital deal fails, one must accept the outcome. Those who resort to underhanded tactics against entrepreneurs because they can’t bear the result are, without a doubt, unscrupulous capitalists.”

The cases have filled Chinese courts. Records show Xu Mingqi lost his company and all of his other identifiable assets to investors after his materials group Yeagood failed to meet a promised three-year window for an IPO.

China’s supreme court in 2021 ruled that since his wife Zheng Shaoai had also worked at Yeagood, one investor could seize communal property including the apartment held in her name.

Wang, the 47-year-old childcare chain founder, has even had funds in her health insurance account seized by investors. She said her problems began in 2021, when funds connected to state-backed investor Guangdong Cultural Investment Management demanded their Rmb16mn of shares be repurchased with interest because her start-up had failed to attain a Rmb500mn valuation.

Their lawsuit torpedoed a funding round needed to offset pandemic-related closures of the group’s 36 day care centres, she said. Now, Wang owes about Rmb30mn to the GCIM-affiliated funds, Rmb11mn to banks and potentially more to other investors whose redemption clauses have yet to be triggered.

GCIM did not respond to a request for comment.

“I built my company into an industry leader — I have ability and I have drive — but every path I try to take is a dead end,” said Wang. “An unexpected turn of events has left me permanently and utterly trapped.”



China is signing growing numbers of Taiwanese people up for local resident or even identity cards, in a drive to incorporate them into its society that is setting off alarm bells in Taipei.

Taiwan government officials said Beijing had become “focused” on getting visiting Taiwanese to apply for Chinese resident cards, bank accounts and local mobile phone numbers — known as the “three documents” — with many then being given the local identity cards, which are reserved for citizens.

“We are concerned that when more and more Taiwanese have Chinese citizenship, it will compromise our jurisdiction,” said a senior China policy official in Taipei. “If a Taiwanese with a Chinese ID was involved in an incident here, China could say they need to take care of the issue because the person is their citizen and intervene in our domestic affairs.”

The push is seen as particularly concerning as China is steadily expanding a multi-faceted pressure campaign against Taiwan. Beijing claims the island as part of its territory and threatens to take it by force if Taipei resists unification indefinitely.

Similar tactics of giving local status to citizens from neighbouring countries has long been part of Russia’s playbook. Moscow issued passports to eastern Ukrainians who moved to Russia after it helped to orchestrate conflict in the region in 2014. Russia also gave citizenship to residents of two breakaway regions of Georgia and then cited the need to protect them as a pretext for a brief 2008 war.

Taiwanese officials said China’s push to give more Taiwanese local papers had not reached that level yet, but it posed a risk of the same nature.

The issue surfaced when a Taiwanese video blogger’s documentary in late December suggested hundreds of thousands of Taiwanese had Chinese identity papers. Lin Chin-cheng, a Taiwanese who heads a Chinese government-backed start-up centre for youth entrepreneurs from Taiwan in the Chinese city of Quanzhou, claims in the film that about 200,000 Taiwanese hold Chinese IDs.

That claim could not be confirmed. But government officials, tourists and businesspeople from Taiwan said visitors to China in recent months had been asked to fill in applications for the “three documents”.

At China’s centenary celebrations for the Whampoa Military Academy last year, veterans from Taiwan were signed up at special desks, participants said. The Straits Forum, an annual event which is part of the Chinese Communist party’s United Front tactics to engage Taiwanese not openly hostile to it, also featured “three documents” application desks.

Three Taiwanese people who recently travelled to China on a ferry from Taiwan-controlled Kinmen said arrival procedures in Xiamen now included filling in forms that they only later understood were applications for those documents.

The resident card for Taiwanese, which is part of the “three documents”, does not amount to Chinese citizenship — Beijing presents it as a preferential measure to allow Taiwanese equal access to local services.

But Taipei fears it is becoming the entry point into citizen status. “The local ID frequently is the immediate next step, or is even directly offered instead of the resident card,” said a national security official. Taiwan officials added that local IDs were being heavily promoted as an opportunity for better conditions on loans or home sales.

Under Taiwanese law, citizens who take up a Chinese ID will have their Taiwanese household registration revoked. But Taipei struggles to effectively monitor its citizens’ actions in China as Beijing has cut off almost all official communication with the Taiwanese government, though cross-Strait travel, trade and investment built over decades continue.

According to the government’s statistics office, 217,000 Taiwanese worked in China as of 2023 — only half of the numbers seen at the peak a decade ago, but a 22 per cent increase over the previous year.

Taiwan President Lai Ching-te last week warned the public not to be lured in by the supposed short-term gain of Chinese papers.

“We have an old saying in Taiwan: Free things turn out very costly. That is very true,” he told reporters after his New Year address. Lai pointed to the many Chinese people taking enormous risks to illegally migrate to other nations, arguing that taking up a Chinese ID at this time was absurd for a citizen of a democratic country and could prove “the end of your road into the world”.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Beijing did not respond to a request for comment.



Taiwan has asked South Korea for assistance investigating a Chinese-owned ship suspected of cutting a subsea cable off its northern coast on Friday.

Taiwan telecoms operator Chunghwa Telecom and the Taiwan Coast Guard said on Saturday that the cargo vessel Shunxing39 was believed to have caused damage to a communications cable — close to the port of Keelung on Taiwan’s north coast — on the morning of January 3.

It follows incidents in which Chinese ships came under scrutiny after fibre optic cables in the Baltic Sea were severed last November and a gas pipeline and cable were damaged there in October 2023.

The latest occurrence also highlighted the vulnerability of crucial offshore communications and energy infrastructure and the difficulties in prosecuting sabotage.

While the ship sails under Cameroon’s flag, Taiwan officials said it was owned by Jie Yang Trading Limited. The Hong Kong-registered company’s only listed director is Guo Wenjie, a mainland China citizen.

Chunghwa Telecom said data connections were immediately restored by rerouting data to other international subsea cables.

But Taipei is concerned that China could surreptitiously cut Taiwan’s external communications links in any potential attempt at annexing the country. Beijing claims sovereignty over the island and has threatened to seize it by force if necessary.

China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Chunghwa Telecom and Taiwan government officials told the Financial Times the damaged cable is part of the Trans-Pacific Express Cable System.

The subsea internet cable connecting Taiwan with the US west coast is owned by an international consortium. As well as Chunghwa, it includes the US operator AT&T, Japan’s NTT, Korea Telecom and Chinese operators China Telecom and China Unicom.

“Since it was not possible for us to question the captain, we have asked the South Korean authorities to help with the investigation at the ship’s next port of destination,” a Taiwan Coast Guard official said. A Taiwanese national security official said the ship was due to arrive in Busan over the next few days.

Taiwan’s coastguard and other government officials said tracking data from the ship’s automatic identification system signal and satellite data showed that the Shunxing39 had dragged its anchor at the location where the cable was ruptured.

While a coastguard ship carried out an external inspection of the vessel and established radio contact with the captain, its officials could not board it due to rough weather, and it could not order its seizure for further investigation under international law because too much time had passed since the incident, officials said.

“This is another case of a very worrying global trend of sabotage against subsea cables,” said a senior Taiwanese national security official. “The ships that are involved in these incidents are typically rundown vessels that have little above-the-board business. This one, too, is in very bad shape. It is similar to the ships that are part of Russia’s ‘shadow fleet.’”

According to data from ship tracking and maritime analytics provider MarineTraffic, the Shunxing39 had been criss-crossing waters close to Taiwan’s north coast since December 1. The pattern suggested the cable damage was not an “innocent accident”, the official said.

Chinese commercial or fishing vessels have occasionally participated in some of the large military exercises Beijing regularly holds close to Taiwan. Taipei is concerned that such “greyzone” operations, below the threshold of war, will make it harder to defend against aggression that could eventually escalate to an outright attack.

Additional reporting by Chan Ho-him and Cheng Leng in Hong Kong



China’s box office takings fell by almost a quarter last year as a lack of blockbusters and tough economic conditions saw consumers turn to streaming services for entertainment.

While China’s film industry surpassed North America’s in box office revenues for the first time in 2020, its recovery after the pandemic has been weaker. The world’s second-largest film market recorded total box office revenues of Rmb42.5bn ($5.8bn) in 2024, down nearly 23 per cent from Rmb54.9bn a year earlier, said the China Film Administration.

That compares with a 3 per cent year-on-year drop in the North American box office to $8.7bn in 2024, according to Comscore and Deadline.

“A lack of domestic industry supply definitely hurt, but that damage was amplified by a poor economy,” said Chris Fenton, a US-China analyst and adjunct professor at the University of Southern California.

On a usually busy Christmas Eve, box office revenues in China plunged to Rmb38mn from Rmb170mn in 2023 and were the lowest in at least 13 years, according to Chinese ticketing platform Maoyan.

“[We are] affected by the consumption downgrade,” said Wang, a cinema manager in Beijing. “Simply put, it’s an economic crisis.” Attendance was estimated to have dropped by up to 35 per cent in 2024 in many major Chinese cities, with a lot of theatres operating at a loss, he said.

Instead of a visit to the cinema, many viewers were opting for online streaming platforms and short-form video content available on their mobile devices, according to industry analysts at Chinese entertainment data provider Beacon Professional.

Another factor was “not enough quality domestic films on the market to generate buzz and enthusiasm for people to head out”, said Ying Zhu, author of Hollywood in China: Behind the Scenes of the World’s Largest Movie Market.

But while streaming services had “certainly eaten into cinema revenue”, Zhu said China’s box office decline had “more to do with overall economic stagnation, with the high youth unemployment rate leading to shrinking pocket money for entertainment”.

Kenny Ng, a film scholar at Hong Kong Baptist University, said the pandemic still “had a lasting impact on consumer behaviour in China, particularly in the entertainment industry”.

“The shift towards home entertainment has gained momentum, with many consumers remaining hesitant to return to crowded venues like cinemas,” he said.

Sun, a 27-year-old tech worker in Shanghai, said he only went to the cinema twice last year, compared with more than 10 times in previous years, with domestic streaming platforms such as Tencent Video becoming increasingly attractive.

“Many theatrical releases don’t give me a strong urge to watch them in cinemas . . . [and] there weren’t many attractive movies released,” he said.

China’s top-grossing film in 2024 was the domestically produced comedy-drama YOLO, an adaptation of a Japanese film about a woman who lacks confidence and takes up boxing to change her life. YOLO took in Rmb3.4bn, according to Maoyan, lower than the more than Rmb4.5bn generated by the top movie of 2023, the Chinese comedy-mystery Full River Red.

China has been experiencing weak consumer confidence, with youth unemployment as high as 17 per cent and wage growth slowing, while growing social tensions have also concerned Chinese leaders.

“The return of comedies, while helping to defuse the social tension, also attests to viewer fatigue towards big-budget propaganda films,” said Zhu, who is also a professor at Hong Kong Baptist University’s Academy of Film.

The Chinese market contributed up to 30 per cent of global revenues for Hollywood blockbusters before 2020, according to USC’s Fenton, but their appeal has faded in recent years, with many big movies seeing 10 per cent or less of their totals coming from Chinese box office receipts. Only one Hollywood production — the sci-fi action franchise Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire — made the top 10 grossing films in China last year, according to Maoyan.

Hollywood films have increasingly “failed to connect with local audiences”, said Zhu. China’s state news agency Xinhua in an opinion last year noted “a lack of novelty and creativity in Hollywood movies with their formulaic storylines having satiated Chinese audiences”.

“Hollywood movies are losing their lustre with China’s Gen Z audiences,” said Shi Chuan, vice chair of the Shanghai Film Association, referring to Western culture’s shrinking influence on the country’s younger generation.

Shi cited the lukewarm reception for the latest Mission: Impossible as an example. “This is a high-quality movie but it disappointed at the box office, as [many] Chinese Gen Z moviegoers don’t know who Tom Cruise is,” said Shi.

Meanwhile, declining financing, censorship and changing tastes have been blamed by film producers and industry analysts for holding back the domestic industry.

The box office would probably still continue to grow over the next few years “due to the enormous size of [China’s] population”, said Fenton. Its film industry is hoping domestic blockbusters, including the fantasy epic Creation of the Gods II: Demonic Confrontation and martial arts fare The Legend of the Condor Heroes: The Great Hero, both set to be released during the peak lunar new year season at the end of January, could revive box office sales.

“As always, the quality of films is important,” said Stanley Rosen, a University of Southern California professor specialising in Chinese society, adding: “An improving economy in China would help a lot.”



The writer is a professor at Georgetown University and a senior adviser with The Asia Group. He served on the US National Security Council staff in 2009-2015

If Donald Trump’s China policy is defined by uncertainty and contradiction, Xi Jinping’s strategy is defined by clarity and determination. The Chinese president’s approach to the US president-elect is not a secret. Beijing has been quite clear since the election about its views and possible responses.

Xi plans not only to respond, but to take advantage of Trump’s moves. During Trump’s first term, Beijing scrambled to react. It is determined not to repeat that. Xi is well into his preparations and has signalled as much.

Most Chinese analysts were not surprised by Trump’s election, linking his comeback to a global tide of populism and nationalism. Beijing believes it now understands Trump’s gamesmanship and can manipulate his administration. China’s confidence is based on the conclusion — accurate or not — that China in 2025 is different from 2017, and so is the US and the world.

Many Chinese argue that Xi is stronger politically and the economy is more self-reliant and resilient, even amid recent challenges. Chinese analysts view the US economy as more fragile and American politics as deeply divided. Geopolitically, Beijing sees US influence as declining throughout the global south and Asia — and support for China’s vision as rising.

Xi has already signalled that he will treat his ties to Trump as a purely business relationship, albeit Don Corleone style. He won’t personally embrace Trump and will retaliate early and hard in order to generate leverage. Beijing in effect rejected Trump’s invitation for Xi to attend the inauguration.

But Beijing is also signalling it wants dialogue and is open to a deal to avoid new tariffs. However, the Chinese, who prefer to use back channels, are struggling to find the right one to understand what Trump “really” wants. Beijing’s baseline assumption is that Washington and its allies will remain hostile to China for the foreseeable future. Thus, Xi is open to negotiations because he wants some breathing room on the economic front, so China can marshal its forces for a long-term competition.

Beijing remains concerned that Trump’s team will focus on deeper economic decoupling, regime change in China and support for Taiwan independence, all as means to contain and destabilise China. Hence Xi’s four “red lines” at a November meeting with President Joe Biden in Peru in a clear message to the incoming administration.

Beijing’s planned responses to Trump fall into three baskets: retaliation, adaptation and diversification. Mirroring US policies, Beijing in recent years has created a range of export controls, investment restrictions and regulatory investigations capable of hurting US companies. Beijing is unable to match tariff for tariff, so it will seek to impose costs in ways that inflict maximum pain. For China, failing to retaliate would signal weakness domestically and only encourage Trump.

This has already started. In late 2024, Beijing blocked the export to the US of critical minerals used for chipmaking, squeezed the supply chain for US-made drones, threatened to blacklist a high-profile US apparel company and launched an antitrust probe into Nvidia. By taking such actions, Beijing is previewing its capabilities and creating future bargaining chips.

China’s second strategy is adaptation. From autumn 2023, Beijing began a vigorous fiscal and monetary stimulus to help businesses and now consumers. This policy shift is generating some positive, though uneven, impacts. It was certainly badly needed, but its scope and nature were also developed with a possible trade war in mind.

Beijing’s third strategy involves expanding its economic ties. It is debating unilateral tariff cuts on imports from non-US partners. On his Peru trip, Xi inaugurated a deep-water port that could reshape China’s trade with Latin America, a key non-US source of food, energy and minerals. In late 2024, Xi also participated for the first time in meetings with the heads of 10 major international economic organisations. His message was clear: China will be the leading force for global economic stability, prosperity and openness, and opposes all forms of protectionism.

Much could go wrong. Beijing’s confidence is matched by that of the Trump team. Both sides believe they possess the upper hand, can impose more costs and withstand more pain. The stage is set for a complicated, destabilising dynamic which, at best, results in a ceasefire. And that’s only on economic issues, not on Taiwan, the South China Sea, tech competition or nuclear force modernisation. The cold war is starting to look quaint in comparison.

​Letter in response to this article:

China is ill-equipped to fight a tariff war / From Mihir Torsekar, Alexandria, VA, US



Happy new year. 2025 is set to be a challenging, tumultuous year for businesses and investors in the green transition — and a very busy one for journalists covering the subject. Below are five of the key questions we’ll be tracking this year. What are yours? Let us know at moralmoneyreply@ft.com. — Simon Mundy

At a time of severe political polarisation in the US, a crackdown on Chinese green tech imports is one of the few things that has bipartisan support. Republican and Democratic lawmakers alike want to reduce US economic reliance on a strategic rival and weaken China’s grip on global clean energy supply chains.

President Joe Biden rolled out his most recent series of restrictions on Chinese products, including solar panels and electric vehicles, last month. The incoming Trump administration is almost certain to raise these barriers still higher, as part of its push to reduce the trade deficit with China.

The EU, too, has been putting new restrictions on Chinese clean energy imports, and is likely to double down on this stance under European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen’s more right-leaning second administration. One notable new tack is a push for Chinese companies to transfer intellectual property to European businesses, in exchange for the right to operate in the EU and benefit from its subsidy regimes.

Just how far the west will go in toughening up trade rules is a crucial question. So too is how severely China’s green tech sector will be affected, and how it will respond — whether by retaliating with trade restrictions of its own, or by redoubling its efforts to grow clean tech exports to friendlier developing economies.

A still more important question is how far this lurch towards green protectionism will slow down the energy transition. A recent paper published by the Carnegie Endowment warned that, given Chinese producers’ superior scale and cost-efficiency in crucial parts of the clean energy supply chain, these trade measures “could result in a deeper and abrupt decoupling that is hugely disruptive at a critical time”.

Instead, it argued for a “clean energy détente” between the US and China, saying a healthier trading relationship would catalyse wider co-operation between China and the west, and accelerate global climate action. It’s a compelling vision — but one that only the most committed optimist would view as likely in 2025. (Simon Mundy)

Last November’s COP29 summit in Baku concluded in disappointment for developing nation representatives who had hoped for a radical expansion of international climate finance. Rich nations’ pledge to mobilise $300bn a year by 2035 fell far short of what expert estimates had deemed necessary.

Still, there is clearly growing global awareness of the need for expanded climate finance in lower-income nations. In 2025, we’ll be watching to see whether this will translate into results.

One huge question concerns the US approach under Trump, who has vowed to pull the US out of the Paris agreement and is likely to take an axe to climate-focused foreign aid. This was a factor behind other rich nations’ reluctance to make generous pledges in Baku, and much will depend on how far they’re prepared to pick up any financial slack left by Washington.

There’s also an opportunity for economies such as China and the Gulf states, which are not obliged to contribute climate finance under the Paris agreement, to build soft power by expanding the voluntary support they offer lower-income nations, notably in Africa.

With the limits of bilateral support increasingly stark, multilateral development banks — especially the World Bank Group — will be under growing pressure to show a more proactive, less risk-averse approach to catalysing private investment.

The competition among developing nation governments to attract green finance will heat up this year, whether through green bond programmes like Kenya’s or through tax and subsidy regimes that have been rolled out from Uganda to Bangladesh.

In 2024, clean energy investment reached a record $2tn, according to the International Energy Agency — yet only 15 per cent of this was spent in developing countries (excluding China), which account for two-thirds of the world’s population. This year, we’ll get a better sense of whether this imbalance can be addressed. (Simon Mundy)

With global warming super-charging floods, wildfires and other natural hazards, homeowners in exposed areas are struggling to find affordable insurance. Governments are incentivised to keep premiums low and to shoulder more of the risk — leaving them exposed to catastrophic events that could generate massive public liabilities, with ripple effects for markets.

Lawmakers such as US senator Sheldon Whitehouse have raised concerns that the retreat of major insurers could set off “a crash in property values” or push state insurers to seek federal bailouts.

As of December, insured losses from natural catastrophes were on track to exceed $135bn in 2024, according to Swiss Re. Two-thirds of these losses were in the US. But Europe’s insured losses from flooding, totalling $10bn, were the second-highest figure from that class of disaster that the region had ever seen. In October, devastating floods in Spain killed more than 220 people, with insured losses likely to exceed €4bn ($4.2bn), according to Morningstar estimates.

Yet there are signs that reinsurance prices, one factor behind rising consumer insurance costs, may be easing slightly. Over the past two years, reinsurers such as Munich Re have raised their pricing to levels that have raked in record profits. Their expanded balance sheets are now giving them scope to trim rates. The cost of property catastrophe reinsurance fell 8 per cent globally on January 1, when policies typically renew, according to Howden, the insurance broker.

According to a recent report by risk modelling firm Verisk, last year’s losses were actually mild by the standards of the years to come. It claimed that the world should expect an annual average of $151bn in insured losses, and much worse in bad years. This year will give new insights on how climate change is altering the risks faced by the insurance sector — and on how insurers are responding. (Lee Harris)

The rise of artificial intelligence was one of the biggest business stories of 2024. And AI’s voracious appetite for electricity has been one of the most significant themes in clean energy. In a landmark deal in September, Microsoft and Constellation Energy said they would reopen the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant, underscoring desperation among giant technology companies to shore up their power supplies.

In 2025, the AI challenge for electricity grids is likely to get worse.

Last month, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, an industry watchdog, warned that AI power consumption could cause blackouts in the US and Canada during peak demand.

“Demand growth is now higher than at any point in the last two decades,” the NERC said.

Microsoft and the other technology giants play an enormous role in determining whether or not increasing AI-related electricity demand will be fulfilled by clean energy. With Donald Trump returning to the White House this month, the federal government will not be a driving force for low-carbon power. But Microsoft, Amazon, Alphabet and the other tech leaders have the deep pockets to pay for it.

Heading into 2025, one of the biggest questions in clean energy will be whether the large tech players will continue to spend on nuclear, solar and wind as the federal government shifts its focus towards fossil fuels. (Patrick Temple-West)

Sustainable investing was thrown in reverse in the US in 2024. Investor demand for environmental, social and governance (ESG) funds slowed in 2024 as Republican politicians ramped up their ESG attacks.

Shortly after Trump’s win in November, Republican-led states filed a federal antitrust lawsuit against BlackRock, State Street and Vanguard, accusing the three largest US index fund managers of using their holdings in coal producers to constrict supplies in pursuit of net zero carbon emissions goals.

This litigation will be closely watched in 2025 to see if it is successful and if it expands to other companies.

“The anti-ESG backlash movement is trying to accomplish its goals by leveraging antitrust risk, but also the perception of risk,” Drake Morgan, a counsel at Crowell & Moring, told me. “Companies may have a hard time telling those apart because the antitrust theories these accusations involve are notoriously slippery and courts haven’t provided much clarification, at least not recently,” he said.

“A few years ago, antitrust risk wasn’t as much of a focus when companies were considering their ESG policies”, Morgan said. “What we’re seeing now isn’t a course correction, so much as the evolution of risk management as enforcement priorities shift.”

Republicans have obviously set their sights on dismantling ESG and DEI (diversity, equity and inclusion) programmes. A crucial question this year will be about terminology. Will financial companies keep pursuing sustainable finance strategies using different language — or abandon them altogether? (Patrick Temple-West)

Gale force The UK government’s plans to expand renewable energy are facing resistance from some local communities.

Water warning The EU’s new environment commissioner says the bloc has neglected the increasing threat of water shortages.

Northward bound Climate change is reshaping the map of Europe’s wine industry.



The writer is fellow for Latin American studies at the Council on Foreign Relations

Donald Trump wants to roll back China’s growing footprint in Latin America. He isn’t above strong-arm tactics to do it. Just see his latest demand to reassume control of the Panama Canal, which a senior Trump appointee afterwards suggested was really about pushing back against China.

But if, or rather when, the pressure does come bearing down, don’t expect all of Latin America to respond the same way. Instead, be prepared for the region to divide less along ideological lines than geographic ones — into a northern half more tightly welded to Washington and a southern half likely to drift, especially if pushed, towards Beijing.

Many believe Washington needs a positive agenda to compete effectively with China: carrots, not just sticks, like expanded access to markets in the US and more abundant development financing. And they’re right.

But assume for a moment that threats remain Trump’s lingua franca — ones like the proposed 60 per cent tariffs on all goods that pass through the new Chinese-owned and operated mega-port of Chancay in Peru, or 200 per cent tariffs on Mexican-made cars, which Trump fears China could exploit as a backdoor into the US market.

Threats only work when they are backed by leverage. But the US’s leverage is not evenly distributed across the region. In Mexico and much of Central America and the Caribbean, Washington still holds most of the cards. Mexico still sends 80 per cent of its exports to the US, for instance.

But head to South America, and the picture changes. China is the continent’s top trading partner, while five of the Latin American countries most indebted to China, and four of the five that have received the most Chinese FDI, are in South America.

The best evidence that South American leaders won’t necessarily be easily swayed or cajoled by Washington is Argentina’s Trump-loving president Javier Milei. Milei, who once compared China’s leaders to “murderers” and openly adores Trump, at first cancelled plans for a Chinese-built nuclear power plant and mega-port. But by October, they were “interesting business partners”, and a new natural gas export deal, a currency swap deal to boost the country’s depleted reserves and a state visit to Beijing were all in the works.

During Trump’s first term, pressure didn’t dissuade conservative presidents in Colombia and Brazil from deepening tech and trade ties to China, either. And these were South American leaders who like Trump. Now imagine the ones who don’t.

South America’s major economies will resist picking sides. But if push comes to shove, it’s hard to see them distancing much from Beijing. If pressure backfires, and South America swings further east, there will be consequences for security dynamics in the Pacific, critical mineral and rare earth element supply chains, and more.

Nowhere is the risk of pressure backfiring greater than in Colombia, one of the top recipients of US assistance worldwide. The country’s leftist incumbent, Gustavo Petro, has continued the trend. He is expected to usher Colombia into Beijing’s Belt and Road Initiative in 2025 and possibly join the Brics bank. With two years left and few internal constraints, Petro could turn even more sharply towards China in response to unmeasured heavy handedness, potentially costing the US its closest regional ally.

Trump and his party’s leaders have spoken repeatedly about reasserting the “Monroe doctrine” — the idea that the US must keep geopolitical adversaries out of the hemisphere. But China is not like the Soviet Union, the last real target of that doctrine. The Soviets and Cuba had soft power but little economic heft. China’s presence, especially in South America, is much greater.

China is different from the USSR in another way. Laser-focused on strategic advantage, it is agnostic towards regimes, happy to work with anyone. “They do not demand anything,” Milei said of China, seemingly warmly. True. China heaped loans on Venezuela socialists, Milei’s arch-rivals, as the country collapsed.

For Latin America, the most serious risk of the current moment is that the US, in a misguided effort to compete, adopts the same attitude: oppose China fervently enough, and democracy and rule of law are no longer concerns.

Trump should worry about whether his planned diplomatic hardball will work, and where it might backfire. Latin America should beware such a race to the bottom.



China’s video game industry is scaling up to release more blockbusters in 2025 after the breakout global success of “triple-A” title Black Myth: Wukong.

In August, little-known Chinese developer Game Science achieved one of the fastest-selling debuts in gaming history with 10mn copies sold in three days of a title inspired by a classical Chinese novel about an anthropomorphic monkey with supernatural powers.

The action role-playing game has since earned $1.1bn, with nearly 25mn copies sold, according to estimates from gaming consultancy Niko Partners. About 70 per cent of sales came in China.

The game’s appeal both at home and abroad goes beyond its state of the art graphics, fun gameplay and strong character development, according to one typical fan.

“Hu,” a 29-year-old former tech worker in Beijing, said: “The biggest difference is that this is an authentically Chinese game, incorporating a wealth of historical, cultural and martial arts elements far more genuine than the occasional Chinese flavour found in other games.”

Developers have taken it up a notch to achieve that. The game is China’s first major triple-A title — an unofficial designation for games with large budgets and lengthy development cycles released for gaming PCs and consoles rather than smartphones.

“Black Myth: Wukong put Chinese developers firmly on the map for triple-A premium games,” said Daniel Ahmad, Niko Partners’ research director.

Industry insiders hope this will rekindle investment in a domestic gaming sector recovering from a regulatory crackdown that began in 2021, when children were banned from playing video games for more than an hour on certain days.

The industry has been suffering globally with mass lay-offs, tepid revenue growth and spiralling development costs, particularly in the US. In China, it is still recovering from the 18-month break in gaming approvals from June 2021, which prompted investors to pull back and forced a wave of closures of smaller studios. Authorities have since resumed issuing licences.

“The success of Black Myth makes developers dare to chase dreams and reach for triple-A projects,” said one gaming developer at a Shenzhen-based studio backed by Tencent. But he added he had not yet seen venture capital investment return with any vigour.

Black Myth: Wukong also received an enthusiastic reception from state media. It celebrated its role in promoting a positive view of China overseas, indicating a more accommodating political view on gaming.

The state-run China Daily published an opinion piece saying it was “exhilarating to see China break the long-standing Western dominance in the high-end gaming market and Western gamers embrace traditional Chinese culture”. This contrasted with state media in 2021 accusing the industry of promoting “spiritual opium”.

The game is leading a shift in China towards larger budgets and more ambitious titles that can compete internationally, with anticipation growing about projects, including Phantom Blade Zero from Beijing-based S-Game and Wuchang: Fallen Feathers by the Chengdu-based Leenzee, due for release later this year. The Tencent-backed studio Chengdu Ophiuchus Technology and the independent developer Digisky are also working on triple-A projects.

“Before this game, Chinese developers were best at making free-to-play games, especially for mobile . . . they had not conquered the triple-A premium space,” Ahmad said.

China’s largest gaming company, Tencent, is still heavily invested in mobile. Its domestic gaming revenues returned to growth in 2024, with the release of its hit smartphone game Dungeon & Fighter Mobile, after several years of waiting for regulatory approval.

“DnF Mobile has been an important factor in Tencent’s strong gaming performance this year,” said Robin Zhu, internet analyst at Bernstein. Tencent’s domestic gaming revenue grew by 6 per cent in the first nine months of 2024 to Rmb106bn ($14.6bn).

Beijing has also stepped up the pace of granting new gaming licences, in another sign that the government has adopted a more favourable stance. In the first 11 months of 2024, Beijing approved nearly 1,300 games, already outstripping last year’s total, according to Niko data.

Zhu said the strength of Tencent’s domestic gaming business showed that even though consumers were shopping less, they were still willing to spend on gaming.

“People are reining in on ecommerce but putting more money on experiences and services,” he said.

But 2024 was not a strong year for all China’s gaming companies, with number-two player NetEase seeing gaming revenue fall by 4 per cent to Rmb21bn in the third quarter. Analysts blamed in part the fading popularity of Eggy Party, a multiplayer obstacle-course casual video game.

Ahmad said that Black Myth: Wukong’s release showed how China had learnt how to tool up for bigger games.

“China’s gaming industry has gone through an industrialisation process. Before, they found it hard to compete with the likes of Activision Blizzard. But the Chinese studios have brought in foreign experts, scaled their teams, standardised tools and production processes, focusing on high- production values, popular gameplay mechanics, and deep progression systems that can help them compete globally.”

While they were going head to head with international gaming giants, Chinese developers had a cost advantage, he said, with the country’s vast pool of talented and cheap engineers. Game Science spent $42mn developing Black Myth: Wukong, according to government reports.

“If the same game were developed in the US, it would have cost at least twice if not three times as much. The costs are so much lower in China,” said Ahmad.



The People’s Bank of China plans to cut interest rates this year as it makes a historic shift to a more orthodox monetary policy to bring it closer into line with the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank.

In comments to the Financial Times, the Chinese central bank said it was likely it would cut interest rates from the current level of 1.5 per cent “at an appropriate time” in 2025.

It added that it would prioritise “the role of interest rate adjustments” and move away from “quantitative objectives” for loan growth in what would amount to a transformation of Chinese monetary policy.

Most central banks, such as the Fed, have only one policy variable, the benchmark interest rate, which they use to influence demand for credit and activity in the economy.

The PBoC by contrast not only sets a multitude of different interest rates but also gives unofficial guidance to banks on how much they should expand their loan books.

While such guidance was its most important tool in managing the economy for decades — as loans were steered to high-growth sectors such as manufacturing, technology and property — officials within the PBoC believe reform is now urgent.

“Rate reform is likely to be the true focus of the PBoC in 2025,” said Richard Xu, chief China financial analyst with Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong. “China’s economic development urgently needs to shift from a mindset focused solely on expanding the market size [of banks’ loan books].”

Demand for credit has collapsed due to a prolonged property market slowdown. The PBoC also fears that credit growth targets lead to indiscriminate lending without consideration for risk, which is wasteful in the long run.

“Aligning with the requirements of high-quality development, these quantitative targets have been phased out in recent years,” said the central bank. “The PBoC will pay more attention to the role of interest rate control, and improve the formation and transmission of market-oriented interest rates.”

As part of the change in regime, the PBoC clarified last year that its main policy instrument would be the seven-day reverse repo rate rather than the host of interest rates it has relied on to date.

A reduced emphasis on targets for credit growth could rein in the rampant overcapacity in China that has led to bad debts at home and disruption to global industries such as steel.

But the central bank has been struggling to implement its shift towards interest rates because the government wants to channel money to the high-tech and manufacturing sectors, which is easier under the old system of credit expansion.

Even as it tries to make a structural change in policy, the PBoC is also under pressure to reflate China’s economy.

During 2024, as part of the most aggressive stimulus package since the Covid-19 pandemic, the central bank cut the seven-day rate twice and a five-year rate that influences mortgage prices three times.

The moves came in the context of President Xi Jinping’s pledge to achieve economic growth of 5 per cent despite troubles in China’s property sector and trade tensions with the US.

PBoC governor Pan Gongsheng and his predecessors Yi Gang and Zhou Xiaochuan have pushed for risk-based pricing of loans in recent meetings with officials from some of China’s biggest banks, according to attendees.

Bankers at the meetings warned of possible confusion when pricing longer-term loans since the market is accustomed to guidance from the PBoC, highlighting the challenge of moving to the new system.

For international investors, if the PBoC is successful, then Chinese monetary policy will start to resemble the system they are used to in the US, Europe or Japan.

For the first time in two decades, the central bank also bought government bonds in the open market to inject money into the financial system in 2024, in the same way that the Fed conducts its policy.

Analysts said the PBoC still lacked some essential ingredients for a system based on interest rates, such as a schedule of routine, publicly disclosed meetings to make policy decisions.

Without such guidance, “market participants might find themselves guessing what will happen next”, said Haibin Zhu, China economist at JPMorgan Chase.



China’s best-selling car manufacturer BYD sold a record number of electric vehicles and hybrids globally last year, even as fierce competition took hold in its home market.

Tesla’s biggest rival sold 4.3mn EVs and hybrids in 2024, far more than the target of 3.6mn it set earlier, according to the company. “China’s champion, the world’s champion,” the company said in a social media post late on Wednesday.

BYD sold 1.76mn pure EVs last year, but not enough to oust Tesla as the world’s biggest-selling EV maker. The US company, run by Elon Musk, said on Thursday that it delivered 1.79mn cars last year.

Li Auto, China’s first profitable EV start-up, Stellantis-backed Leapmotor and smartphone maker Xiaomi also surpassed their targets, selling 500,000, 290,000 and 135,000 EVs respectively during 2024.

China is expected to sell more EVs, including pure battery-powered cars and plug-in hybrids, than vehicles with internal combustion engines for the first time in 2025, as a result of hundreds of billions of dollars in government subsidies over the past decade.

Carmakers have also been helped by a trade-in scheme launched last April that allowed consumers to receive Rmb20,000 ($2,740) for replacing an old gas-powered car with an EV.

But while some of the bigger names performed well, intense competition and a prolonged price war have put scores of players under pressure. Dozens of companies such as Xpeng and Nio fell short of their sales targets, even as they recorded growth.

“Competition in the market is very fierce,” said Yale Zhang, managing director at Shanghai-based consultancy Automotive Foresight. “The biggest companies are taking an increasingly large piece of the pie, while most of the smaller groups are struggling.”

Consolidation is already reshaping the world’s largest EV market. Once high-flying start-ups such as HiPhi and Baidu-backed Jidu have collapsed over the past year. Auto conglomerate Geely combined its sub-brands Zeekr and Lynk & Co in November to “streamline operations”.

“The economies of scale matter more than ever to carmakers as the industry transitions to EVs,” added Zhang.

Analysts also pointed out that the entrance of tech groups such as Xiaomi and Huawei had deepened competition.

As of December 31, Xiaomi sold more than 135,000 units of its only model, the SU7 sedan, launched in late March, surpassing its goal of 130,000 cars. Founder Lei Jun said on Wednesday the group aimed to more than double that in 2025 by delivering 300,000 EVs.

“The country’s EV market is huge, so even a niche segment could see considerable demand,” said Li Yanwei, a member of the China Automobile Dealers Association expert committee.

“Xiaomi’s SU7 sedan made a splash by capturing consumers’ demands for a personalised [car] with an attractive price tag.”

President Xi Jinping acknowledged the success of the industry in his New Year’s address. “[China’s] annual production volume of new energy vehicles exceeded 10mn units for the first time,” Xi said in a televised speech on Tuesday.



Alibaba has agreed to sell its entire stake in China’s largest hypermarket operator at a steep discount, as it sharpens its focus on core ecommerce operations amid intensifying competition.

The Chinese tech group will sell its 73.7 per cent stake in Sun Art Retail to private equity firm DCP Capital at HK$1.75 per share, the company disclosed in a filing on Wednesday evening, after the shares had closed the day at $2.48.

The sale is expected to raise gross proceeds of up to $1.7bn, but will mean a loss of Rmb13.2bn ($1.8bn) for Alibaba shareholders when the deal is completed, it added.

Sun Art’s Hong Kong-listed shares plunged as much as 35 per cent on Thursday before narrowing losses to 17 per cent. Alibaba’s shares slipped 0.7 per cent.

The Sun Art deal came after Alibaba’s exit from Intime Retail Group in December, marking Alibaba’s second major divestment of bricks-and-mortar assets in less than a month. The department store chain was sold to a consortium including clothes retailer Youngor Group and Intime’s management team for $1bn, less than half what Alibaba had paid for it seven years earlier.

The quick sales of Sun Art — the biggest hypermarket operator by number of stores and staff — and Intime at significant discounts underscore the urgency of Alibaba’s pivot back to its ecommerce roots in a bid to sustain growth and strengthen competitiveness.

Once a dominant force in Chinese ecommerce, Alibaba is now racing to counter heightened competition from rivals such as Temu owner Pinduoduo, while retreating from unprofitable expansions into non-core businesses that have weighed on returns.

Alibaba said in its filing that the sale of Sun Art represented “a good opportunity to monetise non-core assets and redeploy proceeds to focus on developing its core businesses and enhancing shareholder returns”.

The group first invested in Sun Art in 2017, with it later taking majority control in 2020 in a HK$28bn (US$3.6bn) deal with France’s Mulliez family. The move was part of its ambitious strategy begun in 2016 to create a “new retail” model blending online and offline shopping experiences.

However, the vision of a retail empire that connects ecommerce and physical stores faltered amid the shock of the pandemic and an economic slowdown that curbed consumer spending in China.

In November, Alibaba announced plans to merge its domestic and international ecommerce operations into a single unit under chief executive Jiang Fan, a move viewed as key to Alibaba’s future strategy.

Alibaba still retains smaller holdings in other traditional Chinese retailers including Suning.com. It is also restructuring the business strategy of its grocery chain Hema, or Freshippo, to increase profitability.



I first visited the ancient Chinese classical gardens in the little town of Suzhou in 2002. It was a two-hour, standing room only slog by commuter train from Shanghai. When I arrived, the only people wandering among the pavilions were fellow international tourists — locals were too busy working for such frivolity.

I returned recently, some 22 years after that first trip. It is unrecognisable. Suzhou is now a city of 7mn people — 25 minutes by bullet train from Shanghai. Admission to the town’s acclaimed museum is by app and tickets are sold to a growing army of Chinese tourists, normally by mid-morning.

Everyone knows China has changed, but I wonder how many Western investors comprehend just how much and in what ways. And, if you want to invest successfully there, you need to understand this.

China has been a disappointment for investors since Covid. The lockdown was so much more severe there than in the west — its population was not cushioned by furlough payments. Economic recovery has been much slower and the Chinese stock market too easy to shun.

Trump’s victory raises the spectre of punitive tariffs on Chinese imports into the US. He repeatedly cited a figure of 60 per cent during the election campaign and in November warned of “an additional 10 per cent tariff, above any additional tariffs” (sic).

Trump’s bark may yet prove worse than his bite — as it was when he imposed tariffs on China in early 2018. His nominee as Treasury Secretary, billionaire financier Scott Bessent, has described 60 per cent as a “maximalist” position and said of the president-elect: “My general view is that at the end of the day he’s a free trader. It’s escalate to de-escalate.”

It’s worth pointing out that the US share of Chinese exports is down to 14.5 per cent today, compared with 19 per cent in 2017, so it’s not as dependent as it used to be.

Arguably more relevant to investors are the recent promises of Chinese government stimulus. Share prices have risen by more than 26 per cent on average in the past couple of months, but they are still cheap by many measures — and could represent an opportunity.

China’s affluent middle class is set to grow by 80mn by 2030 (equivalent to nearly a quarter of the US population as a whole). And this growth will be amplified if the Chinese can be encouraged to change some of their financial habits.

One of the big reasons for China’s economic slump was the unwillingness of its people to spend. In the west we save on average around 7 per cent of our income. In China it’s nearer 35 per cent.

There is a reason for this. Despite being a nominally communist state, China can be ruthlessly capitalist. There is no national health service and insurance and pension industries are fledgling (though rich in potential). Families need a bigger safety net.

Remember too, that this is a country that has only recently become wealthy and has an ageing population. Muscle memory and the handed-down stories of grandparents who barely had enough to get by have a powerful impact on spending habits. Covid reinforced this.

The consequence is that whereas about two-thirds of GDP is typically derived from consumer spending globally, in China it is just over one-third.

What has driven China’s economic miracle has been infrastructure spending — investment in property and modern roads and speeding trains that have drawn hundreds of millions from rural areas to the country’s fast-growing urban centres (3mn a year to Shanghai alone).

The Chinese government knows that the next phase of growth cannot come from infrastructure — it must come, at least partially, from consumption — from supporting the rise of the middle class and encouraging people to spend more. The two in tandem could be powerful drivers of growth.

If the government in Beijing succeeds, the winners will not be yesterday’s winners — for a long time the Western companies that jumped in to establish an early presence as the country’s economic revolution gathered steam. With more choice, consumers are becoming more discerning in their purchases, and we are seeing the rise of domestic brands that are often more adept at reading and catering to the consumer mood.

South Korea’s Samsung’s recent troubles are in part because Chinese brands such as Huawei, Vivo, OPPO and Xiaomi have virtually pushed it out of the smartphone market in China.

The country’s electric car industry, with the benefits of government subsidies, has established a similar grip on the domestic market. BYD produced 1.76mn EVs in 2024, close to Tesla’s 1.79mn — but it also built another 2.49mn hybrids. In four years China has overtaken the US, South Korea, Japan and Germany to become the world’s leading car exporter. Chinese manufacturers on track to become well-known names over here — beyond BYD — include Dongfeng, SAIC (owner of the MG brand), Nio and Xpeng. It is a similar story in fashion and cosmetics: look out for Icicle and Proya.

For me, the bigger question investors should ask is not whether the Chinese will spend again, but how. As Beijing continues to take steps to address the fallout from the real estate implosion — which has undoubtedly played a big role in curbing consumer spending in recent years — new market opportunities are arising.

One area that has seen rapid growth since Covid is health and fitness. Running has become hugely popular. Beneficiaries include Adidas and the Chinese brand Anta. And then there is tourism — now back at pre-Covid levels and up 32 per cent year on year. Trip.com is already benefiting from this trend.

Historically, the safest way to play China’s growth story was to buy Western companies exposed to the Chinese market. Some may say that is still the case — but concerns remain that the state will arbitrarily undermine international businesses seen to cross a line in its eyes.

Nevertheless, I believe some of the best opportunities come from spotting the domestic brands that have taken root in China and are growing strongly. Investing in China is not as simple as it was, but from this low valuation point the potential rewards are arguably greater than ever, despite Trump.

Swetha Ramachandran is a global equity manager at Artemis

This article has been updated since original publication to include the latest BYD and Tesla production figures



The EU, a political project conceived to remove trade barriers, has been raising tariff walls at its fastest rate in 15 years. But just as fast as the defences are built against cheap Chinese imports, fresh storms blow the bloc off balance again.

Donald Trump’s threat to impose levies of up to 60 per cent on Chinese goods would, for instance, put an even higher tariff wall around the US than anything the EU has planned.

The effect, if the US president follows through, would be to divert Chinese goods from the US to the EU — forcing Brussels to in turn consider hitting back with even tougher defensive measures.

It is an impossible situation for a union that has taken pride in its free-trading instincts. Every barrier it erects can save some domestic jobs but will also reduce the competitiveness of other domestic industries by raising the price of imports.

With China now accounting for 30 per cent of global industrial output, the ripple effects will be considerable on EU products ranging from electric vehicles to Italian tomato paste.

Vulnerable industries, such as steel and glass fibre makers, complain the EU has not been building trade defences fast enough or high enough to save them. “We are close to a tipping point for many industries,” said Laurent Ruessmann, a partner with RB Legal and trade defence expert.

On the other hand, those who want cheap Chinese inputs to keep their own product prices down, such as paint makers, have lobbied against tariff measures. The EU has put duties on titanium dioxide, a key ingredient, leaving paint makers worried they will have to absorb the cost or lose sales.

Simon Evenett, professor of geopolitics and strategy at IMD Business School, said tariffs always ended up costing consumers or other businesses.

“Europe’s dilemma is either to sacrifice jobs downstream by slapping tariffs on Chinese imports or watch EU producers shrink by doing nothing. When it comes to protectionism, someone’s ox always gets gored.”

However, Aegis Europe, which represents heavy industries such as steel and chemicals, argued that the EU was sitting on the fence.

Trade defence measures cover far less of its EU imports than other trading blocs, according to Aegis. The number of tariffs has grown to their highest level since 2009, with 141 in force in 2023. But rebased against total imports, the US, Australia and Canada have more than 10 times larger protective shields.

“Claims that EU manufacturers use trade defence as a protectionist tool do not stand up to scrutiny,” it said in a report.

Brussels has responded. In a move asked for by Aegis, it now automatically registers imports when a trade investigation is opened. It can then backdate tariffs if it wishes, deterring stockpiling during the months-long probe to beat the price rises.

But even with tariffs in place, China has tended to find ways around them. Since the EU put anti-subsidy duties in 2010 on glass fibre — used in construction, wind turbines and other industries — Chinese producers have doubled their market share.

After the tariffs were imposed, imports started surging from Egypt. China’s state-owned Jushi had opened a plant there, and Brussels eventually put tariffs on Egypt too.

Ludovic Piraux, chief executive of producer 3B and president of Glass Fibre Europe, said the tariffs were ultimately too low. “Companies operating within a market economy like ours cannot withstand the relentless attacks from Chinese state-subsidised competitors,” he said.

The steel industry is feeling the squeeze most — hobbled by weak demand, high energy costs and regulation forcing it to invest to eliminate carbon emissions.

Steel production hit its lowest ever level — 128mn tonnes — in 2023, according to Eurofer, the lobby group. Trump put tariffs on the metal in his first term in an effort to protect his voters in the industrial heartland of the US, and could reactivate them within days of his return.

Axel Eggert, Eurofer director-general, said: “We have to decide if we want a European steel industry or not.”

Carmakers — themselves now partially protected by tariffs from a surge of cheap, allegedly subsidised Chinese electric vehicle imports — needed EU steel, Eggert argued. While they might be tempted by cheaper Chinese offerings to lower their costs, “as soon as we are gone, the Chinese will raise prices”.

The EU might be tempted to reopen talks with the US on a “green steel club”, which would allow tariff free trade between members while those outside pay.

This was once dismissed by Brussels as incompatible with World Trade Organization rules. But senior EU officials now hint that they could be flexible in interpreting the rules.

In this hostile environment, even good students of trade multilateralism may find it impossible to stick to their principles.



US investors in Chinese venture capital funds are racing to comply with new rules banning them from backing companies that develop artificial intelligence and other advanced technologies used by the People’s Liberation Army.

Measures by the Biden administration, which come into force on Thursday, impose civil and criminal penalties for US entities that invest in Chinese companies involved in semiconductors, quantum computing or AI systems that could be used by China’s military.

The rules introduce a hefty due diligence burden on US investors. Institutions with money tied up in Chinese investment funds must secure “binding contractual assurance” that their cash will not be used to buy companies that violate the rules.

Some large investors have secured such assurances from their Chinese fund managers in recent weeks, but requests from others have been refused, according to people advising large pension and endowment funds on compliance planning.

Many investors have responded by cutting back or pausing new investments in China amid growing tensions between Washington and Beijing. Silicon Valley venture firms Sequoia Capital and GGV Capital separated from their Chinese entities in 2024.

The rules come into effect at a time when US-China ties could be further strained by the return to office of president-elect Donald Trump, who has vowed to increase tariffs on Chinese imports, highlighting the risks for US groups of investing in the world’s second-largest economy.

They also follow a period of growing bipartisan consensus in Washington that the US has to do more to prevent China from getting ahead in key technologies, particularly militarily sensitive ones.

A report by the US House of Representatives China committee in February said American venture capital firms had invested more than $3bn into technology companies that directly fuelled China’s military advancement.

Investors granted assurances will have to perform due diligence to ensure the rules are being followed by their Chinese funds. This is a particular concern since the country’s laws empower the government and private individuals to take countermeasures against “discriminatory” foreign sanctions by other states.

“The problem is that US investors are signing binding contracts with some entities that may be otherwise bound to violate it,” said Phil Ludvigson, a partner at law firm King & Spalding, who advises on national security risks related to foreign investment. “It puts everyone in a tough spot.”

The new rules could also reduce investing in non-prohibited sectors in China because of the wide use of AI.

“US dollar foundations are done committing to China, period,” said an executive at a large American endowment fund. “The hurdle for making new commitments on the private side is 50,000 feet high.”

China reported its smallest annual foreign direct investment since the 1990s in 2023, while foreign capital in China’s VC industry plunged 60 per cent in 2023 to $3.7bn, according to Dealogic.

By contrast, over the past decade Silicon Valley venture capitalists, wealthy family offices and public pension and endowment funds across the US — known as “limited partners” — invested billions of dollars in China’s technology sector.

HongShan, Sequoia Capital’s former China business, raised nearly $9bn in 2022, with about half coming from US LPs.

Hillhouse, which launched in 2005 with a $20mn investment from Yale University’s endowment fund, where its founder Zhang Lei had studied, has grown into a $65bn tech investing powerhouse.

Other big US investors in China include the $460bn California Public Employees’ Retirement Fund and the $260bn New York State Common Retirement Fund, both of which have between 1 per cent and 3 per cent of their portfolios invested in the country.

The 72 largest US public pension funds pumped $68bn into China between 2020 and 2023, according to a report by the Future Union think-tank.



China is stepping up its push to break the grip of Boeing and Airbus on the aircraft market, as the state-run maker of the country’s first homegrown passenger jet seeks certifications for it to fly beyond the country’s shores.

Comac’s heavily subsidised C919, which made its maiden commercial flight in 2023, is already flown on domestic routes by China’s three big state-owned carriers: Air China, China Eastern Airlines and China Southern Airlines. From this month, China Eastern will fly the C919 between Hong Kong and Shanghai, its first regular commercial route outside China’s mainland.

Yang Yang, the company’s deputy general manager of marketing and sales, told the Financial Times the company was aiming for the single-aisle plane to be flying in south-east Asia by 2026 and to gain European certification as early as this year.

“We hope to operate more of the jets domestically in China and to thoroughly identify any issues before . . . bringing them to south-east Asia,” he said.

The C919 is a pivotal project in President Xi Jinping’s drive for China to move up the technology value chain, with the ultimate aim of challenging the western duopoly of Boeing and Airbus.

Boeing’s financial woes and delivery delays, as well as wider supply chain problems in the industry that have left it and Airbus facing engine and component shortages, have weighed on the global aviation sector and offered hope for newcomers.

The world will need 42,430 new aircraft over the next two decades, roughly 80 per cent of which will be single-aisle aircraft, according to an Airbus forecast in 2024. Aviation consultancy IBA predicts that Comac can raise its output of C919s — 16 of which have been delivered to Chinese airlines as of December — from one to 11 a month by 2040, by which time it can deliver almost 2,000 units of the aircraft.

However, Jonathan McDonald, IBA’s manager for classic and cargo aircraft, said that while Comac would eventually penetrate export markets, “for the foreseeable future Airbus and Boeing will be the main suppliers of narrow-bodies to most airlines”.

Global certification and maintenance support remain significant hurdles to Comac’s ambition for the C919 to operate overseas.

In a move to boost its international presence, Comac opened new overseas outposts in Singapore and Hong Kong in October.

The new offices were necessary to help drive aircraft orders from customers, according to Mayur Patel, head of Asia for OAG Aviation.

But Richard Aboulafia, managing director of AeroDynamic Advisory, said building “elaborate product support facilities in export markets is very hard and expensive work, and a necessary precondition for competing with Airbus and Boeing”.

While several carriers in Asia have expressed interest in the C919, some executives say privately that they remain hesitant.

“Maintenance support is the main issue,” said a person close to Indonesia’s TransNusa, which has already received three of Comac’s smaller ARJ21 aircraft and is considering flying the C919.

The path for Comac to gain overseas certification, particularly from the European Union Aviation Safety Agency, is also challenging, according to analysts.

“IBA does not expect the C919 to be certified in Europe in the immediate future,” McDonald said. “Europe has very strict certification parameters.”

Meanwhile, certification from the US Federal Aviation Authority is likely to be complicated by US-China tensions.

EU and US regulators are often the “gold standard” for other global authorities, according to David Yu, an aviation industry expert at NYU Shanghai.

In parallel with its push with the C919, Comac is also developing its first widebody aircraft, the C929. At one of China’s largest air shows in Zhuhai in November, the company announced that state-owned Air China had become the first airline to pledge to fly the jet, which is aimed at challenging the larger planes made by Airbus and Boeing such as the 787 Dreamliner.

Sash Tusa, a UK-based aerospace and defence analyst, said that while the C929 offered China another opportunity to prove its technological advancement in the aerospace sector, the country would still probably be reliant on overseas engines for commercial jets. IBA estimates that the C929 will not come into service before 2040.

For the C919, key components are still western-made. The jet’s engines are supplied by Franco-American venture CFM International while its auxiliary power units are made by US-based Honeywell.

“So far, [Comac is] building aircraft that are mostly western by value, but with Chinese structures,” said AeroDynamic Advisory’s Aboulafia. “That makes production ramps dependent on western willingness to continue providing systems, and, given a Trump presidency, there’s no guarantee of that at all.”

Comac would probably not be able to get any “fair share of the global market” within the next decade, Tusa said, but would provide an important “import substitution” for domestic Chinese airlines.

“Airbus builds in China. Boeing doesn’t,” he said. “So Comac comes in as the second supplier. Import substitution doesn’t make you a competitor. That makes you an act of state policy.”

Additional reporting by William Langley in Guangzhou



Chinese President Xi Jinping has stressed support for the country’s vulnerable elderly and youth in a new year address that acknowledged the strains on some of the 1.4bn-strong population.

Xi’s speech comes after his economic planners have for much of the past four years struggled to restore consumer confidence or address rising youth unemployment and slow wage growth.

In the televised speech on Tuesday evening the 71-year-old leader, speaking in front of a large motif of the Great Wall, said that issues of employment, income growth, elderly care, childcare, education and healthcare “are always on my mind”.

Xi said that a July meeting of the Chinese Communist party leadership had sounded a “clarion call for further comprehensive deepening of reform”.

“Enabling people to live happy lives is the top priority,” he said. “Every household hopes that children can receive good education, the elderly can have good care services, and young people can have more development opportunities.”

China’s economy, which is the world’s second biggest behind the US, recorded growth of 4.8 per cent in the first nine months of the year, trailing Beijing’s official target of about 5 per cent.

Weak sentiment and deflationary pressures follow a series of blows, from the pandemic and a years-long property market slump, to Xi’s reassertion of Communist party control over large swaths of China’s business landscape.

Xi on Tuesday also repeated a thinly veiled warning over international support for Taiwan. China claims sovereignty over Taiwan and has not ruled out using force if Taipei refuses unification indefinitely.

“Compatriots on both sides of the Strait are one family. No one can sever our blood ties and kinship, and no one can stop the historical trend of national reunification,” Xi said.

Xi has increasingly steered state support for high-tech manufacturing and industry, lifting investment in electric vehicles, batteries, semiconductors and artificial intelligence, while pursuing China-made production of critical technologies.

On Tuesday he highlighted China’s progress in technological self-reliance and breakthroughs in areas including computer chips, AI and space exploration.

A series of policy-easing measures announced by Beijing since September, including some property and stock market support, has been viewed as a sign that the Xi administration is shifting focus to stoking domestic demand.

Reflecting those changes, the World Bank last week revised its forecast for China’s GDP growth next year upwards by 0.4 percentage points to 4.5 per cent.

However, China has this year been rocked by a series of mass killings and stabbings that some experts have blamed on rising social strains. Fan Weiqiu, a 62-year-old man, was last week sentenced to death after being found guilty of driving his car into a crowd in Zhuhai, southern China, in November, leaving at least 35 people dead, the country’s worst mass killing in a decade.

Ahead of a series of national holidays Beijing has started to urge local governments to expand the delivery of seasonal cash handouts to people facing economic hardship, including unemployed youth.

Kelvin Lam, an economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said while the handouts would not have a significant impact on the broader economy they might shore up social stability and consumption in poorer rural areas.

China’s economic outlook has been further weakened by strained relations with the US.

Under President Joe Biden, the US has restricted China’s access to computer chips, clamped down on Chinese investment into the US and ramped up sanctions on Chinese companies for trading with Russia in the wake of the full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

Earlier on Tuesday, Xi told Russian leader Vladimir Putin that “strategic co-ordination” between China and Russia continued to reach higher levels under their leadership, according to a new year message reported by Xinhua, the state news agency.

Additional reporting by Wenjie Ding in Beijing, Cheng Leng in Hong Kong and Kathrin Hille in Taipei







Two years of escalating confrontation in the South China Sea have persuaded the Philippines that going head-on against Beijing is not viable as it tries to police one of the world’s largest maritime territories.

Direct clashes with the Chinese coastguard — accused of behaving “like Vikings” — threaten to exhaust Manila’s limited resources, according to Philippine government officials. They said the country had to balance securing its western flank, where China is most active, with the need to safeguard the rest of its maritime interests across 7,000 islands where smuggling and piracy are perennial threats.

“We cannot go toe to toe with China,” said Jonathan Malaya, assistant director-general in President Ferdinand Marcos Jr’s National Security Council. “We are not a rising superpower like China who has enormous resources at their disposal, so we have to live with what we have.”

The government is now employing a mix of diplomacy, drones, new laws and new naval infrastructure to try to protect its maritime rights, said government officials.

The more measured approach is part of an effort to secure and effectively govern the waters, straits and coastline of the world’s second-largest archipelago. Since Marcos took office in June 2022, he has refocused national security from combating internal insurgents and crime to external defence.

The Philippines’ fisheries and maritime resources are crucial to the country’s economy. But policing its vast waters strains its coastguard, and the many straits cutting through its territory make it vulnerable to invasion and other foreign military incursions.

The Marcos government’s pushback against China’s claims over almost the entire South China Sea has attracted the most international attention, as Manila has publicised how Chinese coastguard ships try to assert control in the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone by often violently targeting military or coastguard vessels.

The clashes were shown most dramatically in June near Manila’s military outpost at Second Thomas Shoal, where Chinese coastguard forces used axes and spears to hack at Philippine boats and a sailor lost a thumb.

“I never expected someone who wants to be a superpower to behave like Vikings,” said Vice-Admiral Alfonso Torres, chief of the Philippine military’s Western Command.

The Chinese force claimed Philippine vessels had rammed a Chinese coastguard ship during what Beijing called a legitimate law enforcement operation against Philippine boats “illegally trespassing” in Chinese waters.

But since the two sides reached a temporary deal allowing the Philippines to resupply Second Thomas Shoal with less Chinese disruption, Manila has toned down its transparency strategy.

“There will be listener fatigue. People will say: ‘What are these guys doing repeatedly banging their heads against the wall?’” said defence secretary Gilbert Teodoro. “Transparency will still be the principle, but we have to show the world that we strategise our moves.”

In September, the Philippine coastguard withdrew a ship from Sabina Shoal, another reef in its EEZ after a five-month deployment because its sailors had run out of food and water and the vessel needed repair after being rammed by a Chinese coastguard ship.

Chinese maritime militia and coastguard vessels have since massed in large numbers in the area.

But Philippine officials said Manila had to live with that. “It is not our territorial sea but the EEZ, so it is more our economic rights that are at stake,” said Malaya. “Given the limited resources the Philippine government has, we can presently tolerate these things so long as they don’t lead to land reclamation or new island building.”

Andres Centino, chief adviser to Marcos on maritime policy, said the lesson from the Sabina episode was that having an extended physical presence at any isolated land feature was not a sustainable approach.

Instead, he said, the Philippines would increasingly rely on satellites, drones and uncrewed surface vehicles to monitor Chinese activity.

Some of those missions are now conducted by autonomous surface vessels provided by the US. Torres said the Western Command now had three Mantas, small uncrewed boats also known as T-12, and three Devil Rays, 11m-long autonomous speedboats. A group of US soldiers known as Task Force Ayungin are providing additional technical support.

The new systems were necessary to counter China’s use of various irregular tactics, said Torres.

Manila’s new capabilities are part of a modernisation drive aimed at enabling its military to protect the country’s entire maritime domain effectively.

In November, Marcos signed two laws outlining his country’s maritime zones and archipelagic sea lanes, designating just three sea lanes for international shipping traffic.

“There are too many entry and exit points, and we do not have the capacity to monitor them all,” said Centino. Including the necessary communication with the International Maritime Organization, Manila expects to have a new, complete regulatory regime in place in about two years.

To implement it, the Philippines is upgrading runways and piers on some small outlying islands and planning several new naval bases and detachments, including on its Pacific-facing east coast, according to Teodoro.

“It is not directed towards China,” said Centino.

But one area where Manila’s capabilities fall short is the Benham Rise, an undersea ridge off the east coast of Luzon which the UN has recognised as an extension of the Philippine continental shelf.

China has been conducting maritime surveys there, an indication that more friction between the two countries can be expected.



A Chinese state-sponsored actor hacked the US Treasury department through a third-party service provider in a “major cyber security incident”, the agency said on Monday.

In a letter to the Senate banking committee seen by the Financial Times, the Treasury department said it had been informed on December 8 by software company BeyondTrust that a hacker had breached several remote government workstations by obtaining a security key and had in turn gained access to unclassified documents on them.

“Based on available indicators, the incident has been attributed to a China state-sponsored Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) actor,” the letter said. “In accordance with Treasury policy, intrusions attributable to an APT are considered a major cyber security incident.”

The department said it had been working with the FBI and other investigators in the wider intelligence community to determine the impact of the hack. It added that “at this time there is no evidence indicating the threat actor has continued access to Treasury information”.

In a separate statement on Monday, a Treasury spokesperson said the agency “takes very seriously all threats against our systems, and the data it holds”.

“We will continue to work with both private and public sector partners to protect our financial system from threat actors,” the person added.

Liu Pengyu, the spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in Washington, said on Monday: “We hope that relevant parties will adopt a professional and responsible attitude when characterising cyber incidents, basing their conclusions on sufficient evidence rather than unfounded speculation and accusations.”

“The US needs to stop using cyber security to smear and slander China, and stop spreading all kinds of disinformation about the so-called Chinese hacking threats,” he added.

The breach is the latest cyber security violation involving US targets allegedly carried out on behalf of China.

In October, the Biden administration said it was investigating what the FBI and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said was “unauthorised access to commercial telecommunications infrastructure by actors affiliated with the People’s Republic of China”. Hackers reportedly targeted the phones of president-elect Donald Trump and his running mate JD Vance in the lead-up to the US election.

Underscoring the level of concern, the commerce department in September took steps to limit China’s access to Americans’ data by proposing a ban on Chinese software and hardware for vehicles with a built-in internet connection.



French stocks are on course to deliver their weakest annual performance since the depths of the Eurozone crisis, as investor worries over tariffs and political turmoil combine with lacklustre demand for luxury goods.

Paris’s Cac 40 index has fallen 3 per cent this year, compared with a 6 per cent gain for the region-wide Stoxx Europe 600, after a strong start to the year driven by bumper sales for companies such as LVMH melted away.

Investors have been put off by political crisis, sluggish demand from the key export market of China and a weakening domestic economy. The prospect of a trade war after US president-elect Donald Trump threatened sweeping tariffs on goods has added to the malaise.

“So many things are happening at the same time [that] people want to stay away from French names,” said Roland Kaloyan, head of European equity strategy at the French bank Société Générale. “This downturn has been quite remarkable.”

The political turmoil has weighed heavily on the French market, analysts said, with François Bayrou becoming the country’s fourth prime minister this year.

That crisis has intensified a debate over how the country will tackle a growing budget deficit. Investor unease about the country’s fiscal situation has already pushed its 10-year borrowing costs above 3 per cent this year and the additional margin that France pays over benchmark German debt has reached its highest levels since the Eurozone debt crisis.

Earlier this month Moody’s downgraded France’s credit rating following outgoing premier Michel Barnier’s government’s vote of no confidence, citing a “materially weaker” economic outlook.

The falling price of French stocks stands in stark contrast to neighbouring Germany, where a 18.7 per cent gain in the country’s stock market this year has defied the gloom enveloping its domestic economy.

Luxury goods companies, which are a cornerstone of the Cac 40, have struggled as it has become clear that China’s economic recovery from the pandemic has stalled.

The rise of middle-class Chinese shoppers this century had transformed earnings for luxury goods companies, with consumers flocking to European and Asian capitals alike to buy designer handbags and other goods.

The Covid-19 pandemic then supercharged purchases as bored shoppers stuck at home spent furlough payments on accessories and premium alcohol. Profits at companies such as LVMH as well as beauty giant L’Oréal grew by double digits.

But Chinese shoppers have reined in their spending on concerns over a potential sharp economic slowdown. Beijing has announced sweeping plans to stimulate confidence in the economy and markets.

“The big disappointment in China has probably reached a trough,” said Caroline Reyl, head of premium brands at Pictet Asset Management, adding that she is now waiting for the Chinese government stimulus to translate into consumer activity as she “doesn’t expect a worsening of the situation”.

Still, more than one-fifth of the Cac 40’s constituents are consumer goods companies with “heavy” exposure to China, including LVMH and Kering — which are down 12 and 40 per cent this year, respectively.

Emmanuel Cau, an analyst at Barclays, said the market was “split” on whether luxury goods companies would bounce back in 2025 or earnings would weaken again. He forecasts sector growth of just 3 per cent next year, at constant currency rates. “This was a year of pain,” he added.

It is a combination that puts the Cac 40 on track to being the only major stock market worldwide to end the year in negative territory.

French banks and insurers, which make up 10 per cent of the benchmark, have fallen sharply as they are exposed to slowing economic growth and also hold substantial government debt, which investors now consider more risky.

BNP Paribas, Europe’s biggest bank and often traded by investors as a proxy for the French economy, has fallen 8 per cent this year.

Intense competition from China’s electric-vehicle makers and political turmoil has hit carmakers, including Stellantis. Shares in the company behind the Peugeot, Fiat and Jeep brands have fallen 41 per cent in Paris this year.

As the Cac 40 struggles, French companies have started to explore other capital markets. Pay TV operator Canal+ listed in London this month, although shares have slumped nearly 30 per cent since they began trading.

TotalEnergies has said it is “seriously exploring” a US listing, while fast-growing asset manager Tikehau told the Financial Times last month that it was considering moving its listing from Paris to the US.

However, France’s struggles are also a reflection of the challenges the continent’s politicians are now facing, which include stimulating growth and the looming prospect of a global trade war with sweeping tariffs after Trump’s election win.

Barclays’ Cau added: “We need some kind of catalyst for Europe to take care of itself. It has been dependent on China but now the world is less globalised and China is growing less.”

Additional reporting by Ian Smith



China’s central government is trying to curb a spate of detentions by local authorities of business executives that is fuelling anxiety among entrepreneurs and risks undercutting efforts to boost economic growth.

A review of filings by the Financial Times found senior figures in more than 80 companies listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges were detained in 2024.

China’s securities regulator requires that listed companies disclose detentions of controlling shareholders, chairs, chief executives and other top managers, and the numbers suggest much broader action against executives across the country.

Some of the detentions appeared to have little or no legal basis and in many cases were carried out by authorities based far from the target’s business operations, a practice Chinese media have dubbed “long-range fishing”. One leaked official document from the southern province of Guangdong said thousands of companies in a single city had been targets of action by authorities from other areas since 2023.

Premier Li Qiang this month called for stronger supervision of company-related law enforcement, saying the government would review regions with abnormal income growth from fines and confiscations or high levels of enforcement outside their jurisdiction.

“Instances of abuse of administrative discretion and unfair enforcement persist in certain areas and sectors,” Li said, according to the official news agency Xinhua. The premier added that it was essential to address “the pressing issues raised by citizens and businesses”.

Analysts said the high number of detentions might be linked to the deteriorating finances of local governments, which have suffered plummeting revenues from land sales amid a nationwide property crisis that has also slowed China’s economic growth.

“My friends are getting squeezed from all sides,” said one top Chinese investor, who claimed some local governments were reviewing residents’ assets in order to target the wealthiest with fines.

The investor, who declined to be named and was himself forced to pay off a local authority about a decade ago in order to win release from detention, said some areas had turned to “long-range fishing”.

“I accuse you of violations in my region and come and take you and make you pay,” he said, characterising local authorities’ attitudes. “It’s like a nationwide shakedown.”

About half of the 82 listed company-related detentions in 2024 reviewed by the FT involved authorities from another region or an unspecified location.

Eugene Weng, a lawyer at Shanghai-based Wintell & Co, said some of his clients had experienced abusive law enforcement by authorities from other areas, adding that such practices were eroding confidence in the business environment.

“The sense of anxiety has gone beyond imagination,” said Weng. “Entrepreneurs are thinking only about the short term, taking profits as soon as they can instead of investing in their businesses and transferring funds overseas as soon as possible.

“This actually worsens tax revenues and employment,” he added, “causing local finances to fall into a vicious cycle.”

The internal report prepared for Guangdong provincial leaders in April, which was later leaked online, said cross-jurisdictional enforcement had ensnared a growing number of local companies.

The report said that since 2023, almost “10,000 enterprises in the city of Guangzhou had faced law enforcement from other areas, with the vast majority of cases involving private enterprises and a rather clear profit-seeking motive”.

A Beijing-based entrepreneur said the detentions had created a climate of fear among founders. “It gets scary when you start to know people who’ve been detained,” he said. “The government needs to do something.”

China’s opaque enforcement system compounds these concerns. Companies said they and the families of detained executives received little information about their cases.

The board of “smart city” solutions provider Zhejiang Whyis Technology struggled to respond to a demand from securities regulators in March for more information on the detention of chief executive Ye Jianbiao.

In a filing, the board said that other than a notice from another city’s anti-corruption bureau that Ye was “under investigation for work-related crimes”, neither it nor Ye’s family had “received other formal notifications or documents”, nor were they “aware of the progress or conclusions of the investigation”.

Nine months later, the 51-year-old executive remains under detention. Ye could not be reached for comment. A company representative said they had no further information to provide on Ye’s case and that they would make an announcement as soon as he was released.

Some provinces have begun publicising efforts to protect private companies. Prosecutors in eastern Zhejiang last month revealed that local police had helped foil the abduction of an entrepreneur surnamed Shen by officers from another area.

After being abducted from his home, Shen fled from the police while being taken out of the province. Zhejiang police then arrested the two out-of-town officers, who initially claimed they were acting on their superiors’ orders and were eventually imprisoned.

In some cases, the detained executives ended up in the hands of authorities in areas where they did not appear to have any business.

Zhang Jian, 55, has spent more than two decades growing Aima Technology Group into one of China’s largest electric scooter makers. His family’s 73 per cent stake in the group is worth about Rmb19.5bn ($2.67bn), putting them at number 247 on the China “rich list” compiled by research group Hurun.

But in October, Aima announced that Zhang had been detained by an anti-corruption squad from Chengde, a city hundreds of kilometres from his home and the company’s headquarters in Tianjin. Aima does not hold any assets in Chengde, according to public filings.

“They say it’s about his personal issues but won’t tell us more,” said an Aima manager who asked not to be named.

The manager said Aima had been able to send Zhang important company documents to sign from detention and that they hoped he would be released soon.

“A lot of the detained chairmen get out in two or three months,” said the manager. “I can’t say how long ours will be in there, but this is the situation in the market.”

Data visualisation by Haohsiang Ko



The inauguration of Donald Trump as president of the US will take place on January 20 — the same day as the opening of the World Economic Forum in Davos.

Since the end of the cold war, the annual Davos meeting — which brings together business and political leaders from all over the world — has become a symbol of elite-driven globalisation.

But Trump is a sworn enemy of what he calls “globalism”. Davos-goers promote free trade; Trump says that “tariff” is his favourite word. The WEF hosts innumerable forums about international co-operation; Trump believes in “America First” nationalism.

For three decades, the world’s major powers broadly embraced the Davos worldview. This was a period when economic interdependence drowned out geopolitical rivalries. Trump, President Xi Jinping of China and President Vladimir Putin of Russia have all spoken at the World Economic Forum in the past.

But now, in different ways, the US, China and Russia have all become revisionist powers that are seeking radical change to the current world order.

When Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, he sacrificed his country’s economic ties to the west in favour of his vision of Russian grandeur. Xi’s China has become more nationalistic and more menacing in its behaviour towards Taiwan. And Trump is demanding fundamental changes to the international trading system and to America’s relationship with its allies.

It is not terribly surprising that Russia and China are demanding changes to the world order. Russia is a former superpower that is striving to rebuild its lost influence. China is a rising superpower that wants the world to accommodate its ambitions. It is American revisionism that is both most puzzling and most far-reaching in its consequences.

The US is still the world’s most powerful country and the world’s largest economy. The dollar is the world’s reserve currency and the American alliance system underpins the security of Europe, Asia and the Americas. If the US is serious about fundamentally rethinking its international commitments, then the entire world will have to adapt.

And yet that appears to be what is happening. According to John Ikenberry of Princeton University, a leading theorist of international relations, “a revisionist state has arrived on the scene to contest the liberal international order . . . it is the United States. It’s Trump in the Oval Office, the beating heart of the free world.”

As Ikenberry sees it, Trump is poised to contest “almost every element of the liberal international order — trade, alliances, migration, multilateralism, solidarity between democracies, human rights”.

As a result, rather than supporting the international status quo, the US is poised to become the leading disrupter. “Every talk I’ve ever given on the geopolitical risks that we face in the world started with China and Russia,” says Ivo Daalder of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs. “But the biggest risk is us. It’s America.”

America’s traditional allies are among the countries that feel most threatened by a change in the way that the US exercises its power. Middle-power democracies such as the UK, Japan, Canada, South Korea, Germany and the entire EU have got used to a world in which American markets are open — and the US provides a security guarantee against threatening authoritarian powers.

But Trump is promising to impose tariffs on America’s closest allies and has called into question US security guarantees — including Nato’s Article 5, its mutual-defence clause. On one notorious occasion this year, the president-elect remarked that he would let Russia “do whatever the hell they want” with Nato countries that failed to meet their spending commitments on defence.

The threat posed by Trump to allied interests is already leading to agonised debates in some of the countries that he is targeting. When Chrystia Freeland resigned as Canada’s finance minister this month, she accused Justin Trudeau, the prime minister, of failing to recognise the “grave challenge” posed by America’s “aggressive economic nationalism, including a threat of 25 per cent tariffs”. Canada, she suggested, needed to keep its fiscal powder dry to prepare for a “coming tariff war”.

The question of whether and how to respond to Trump tariffs is exercising diplomatic minds across the western world. Finding an answer is all the more difficult because Trump’s true intentions remain unclear. Is the former and future president best understood as a dealmaker? Or is he a revolutionary — intent on blowing up the system, come what may?

The EU’s initial response will be to hope that Trump’s tariff threats are simply a negotiating tactic — and that a reasonable deal can be reached, well before an all-out trade war breaks out. But if Trump goes ahead with his threatened tariffs for a prolonged period, Brussels is likely to hit back.

Other American allies such as Britain and Japan may respond differently. The UK government will hope that the Trump administration spares it from tariffs, perhaps because the US has a small trade surplus with the UK. Even if Britain is hit, the depth and importance of the security relationship between London and Washington will make any UK government think very hard before entering a trade war with the US.

Japan, which has a large trade surplus with the US, is a much more obvious potential target for Trump tariffs. But Japanese officials think it unlikely that Tokyo would hit back. Like the British, the Japanese would be very reluctant to do anything that tempted a Trump administration to put American security guarantees on the table — as Washington’s next chip in a negotiation.

The need for America’s allies to balance trade priorities and national security reflects the fact that it is not just the global economic order that is under challenge. In Europe and Asia, the established balance of power is also under threat.

When it comes to security, Russia and China are the most dangerous revisionists — because they are the nations that are demanding changes to international borders and adjustments to the global and regional security order.

Both Putin and Xi clearly see opportunities in the current global situation. In a recent speech to the Brics summit in Russia, Xi hailed the emergence of a new global era, “defined by turbulence and transformation”. Putin struck a similar note in a speech that he gave in Sochi on November 7, two days after Trump’s election, proclaiming: “Before our eyes, an entirely new world order is emerging.”

At times, Putin and Trump sound like they are reading from the same anti-woke hymn sheet. In his Sochi speech, the Russian leader defined his enemy as “liberal and globalist messianism” — sentiments that Trump could easily have echoed.

But while Trump believes that the new world order should increase America’s wealth and power, Putin’s central aim is to cut the US down to size. He told his audience in Sochi that “what is at stake is the west’s monopoly [of power] which emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union”.

Xi also sees the decline of western power as a central and desirable feature of the emerging new world order. The Chinese leader is fond of proclaiming that “the east is rising while the west is declining”. Both Russia and China are hoping to build up the Brics as a counterweight to the western-dominated G7.

Beyond the generalities, both Putin and Xi have specific territorial demands in mind. In Washington and Brussels, it is now assumed that Russia is determined not just to hang on to the Ukrainian territory it has occupied, but also in effect to end the country’s independence by gaining a veto over Ukraine’s foreign and security policies, as well as setting up a Moscow-friendly government in Kyiv.

Western officials also note that Putin’s prewar demands extended well beyond Ukraine. In an ultimatum that the Kremlin issued in December 2021, Russian demands included the withdrawal of all Nato forces from the eastern European countries that joined the alliance after the collapse of the Soviet bloc.

The assumption inside Nato is that the war in Ukraine — and the immense losses inflicted on Russian forces by the western-backed Ukrainian forces — will have made Putin even more radical in his thinking. One senior European official says: “We need to understand that Russia thinks it is already at war with us.” An American counterpart adds that a Russian victory in Ukraine would present a “huge threat” to Nato.

A perceived Russian victory in Ukraine would also resonate around the world, and particularly in China. One obvious possibility is that it would embolden Xi to pursue his own revisionist ambitions in Asia. Professor Steve Tsang of Soas, University of London, argues that Xi believes “taking Taiwan” is fundamental to his “China dream”. For Xi, victory in Taiwan would mark “the advent of China as the pre-eminent power” in the Indo-Pacific and ultimately the world.

Beijing’s position is that Taiwan is internationally recognised as part of the People’s Republic of China. But the island is self-governing and its de facto independence could only be ended by intense Chinese pressure — or an invasion. In Beijing, Taiwan’s political leadership is portrayed as dangerous separatists. There has been much speculation in America that Xi has told his military to be ready to conquer the island by 2027. The date the Chinese leader himself has spoken of in public is 2050. On the other hand, Xi is now 71 years old. He may be tempted to try to secure his legacy relatively soon.

President Joe Biden has said several times that the US is prepared to go to war to defend Taiwan from a Chinese invasion, though Trump has made no such commitment. And while the incoming president is surrounded by China hawks, he himself has campaigned as a peace candidate — and has frequently expressed his admiration for both Xi and Putin.

The questions about how Trump will interpret his revisionist America First agenda are made even more complex by the fact that he will not be operating in an international vacuum. The US president will also have to respond to the actions and reactions of other foreign powers — in particular the revisionist leaders in Moscow and Beijing.

Given all the elements involved, there can be no certainties about how the new world order will evolve, only scenarios. So here are five possibilities.

A new great power bargain: Trump’s transactional nature, his determination to avoid war and his contempt for democratic allies leads the US to strike a new grand bargain with Russia and China. The US tacitly grants Russia and China spheres of influence in their regions. America concentrates on asserting dominance in its own region — pushing around Mexico and Canada, and seeking to take back the Panama Canal and gain control over Greenland. Trump forces a peace deal on Ukraine without accompanying security guarantees. Sanctions against Russia are relaxed and Putin is welcomed to Thanksgiving dinner at Mar-a-Lago. A possible bargain with China would involve the easing of American tech restrictions and tariffs on Beijing, in return for Chinese purchases of American goods and sweetheart deals in China for US companies such as Tesla. Trump would also signal his lack of interest in fighting to defend Taiwan. US allies in Europe and Asia would be left scrambling to provide for their own defence in a new atmosphere of insecurity.

War by accident: The western allies have a trade war with each other. Political instability spreads in Europe, with the rise of populist forces sympathetic to both Trump and Putin. A ceasefire is agreed in Ukraine — but there is widespread fear in Europe that Russia will resume hostilities at some point. Trump himself repeatedly calls into question America’s willingness to defend its allies. China, Russia or North Korea — or some combination of these powers — decide to take advantage of western disarray by launching military action in Asia and Europe. But they miscalculate. Asian and European democracies fight back, and eventually the US gets drawn into the conflict, as happened twice in the 20th century.

Anarchy in a leaderless world: The US, China, Russia and the EU avoid direct conflict. But Trump’s America First policies on trade, security and international institutions create a leadership vacuum. Economic growth is depressed across the world by Trump’s trade wars. Civil conflicts in countries such as Sudan and Myanmar intensify. The UN is debilitated by big power rivalry and is powerless to intervene. Instead conflicts are fuelled by competing regional powers that are seeking advantage and resources. More countries such as Haiti slide into violent anarchy. Refugee flows to the west increase. Populist parties, contemptuous of liberal democracy, flourish in an atmosphere of social and economic insecurity.

Globalisation without America: The US retreats behind tariff walls and leaves the World Trade Organization. Prices rise in America and goods get more shoddy. The rest of the world responds to American autarky by accelerating economic interdependence. The EU ratifies its new trade deal with Latin America and signs new agreements with India and China. Europe also opens its market to Chinese electric vehicles and green tech, in return for the Chinese setting up factories across the EU and restraining Russian aggression against Europe. The global south’s integration with the Chinese economy deepens further and the Brics gain new members and influence. The use of the dollar as the global currency declines.

America First succeeds: Trump’s faith in the irresistible nature of American power is vindicated. Investment is driven to the US, increasing America’s lead in tech and finance. The Europeans and Japanese sharply increase spending on their own defence and this is enough to deter Russian and Chinese aggression. American tariffs dramatically reduce Chinese growth, sending the Chinese system into crisis. The Iranian regime is finally felled by some combination of military, economic and domestic pressure. Trump’s prestige soars at home and abroad. American liberals are cowed into silence and some of Trump’s enemies are jailed. The stock market hits a new high.

The reality of the next four years is likely to be some strange amalgam of all of the above scenarios, plus several other unforeseen developments. As the Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci, writing during the late 1920s, famously put it: “The old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear.”

Letter in response to this article:

US president’s takeover talk was learnt from Putin / From Nicholas Westcott, Professor of Practice in Diplomacy, Department of Politics and International Studies, Soas University of London, London WC1, UK



China has launched the world’s largest amphibious assault ship, in the latest demonstration of how Beijing’s industrial capacity is strengthening its military power amid rising geopolitical tensions with the US.

Combining elements of amphibious landing vessels — which are designed to carry and support an invasion force — with those of an aircraft carrier, the ship significantly strengthens Beijing’s ability to project power globally. It also adds to China’s capabilities in the event of an invasion of Taiwan.

Chinese navy officials christened the ship Sichuan in a ceremony on Friday at the Hudong Shipyard in Shanghai while its dock slowly filled with water, according to Chinese official media reports.

The launch came a day after test flights of prototypes for a new Chinese fighter jet. According to videos posted online by Chinese internet users, the aircraft were spotted over the north-eastern city of Shenyang and the south-western city of Chengdu on Thursday. The two cities host institutes developing rival projects for a new stealth fighter.

A mock-up of the Chengdu model was on display at China’s twice-yearly Zhuhai air show last month, where China debuted the J-35, its latest stealth fighter.

Although the exact specifications of the fighter prototypes remain unclear and it could be years from entering service, the test flights and launch of the amphibious assault ship underscored Beijing’s rapid production of new military hardware. It also comes at a time when capacity bottlenecks have started to constrain the expansion of Washington’s military arsenal.

The People’s Liberation Army started tendering for the design and construction of the new amphibious ship, which is called Type 076, just four years ago. The PLA Navy has three amphibious assault ships, the first of which only entered service in 2021.

The new class is not only much larger than those of its Type 075 predecessor, and can carry more aircraft or amphibious landing vessels on a lower deck. It is also equipped with an electromagnetic launch system, suggesting large drones and even crewed fighter aircraft can take off from its deck. Traditional amphibious assault ships typically only carry helicopters.

Chinese military commentator Song Zhongping has called the new class a “light aircraft carrier”. At 260 metres, it is longer than the America Class, the US Navy’s largest amphibious assault ship, and the Izumo, a Japanese class of helicopter carriers.

“With this, we are entering the four-carrier era!” said a Chinese military enthusiast who often posts pictures and comments on new PLA weapons systems. The Fujian, the PLA Navy’s third aircraft carrier, is undergoing sea trials after its launch earlier this year.

US think-tank CSIS estimated in August that China’s new ship would have a displacement of 50,000 tonnes, compared with the America Class’s 45,000. Chinese official reports on Friday put its displacement at “more than 40,000” tonnes.

​Letter in response to this article:

Amphibious assault ships are ‘light aircraft carriers’ / From Terence R Murphy, One-time US Navy “amphib” Officer, Bethesda, MD, US



Sotheby’s starts 2023 with a £20mn bang, in the form of Gerhard Richter’s four metre-wide, two-part “Abstraktes Bild” (1986), which it will offer in London on March 1. The work is being sold from an American collection, which acquired it for $9.7mn in 2007 (£4.7mn), then a record for a Richter abstract.

The German artist’s prices have continued to rise, with recent records for his Colour Charts, Clouds and Seascapes paintings, though his abstracts are still the most prized internationally — eight out of 10 of Richter’s priciest works are those, like the Sotheby’s work, made with his trademark squeegee, a tool traditionally used to clean windows.

These include his top price of £30.4mn ($46.3mn), made for another 1986 work in 2015. “He is on the top of every auctioneer’s wish list,” says James Sevier, Sotheby’s head of contemporary art for Europe. The work is guaranteed to sell and starts its tour in Miami this weekend.

In April, Berlin’s Neue Nationalgalerie opens a show of 100 of Richter’s works, while David Zwirner gallery, which recently took over the commercial representation of the 90-year-old artist, promises a solo exhibition in New York in March.

Art market players were surprised by the cancellation of Masterpiece, the mixed-category fair founded in 2010 that had grown to be a welcome addition to London’s summer season of smart events. The UK’s inflationary and post-Brexit environment created a “harsh commercial reality”, says chief executive Lucie Kitchener. She cites staffing struggles in the wider hospitality industry and says that, since Brexit, the fair’s European exhibitors had more than halved from 38 in 2018 to 16 last year.

The fair proved to be one too many for MCH Group, which took full ownership of Masterpiece just five months ago, up from its 67.5 per cent investment in 2017. The company also runs the four Art Basel events, its priority art brand. While MCH specifies only that the 2023 Masterpiece fair has been cancelled, there is no sense that it will come back.

To Kitchener’s credit, and in a crowded field, Masterpiece did something right. Robert Travers, founder of the 20th-century art gallery Piano Nobile, is one of many longtime exhibitors to praise the fair, particularly its 2022 edition, where “there was one billionaire after another”, he says. Perhaps for another organiser, there’s a summer opportunity ahead.

“Everybody has flown in for the first time in three years,” enthused Emi Eu, director of Singapore’s STPI gallery at the opening of her city’s newest fair, Art SG, which runs until Sunday. Her international counterparts were also pleased to be among the 160 galleries testing the south-east Asian art market in the Marina Bay Sands Expo and Convention Centre.

Many had committed to the fair back in 2019, but first logistical and then Covid-related problems delayed its opening, during which time Singapore gained an influx of wealthy inhabitants from Asia’s more Covid-restricted countries, including China.

“In some ways, Singapore was a net beneficiary of Covid,” notes Nick Simunovic, director of Gagosian in Hong Kong. His gallery’s early sales included two Ocean Chunk series works by Ashley Bickerton, who lived on the Indonesian island of Bali from 1993 until he died last year, to Jakarta’s MACAN Museum. Simunovic and others said they had brought works that were priced “invitingly”; Javier Perés, founder of Peres Projects, confirmed early sales of his more expensively priced works, at around $50,000.

Patti Wong, who recently left Sotheby’s after more than three decades, latterly as its senior international chair, has set up her own art advisory business for Asia’s collectors of art and luxury items. She says the auction business has changed dramatically since the pandemic: “Overnight, Sotheby’s became a digital auction house. Automation is fantastic, but there are certain clients who need more hand-holding.”

Wong opens her Hong Kong-based business with Daryl Wickstrom, another Sotheby’s long-timer in Asia who left the company in 2016.

Wong notes the growth of Asian buyers beyond the continent in the past 10 years. “Before the pandemic, half of all the works [that Sotheby’s] offered for more than $5mn were bought or bid for by Asian collectors,” she says. This is part of the thinking behind Wong’s tie-up with the London-based Fine Art Group advisory business, an investor in Patti Wong & Associates. The Fine Art Group also provides “access to capital”, which Wong says appeals to clients looking for art loans and other forms of financing.

The Natalia Cola Foundation, set up by the Ukrainian philanthropist in 2019, is organising a charity dinner and auction at London’s Royal Academy of Arts to benefit Kyiv’s National Academy of Arts of Ukraine (NAAU). Since Russia’s devastating invasion last year, the museum has lost most of its local support, the foundation and museum say.

The fundraiser will go towards necessary repairs to the building and will directly support Ukrainian artists. “Russia’s policies and atrocities intend to eradicate Ukrainian identity and it is more important than ever to preserve Ukrainian art and culture in all its forms,” Cola says.

The live auction on January 28 will have nine works, with another 25 offered in a silent auction that opened this week. Artists who have donated work include Tracey Emin and Antony Gormley, while Juergen Teller has given a photograph taken while he was in Ukraine, “Kiev No 1” (2007), with a starting bid of £10,000.

The country’s own artists Boris Mikhailov and Pavlo Makov — the latter represented Ukraine at last year’s Venice Biennale — also feature. Kyiv-born Cola, who studied art history at a branch of the NAAU, says she hopes to raise £250,000.

saveukraineculture.com

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @ftweekend on Twitter



Olam Group, one of the world’s biggest agricultural commodity traders, will list its $3.5bn agricultural arm in Singapore and potentially Saudi Arabia as concerns around the war in Ukraine and climate change spur investment in food security.

The Singapore-based trader, which sold a 35 per cent stake in Olam Agri to a subsidiary of Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund last year for $1.24bn, said on Tuesday that the dual listing of the company was designed to help expand its business outside of Asia.

Olam Agri is looking to raise between $800mn and $1bn for the listing in the first half of the year, according to two people familiar with the deal. The company, which supplies global brands from Nestlé to Unilever, also counts Japan’s Mitsubishi and Singaporean state investment company Temasek as its backers.

The initial public offering comes as Saudi Arabia is looking to diversify its economy away from fossil fuels into sectors including agriculture.

Climate change and the war in Ukraine are set to keep food prices at higher levels than before the Covid-19 pandemic, even as wholesale food costs have stabilised in recent months.

Chief executive Sunny Verghese on Tuesday said investors were increasingly concerned about global food security. “What the Russia-Ukraine war has brought into sharp relief is that as the world balkanizes and polarises . . . global output including food and feed production, can get upended,” he said.

Olam Agri is a supplier and processor that links farmers — particularly from frontier and emerging markets in Asia and Africa — with global brands.

The listing is part of a reorganisation of the Singapore-listed Olam Group to split into three new entities. Verghese said there was no change to the plan to list its food ingredients business on the London Stock Exchange with a secondary listing in Singapore. The executive said it would happen after the Olam Agri listing was completed and when market conditions improved.

Nirgunan Tiruchelvam, head of consumer and internet research at Aletheia Capital, said: “Efforts to spin off [the Olam Agri] business ticks boxes in a world where people [are] valuing food security and high environmental, social and governance standards.”

The company is “viewed as proxy for commodity or food prices going up,” he said, though he added that a number of global investors were not set up to trade in the Saudi stock market.

“The Saudis have been investing in the business for a while, and it fits into the government’s plans to diversify and get exposure to businesses that are ESG-friendly but also serve its specific interests,” he said.

In response to questions about why it was pursuing a primary listing in Saudi Arabia as well as Singapore, Verghese said the Saudi exchange raised a lot of money in 2021 and 2022, making it an exception to other global equity markets last year.

“As the first foreign company to list there, we can tap into this additional incremental discrete pool of new capital,” he said.



Singapore could become the first dengue-free country in the tropics, according to Alphabet’s life sciences unit Verily — if the government decides to use its technology across the city state to tackle the mosquito-borne disease.

Dengue claims 300mn victims each year, with 90mn serious cases and tens of thousands of deaths, the majority being children. In Singapore, cases have surged this year, with the average weekly number as of early December being 20 per cent higher than normal, according to the National Environment Agency.

But in some residential neighbourhoods where the NEA and Verily have run field trials, it is a different story. Verily’s tech fights dengue-carrying Aedes aegypti mosquitoes with the release of other facility-bred Wolbachia-Aedes mosquitoes. The NEA has reported up to 98 per cent suppression of the Aedes aegypti population and an 88 per cent reduction in dengue cases after at least one year of releases under Project Wolbachia, which Verily joined in 2018.

“We could make Singapore the first dengue-free country in the tropics,” said Linus Upson, who leads Verily’s Debug Project out of California and previously worked at Google. “We are making sure our [island-wide] proposal is scientifically and economically sound . . . and will make a proposal to [the Singapore government] in the next couple of months.”

Projects to sterilise insects have been around for decades and Verily has trialled the technology elsewhere, such as in California, but high density Singapore is seen as a particularly ambitious opportunity to test a whole country.

Companies, including resorts and hotels in hot, tropical locations could eventually be customers of the tech — though concerns remain about environmental impact, with the insects being pollinators that affect plant growth. There are also doubts over whether poorer governments in south-east Asia could afford to replicate wealthy Singapore’s project.

Aedes aegypti is the primary vector that drives dengue transmission in Singapore and can also carry the yellow fever, chikungunya and Zika viruses.

The key to eradicating it is using Wolbachia — common bacteria that occur naturally in 50 per cent of insect species — for suppression. Verily’s highly automated facility in Singapore and team of scientists, engineers and specialists rear mosquitoes, sort them according to sex and then release males to mate with wild females. Verily’s males have Wolbachia, while wild Aedes aegypti females do not, making them incompatible. The females lay eggs, but they never hatch.

“The concept is quite interesting because they are adding to the overall number of mosquitoes to bring the population down. It has worked here and other places though we need to work out if the overall benefit is worth the environmental impact and the cost,” said one science professor based in the city state, asking to speak anonymously because it is a government project.

Other projects that do not focus on suppression have also had success. The World Mosquito Program, working in 12 countries from Australia to Brazil and Fiji, rears and releases Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes weekly over a period of up to 20 weeks. After one year, the wild population of the target area becomes infected, with the bacteria able to block the replication of viruses including dengue.

“We effectively immunise them,” said Cameron Simmons, the World Mosquito Program’s director of global implementation and director of the Institute of Vector-Borne Diseases at Monash University. There were not more or fewer mosquitoes with the WMP method, he said. It also did not need to be repeated and did not require huge industrial and automated facilities.

WMP’s trial in Yogyakarta in Indonesia showed a 77 per cent reduction in dengue cases and an 86 per cent reduction in dengue hospitalisations in Wolbachia-treated areas compared with untreated areas.

“High-income countries such as Singapore or states in the US can afford the male mosquito method used by Verily. But in cities such as Jakarta, Bangkok or Ho Chi Minh, both the mosquito and human population are much higher, making it more difficult and expensive. [That technology] has not been proven at scale,” Simmons added. “We don’t solve the problem of people being bitten. The mosquitoes are still there, but we solve the health problem.”

Proponents argue that suppression techniques are still cheaper than the public health cost over the long term. Research by the NEA put the economic impact of dengue at between $1bn to $2.2bn between 2010 and 2020.

Upson agreed there was an environmental impact to any interference but said the problem of invasive species of mosquito such as aedes aegypti — which is not native to south-east Asia — had become ever more serious for governments and health systems.

The cost of Verily’s programme in Singapore “would be less than the direct healthcare costs of dengue”, he argued.



In Singapore, the state has invested heavily in the arts. Although this has been a boon to local artists in many ways, it has mostly involved support for museum institutions and large-scale events such as fairs and biennales.

“In Singapore, the state is always a participant, either as an invisible co-curator or co-commissioner or as a more active agent,” says Singaporean artist Jason Wee, founder of independent outfit Grey Projects. “What is sorely lacking are small- and medium-sized spaces, where artists, curators, and directors can develop projects and relationships under different conditions.”

Grey Projects is one of a handful of spaces challenging the bureaucratic matrix of the city’s state-led art scene. “Museums aren’t the be-all space of art,” says Wee.

Starch established itself in 2021 as a flexible gallery that would adapt and morph depending on artists’ needs. “When I was offered a large space,” says founder Moses Tan, “the original idea was to first commit to a one-year programme, with each month given to artists to experiment or workshop in or to put up an exhibition.” This has carried on for a second year and there are no plans to stop.

Tan, an artist himself, was inspired by spaces such as Supernormal in Singapore, Hidden Space in Hong Kong, Speedy Grandma in Bangkok and some artist-run initiatives in Australia. He has also collaborated with Grey Projects on programming around queer art. But instead of following the blueprint of other galleries, Tan tried to understand their ethos and the part they played in the bigger art system. “It led me to consider how I could also contribute to an organic framework with Starch, to hopefully support the arts with kindness and flexibility,” he says.

One project Tan is particularly proud of is Inheritance of Parts, a 2021 installation-based group show inspired by Kuo Pao Kun’s play Descendants of the Eunuch Admiral. He says the show was “maximalist while thoughtful in its considerations of display and performance”.

This year’s art week is a busy one. The space will host a show titled Nighthawks, curated by artist Jeremy Sharma, made up of works on the theme of “expanded cinema”, which is part of a collaboration with nearby design studio Supper House. Starch will also be participating in talks and performances.

starch.sg

Independent non-profit space Seed aims to push the boundaries of art from south-east Asia. It was founded in 2019 by Ivy Lam, Lourdes Samson and Connie Wong, all graduates of the MA course in Asian art history at the Lasalle College of the Arts in Singapore. Wong cites London-based Parasol Unit and Hong Kong’s Para Site as among the trio’s inspiration.

“We are seeding new ideas, new artistic approaches and new audiences, allowing the platform to be more open to different art projects,” says Samson. An exhibition which shaped the direction of the space was Work in Progress: Video Art from Southeast Asia. “This was one of the few shows in Singapore that featured video as an important medium used by south-east Asian artists.”

Located in a gallery in the River Valley area (until February, when its lease expires and it will have to move), Seed has occasionally expanded into larger exhibition venues on a project basis, including Gillman Barracks, Tanjong Pagar Distripark and The Substation. “We realise that Seed is not specific to a location,” says Lam.

From January 8 to February 4, Seed will present The Garden by Singapore artist Ernest Chan — who was the first artist to exhibit in the space, back in 2019 — and will feature paintings, drawings and ceramic sculptures reflecting on the connections between humans and nature.

seedartspace.com

Over its 15 years, the artist-run Grey Projects has grown to encompass two galleries, a library, a studio and a residency apartment. The residency programme has given Grey Projects a reputation for research-led international artistic exchanges, as well as experimental curatorship.

Wee, who was inspired by earlier Singaporean artist-run experiments such as Plastique Kinetic Worms and Lee Wen’s Independent Archive, founded Grey Projects as a home for nonconformist art, including queer art, when the field was ostracised in Singapore. Today it has expanded to encompass a variety of artists, including performance artist Amanda Heng, who recently had a show there exploring interpersonal communication in urban environments.

During Singapore Art Week Grey Projects will be showing the sound and video works of Seo Hye-Soon as part of a partnership with MMCA Seoul. It is also about to launch the next edition of Walk Walk Don’t Run, its open-studio art tours.

At the end of July, Wee will take a break from public programming in Singapore, saying that “it’s time to make space for others”. He also has a multiyear project of his own to focus on. “I am an artist and a writer in the end,” he says. “But it’s not the end of Grey Projects yet, we have a few more projects down the line.”

greyprojects.org



Richard Koh emerged from the pandemic with a realisation: the world had changed and so had he. With that guiding him, the south-east Asian gallerist started making some changes in his own life. First he shook up his stable of represented artists, cutting the number from more than 20 by nearly half.

“It lifted a lot of weight off. If someone claims to have not been damaged even in whatever small way during the pandemic then I don’t think they are human,” he says over tea in Singapore. “It is the same with the art world: if they haven’t changed, it is going to be tough. We are working with artists with interesting things to say.”

It is fitting then that Art SG, the biggest art fair to launch in Asia Pacific in a decade, is in Singapore. Koh says the city-state is itself transformed after the pandemic: it became a hub for summits, conferences and exhibitions as Hong Kong remained shut with crippling pandemic restrictions, to the point where there is a buzz in Singapore that did not exist before the crisis.

That buzz has flowed through to broader south-east Asia, Koh’s home and a region of 675mn with Singapore nestled in the centre. New buyers, new artists and new buying patterns are emerging. All of this, he hopes, will be on display at Art SG. His gallery, Richard Koh Fine Art, will join 150 others at the major new art fair, which was delayed for nearly four years because of the pandemic. The show was postponed in 2019 to 2020 after participants requested more time, then the pandemic struck and its debut was delayed three more times.

The 57-year-old, a longtime supporter and promoter of south-east Asian contemporary art, says another change has been a shift towards localisation. Art buyers and collectors, unable to fly to international art fairs while the pandemic raged, started looking more deeply at local artists, especially in Vietnam and Thailand, he says.

“Covid, the war [in Ukraine], geopolitical tensions between the US and China . . . under the facade there is a sense now that local is better,” he says. “Younger buyers in the region are coming in. The buying pattern is different. The visual language appreciation is different. The idea of collecting is different. They are collecting their time. Many of these buyers are from a social media generation, drawn to visual work that is fast, colourful and even virtual.” For this reason, he is hopeful Art SG will steer clear of being another generic international fair and that gallerists showcase more homegrown and regional art.

But art is an expensive business and south-east Asia’s developing economies often cannot afford to build the infrastructure and programmes needed to foster and promote local art, Koh says. This is part of what has driven his new artist residency programme, scheduled to start in the second quarter of 2023 and run for three months. The course will focus on cultivating new artistic talent in south-east Asia — applicants have to have been practising for less than five years — and giving them the bonus of more practical experience in the running of a gallery so they understand how it works when dealing with their own galleries. “At the moment they don’t teach this in art school and no one talks about it because selling seems to be a bad word,” he adds.

The project is self-funded and will run for three years, after which he hopes to attract sponsors. Having fairs such as Art SG that then promote these artists’ work, and carry on the momentum, is crucial, he says. Sotheby’s first sale of Modern and contemporary art in Singapore in August 2022 made S$24.5mn (US$18mn), with “strong results”, according to the auction house, for south-east Asian art.

Artists from the Indochina region — which includes Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam — will feature heavily in Koh’s selection. “Underdog” isn’t the correct word, Koh insists, but he says he does gravitate towards artists who are not considered trendy and don’t have a huge platform.

One of the regional artists Koh champions is Natee Utarit, who he has worked with for 20 years. A painter from Bangkok, Utarit’s latest body of work considers the question of what would happen if history was written by the east and not the west. “A lot of western curators when they see the work, they think this is about religion. But if you understand the Asian psyche, you see a lot of the quirky things in the painting.” One painting in the Déjà Vu series shows men in Buddhist robes in a historic Greco-Roman building.

Another artist he thinks local collectors will appreciate is Vietnamese-American Trong Gia Nguyen, who is based in Brussels. Koh, who describes his personal preference for art as “contemplative”, says Nguyen’s work is political in a “quiet way”. His work at Art SG considers the concept of displacement, using both photography and painting. “Indochina citizens are everywhere from the US to France but often never fully accepted or integrated. The work subtly considers the feeling of being displaced.”

Vietnam in particular has many more collectors supporting local works, more galleries opening and artists practising full time, according to Koh. Another work he will feature at Art SG is an installation by Vietnamese feminist artist Cam Xanh. The work involves a giant acrylic cross and bible with phrases sandwiched between the bonded layers, referring to the burdens put on women.

Koh admits that any social commentary, even through art, can be a risk in south-east Asia, a region known for authoritarian regimes and frequent clampdowns on dissenting voices. Singapore, where people require a permit to protest and sex between men was only decriminalised in 2022, has its human rights critics.

Still, he is optimistic about the change wrought by the pandemic. In some ways the crisis changed life — and art — for the better, including in south-east Asia. “The good thing from this is that people looked inwards. It was a time of self-discovery. Does it move on further, deeper? I don’t know, but we have had time to understand ourselves better.”

rkfineart.com



Singapore has long played second fiddle to Hong Kong as an art-market hub in Asia. But next week a new fair, Art SG, opens in a fresh attempt to establish a major event in Singapore and cement its rising influence in the continent’s shifting art scene.

Singapore’s role as an international art market centre didn’t seem to stand a chance against Hong Kong in 2011, when Art Basel announced it was acquiring ArtHK, launched four years earlier by Magnus Renfrew, who has co-founded Art SG. The relative ease of doing business in Hong Kong and the power of the Art Basel brand limited the prospects for Singapore’s fledgling rival fair, Art Stage Singapore. This began in 2011, ran relatively well despite some internal wranglings, then ended abruptly in 2019.

Singapore’s time may now be coming. It has maintained its status as a haven for private wealth, particularly drawing mainland Chinese money, and as the hub market for south-east Asia’s many growing economies, including Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. The geopolitical backdrop, Renfrew says, has since enhanced Singapore’s prospects.

“You could say that [Art Stage] was too early. Historically, Singapore’s distance from China and its collectors was seen as a disadvantage; now it is regarded as the only neutral territory in Asia,” Renfrew says. “Singapore has had consistently positive relations with both China and the USA and . . . has been the de facto hub where constituencies from around the region can meet on equal terms.”

The new fair’s director is Shuyin Yang, who previously ran Art Central, a Hong Kong satellite fair. Yang, a Singapore native, notes too that, since the pandemic started, the city-state, which opened its borders relatively quickly after a strict lockdown, has witnessed an influx of wealthy individuals from China and Indonesia, particularly from the technology and financial sectors. It’s helpful that Mandarin is commonly spoken in Singapore. “People thought they were sheltering temporarily during Covid, but have stayed and helped to revitalise the city,” she says.

Renfrew acknowledges the growing importance of other Asian cities, notably those with strong local support, such as Seoul, where Frieze opened a fair this year, as well as Taipei and Tokyo, where he also runs fairs: Taipei Dangdai and the forthcoming Tokyo Gendai.

Singapore’s cultural scene is more mature than Hong Kong’s was in 2007 — the Singapore Art Museum and the vast National Gallery Singapore are just two of its respected and well-visited institutions. The commercial sector has been more stop-start and now has less of the marked support and influence of Singapore’s government. But Yang says galleries are regaining momentum since the pandemic and are focused in two areas — Gillman Barracks and the Tanjong Pagar district around the Singapore Art Museum. In August, Sotheby’s held its first Modern and contemporary art auction in Singapore, citing a “growing collector base in the region”, making a total S$24.4mn (about US$18mn), with more sales planned for this year.

There are no official stipulations on the sort of works that can be shown, with Singapore’s authorities generally less strict than those in China when it comes to politically motivated art. “Singapore is a multicultural and multiracial society with a thriving contemporary art scene,” says Renfrew. “We have highlighted to participating galleries that it is important to keep in mind cultural sensitivities, with similar considerations to exhibiting elsewhere in Asia.” These sensitivities include nudity and profanity, according to local art-market figures.

The cultural winds might be in Singapore’s favour, but Art SG’s opening has faced turbulence. The fair’s launch was originally announced in 2018 as one of the regional fairs in a new portfolio established by MCH, the owner of Art Basel. A few months later, MCH pulled out of these events, so Renfrew stepped in to join co-owners Sandy Angus and Tim Etchells. MCH Group then reinvested in the fair (it now owns 15 per cent), seemingly hedging its bets in Asia, though its management has described its investment as “additive” to Hong Kong rather than an alternative.

Art SG’s inaugural event was planned for November 2019 but participating galleries then reportedly asked for more time to prepare, so the fair was pushed back to January 2020 — then Covid struck. Such pent-up planning might partly account for the 2023 fair’s impressive roster of more than 150 galleries. Many are international — including the likes of Gagosian, White Cube and David Zwirner — while 20 galleries with spaces in Singapore are in the mix, such as homegrown heavyweights Yavuz Gallery and STPI.

“It is bittersweet that so many people have moved from China to Singapore, but it has become such a hub,” says Rachel Lehmann, co-founder of Lehmann Maupin gallery, which will be showing at Art SG. While some see the government as culturally overbearing, Lehmann finds that “it is a small country with great support. They understand the power of soft culture.” The gallerist, who started her career in Geneva and Lausanne, adds that Singapore “reminds me of Switzerland” — and doesn’t disagree when I mention their similarly friendly tax regimes.

At Art SG, the gallery’s booth will include work by the British-Malaysian artist Mandy El-Sayegh, the Vietnamese-American Tammy Nguyen and the South Korea-born Lee Bul. Lehmann’s gallery has gone one step further than just showing at the fair and has appointed Ken Tan as a director based in Singapore, though she says there are currently no plans for a formal gallery.

Fellow international gallerist Thaddaeus Ropac also brings work by El-Sayegh, as well as new pieces by Alvaro Barrington and Oliver Beer. Showing at a Singapore fair for the first time, he cites the might of its National Gallery as well as “a handful of very well-informed collectors” he already knows there. He is keeping his expectations in check. “It is an experiment. I doubt Singapore can be the next Hong Kong, those are big shoes to fill, but it is important to build relationships in Asia,” Ropac says.

At the fair, held in the Marina Bay Sands Expo and Convention Centre, there will be additional sections for younger galleries — in business for six years or fewer — including Capsule from Shanghai and Tabula Rasa (Beijing, London). Bucking the trend away from art backed by non-fungible tokens, the fair has another section, called Reframe, with eight galleries showing digital art in its many forms. “There was arguably too much euphoric excitement [about NFTs] but the baby’s been thrown out with the bathwater. There is incredible work in digital media,” Renfrew says.

Yang says that digital art is also part of her mission “to make sure that the fair suits different interests . . . We are expecting a new audience, many galleries and collectors are coming to Singapore for the first time, we want them all to find areas of engagement.”

The otherwise measured Renfrew predicts an art scene about to explode. “We need to be slightly ahead of the curve, a catalyst to make it happen, that’s the role we want to play.”

January 12-15, artsg.com

Singapore Art Week, January 6-15, artweek.sg



When Yeo Workshop opens its booth at the Art SG fair in Singapore next week, a painting by Burmese artist and poet Maung Day will hang there, depicting a bucolic backdrop in a delicate style that is at once surrealist, whimsical and naive. But just before the rolling hills and verdant woods is a disquieting element: a dog standing next to a corpse.

Called “Dog Found the Murdered Body of His Master on the Beach”, the acrylic painting illustrates a real-life murder that shook the fishing community in Rakhine state in Myanmar, where Maung Day used to live. The murder was part of the post-coup turmoil of recent years: on February 1 2021, the military seized power, putting an end to the democratic transition started by Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy party. Since then, more than 2,600 people have been killed and 13,000 arrested, according to a domestic human rights organisation.

Like many other murder cases in Myanmar, the culprit behind the murder in Maung Day’s picture has not been found. “The political instability and ensuing acts of violence have been an everyday reality throughout the country over the past two years,” the artist has said.

Part of a presentation by curator Louis Ho for the Singaporean gallery Yeo Workshop, the artwork highlights the tensions and violence in that region of Myanmar. Singapore Art Week, which includes Art SG, is “a timely platform to reflect on the plight of the Burmese people, especially those poor, rural, minority communities, who are most vulnerable to the violence”, says Ho. And his presentation is not the only one to highlight Burmese artists.

Since elections in Myanmar in 2010 and the 2012 by-election victory of the National League for Democracy party, Burmese art had been on the rise. Private galleries, such as Art Seasons and Yavuz in Singapore and Thavibu gallery in Bangkok, and public museums, notably the National Gallery Singapore, have started exhibiting the work of Burmese artists. A 2013 exhibition organised by the Guggenheim and a 2017 show in Tokyo included many works by Burmese artists and in 2021 the Centre Pompidou in Paris dedicated a large-scale exhibition to the Burmese modernist Bagyi Aung Soe.

But the coup’s leaders brought growing domestic artistic freedom to a halt, blacklisting anti-coup artists or those who had made pro-democracy work or art dealing with sexuality. This violence added to the oppression of local ethnic and religious groups, including the Rohingya people, the Muslim minority now confined to Rakhine state and victims of a genocide by the military rulers.

Artists within the country never stopped working, but they are under strict censorship and the constant threat of incarceration. Art fairs and art weeks are a good chance to see their works since they have limited possibilities to show within Myanmar or are in exile abroad.

Htein Lin, a prominent painter, performer and activist who has been involved in resistance movements for decades, became a cautionary tale. He was thrown in prison last August, along with his wife Vicky Bowman, the former British ambassador, charged with breaching immigration laws. They were finally released in November in an amnesty of political prisoners.

“It seems as if news of Htein Lin’s arrest was what jolted the art community in Singapore and south-east Asia [into greater awareness],” says Ho, who also curated Htein Lin’s solo show Another Spring at Richard Koh Fine Art in Singapore in 2022. At Art SG, Koh’s gallery is showcasing pieces by two Myanmar artists, Aung Ko’s “The Burmese Tiger and English Hunter” and Wah Nu’s cloud paintings.

For most artists who decided to leave the country after the 2021 coup, the challenge is to highlight the condition in Myanmar and still be subtle enough not to endanger their families back home. That’s why most of the works that will be showcased in shows and on fair booths prefer to address specific issues using symbols and ancient tales.

Examples of this are the pieces at the SEA Focus fair presented by Intersections, a gallery which focuses on contemporary art from Myanmar, Singapore and France founded by Marie-Pierre Mol. She will show “Lost Children 1”, a work by Maung Day revisiting the story of how the pied piper led children to disappear — a pervasive plague in Myanmar — and “Tales (The Kiss)” by Kyaw Htoo Bala, a young Yangon-based artist who studied at the Lasalle College of the Arts. “Bala recently opened an art space in Yangon,” says Mol. “I think it’s just amazing that he managed to do this at this time. It shows the resilience of Burmese people.”

Bala’s almost monochromatic collage is made with a traditional paper produced only in Shan state and was inspired by the stories his grandfather told him when he was a young boy. As an adult, the artist realised these drew on the history of his family, his neighbourhood and his country. “At the moment,” says Bala, “I’m creating my own stories based on the events in my life. For instance, a piece I will show in Singapore called ‘The Kiss’ . . . was inspired by lovers who seemed unaffected by the confusing, nasty and oppressive turmoil around them.”

Outside the fair, there are works that indirectly address the deeper roots of the crisis. This is the case with Burmese artist Sawangwongse Yawnghwe, who presented two pieces at the Singapore Biennale in 2022, “The Opium Parallax” and “Footnotes”. These installations explore the history and conditions surrounding the opium trade in and around Myanmar. The first consists of a suspended panel: one side presents a simplified version of the history of the opium trade, the other shows a map of the complex web of relations between drug-dealing and geopolitics.

Yawnghwe is a descendant of the Shan royal family, and his grandfather was the first president of the Union of Burma, the party which ruled the country from 1948 to 1962 after independence from Britain. Following his death in prison after the 1962 military coup, Yawnghwe’s family formed the resistance of the Shan State Army, before being forced into exile.

Yawnghwe’s artistic practice can’t help but delve into the national history: “In my work there is always the desire of going back to the roots. But as a Burmese artist my roots have been completely destroyed,” he says. “Instead of being annihilated by this realisation, I look at this as a unique chance for freedom — a way of getting into new territory of how I define myself and my work as an artist.”



Richard Deacon constructed paper towers inspired by Singapore’s public housing. Rirkrit Tiravanija mashed metal foil on to large paper sheets to make circular “time portals”. Haegue Yang sprayed rice and spices on to pulp to create textured landscapes.

The artists created these works during their residencies at STPI Creative Workshop & Gallery in Singapore, a contemporary art gallery that specialises in experimentation in the mediums of print and paper. At STPI, they were supported by an in-house team of master printers and also had access to a state of the art printmaking facility and paper mill.

STPI has hosted 125 artists since 2002. “Spice paper, cement paper, copper paper . . . We’ve had all kinds,” says Emi Eu, STPI’s Korea-born executive director, who has been at the organisation since 2001. She is credited with building STPI’s critical reputation at home and abroad.

STPI began as a state-led initiative to kick-start the local arts ecosystem, with training up local master printers as its primary goal. Now it champions innovations in the field of printmaking; owns a commercial gallery that participates in top global art fairs; and runs its own boutique fair. Called SEA Focus, it features contemporary art from south-east Asia and its fifth edition (January 6-15) takes place at portside art cluster Tanjong Pagar Distripark, with offerings from 25 galleries in a flowing, boothless format.

Eu had a cosmopolitan upbringing. She lived with her father’s family in Seoul as a child. When she was 13, she moved to New York to live with her mother, a prominent textile historian and embroiderer. After college, through the connection of a family friend, she worked in Venice at the Galleria d’Arte Contini for four years, then studied for a masters degree at New York University in visual arts administration, during which she did an internship in the department of prints and illustrated books at MoMA.

After she met her husband, a freelance journalist and restaurant investor, she lived between New York and Singapore, and eventually settled in the city-state in 2000. A year later, she joined STPI as one of three staff in the gallery. What’s the headcount now? “Forty-eight. Can you believe it? When I first joined, I was the youngest. Now I look around and I’m the oldest!” She effectively took the reins of STPI when its founder, American printmaker Kenneth Tyler, left a few months after the opening because of operational disagreements. (STPI was formerly known as the Singapore Tyler Print Institute.)

There is no hard and fast rule by which she selects the artists for the residency, which offers up to five weeks’ stay. First, she gets to know their practice and has to feel confident that they can manage a project with 15 people waiting to receive their instructions. This is why STPI started inviting mid-career artists.

She is candid about the unevenness of the outcomes in the residency programme, but technical innovation isn’t STPI’s only aim. “Maybe for the south-east Asian artists, some didn’t produce visually groundbreaking work. But for many of them, it was an important starting point. When we began the residency programme in 2002, in Singapore, let alone the region, there were no other residencies,” she says. “So every project has a meaning.” Besides opening up possibilities for south-east Asian artists, she adds that STPI has helped to create a regional market for mid-range works on paper.

STPI’s reputation has grown organically. Artists who attended the residency introduced other artists, and collectors and museums took notice. MoMA came to acquire works. In 2013, after seven years of applying for a spot, STPI became the first Singapore gallery to participate in Art Basel; now it is the only one to exhibit in all three of the fair’s locations.

STPI is able to be ambitious in its programming and where it shows because of hefty government support. Part of the trifecta of flagship visual arts institutions in Singapore, which also includes the Singapore Art Museum and National Gallery Singapore, STPI received S$5.1mn (US$3.8mn) in government grants in the financial year ending March 2022. (Its operating budget for the year was S$8.4mn.)

While SEA Focus has been the only art fair in the city during Singapore Art Week for the past four years, after Art Stage Singapore was suddenly cancelled in 2019, this January a new juggernaut is in town: Art SG, with more than 150 galleries, intended to be south-east Asia’s largest fair. Eu thinks they are complementary: “SEA Focus is not a protagonist, we are more behind the scenes, a conduit for the region’s galleries and non-profits. We offer them a platform. Art SG is about connecting galleries to buyers, which is an integral part of any ecosystem.”

This year, SEA Focus is launching a projects section called Collaborations. One of the presenting artists is Danh Vo, who will be supported by Vitamin Creative Space and M Art Foundation, both from China. The Berlin-based artist will realise a work that explores his passion for gardening.

Eu, who has overseen STPI’s transformation, hopes that it continues to grow with the times. “I want it to evolve and not be put in any box,” she says. “I feel like I’ve done my job to bring STPI to where it is now; the next thing to do is to pave the way for a new chapter.”

stpi.com.sg, seafocus.sg



This article is part of a guide to Singapore from FT Globetrotter

When Singapore is mentioned, what comes to mind are the gleaming skyscrapers of our financial district and the triple towers of Moshe Safdie’s Marina Bay Sands, along with the futuristic-looking lotus of the ArtScience Museum and the flower domes and “supertrees” — solar-powered vertical gardens — of Gardens by the Bay, all nestled within a manicured swath of the Singapore Strait.

However, the Singapore that I know best is the bustling one of my parents and grandparents, a city of rich heritage and culture whose different areas refer not simply to topographical locations but also to character-filled enclaves of different migratory ethnic and dialect groups — along with all the accompanying food, culture, vibrant colour and ear-scorching slang.

Any morning in Singapore is immediately made better by a sunrise walk or morning yoga in the Singapore Botanic Gardens, the only tropical botanic garden which is a Unesco World Heritage Site. Not only is it a verdant paradise that articulates Singapore’s reputation as a garden-city — the work carried out here to research and preserve rare tropical flora and fauna native to the region is also incredibly important, not only for Singapore but all of south-east Asia.

One is truly spoiled for breakfast choices in Singapore, from a plethora of street-food options such as prata (Indian flatbread) and curry in the Thomson district, bak kut teh (a pork-rib broth) along Keppel Road (conveniently located next to the art galleries and warehouses of Tanjong Pagar Distripark), brunch boards and coffee in the smart cafés of Dempsey Hill, or if feeling indecisive, an entire smorgasbord of hawker stalls to sample in Tiong Bahru market.

If I’m feeling energetic, I’ll brave the queue for Hill Street Tai Hwa Pork Noodle in Crawford Lane. Since the stall received a Michelin star in 2016, the line can grow to astronomical proportions (the longest I’ve waited is two hours), but the al dente noodles and perfect balance of vinegar make this one of the best bak chor mee (minced meat noodles) on the island. Otherwise, I’m always happy to have nasi lemak (fragrant rice cooked in coconut milk and pandan leaves, usually served with sides such as sambal chilli, fried anchovies, hard-boiled egg or slivers of omelette, and chicken), from its humblest version wrapped in takeaway banana leaves to the elevated plates served at The Coconut Club in its new premises along Beach Road.

While in central Singapore, don’t forget to visit the National Gallery Singapore, which houses the world’s largest public collection of south-east Asian art from the mid 19th century to today, showcasing the splendour and tribulations of the region’s colonial and postcolonial history. The museum building is iconic, comprising two national monuments, the City Hall and former Supreme Court, where some of the original fixtures such as the prisoner’s dock and jail cells have been preserved and are now interspersed with the country’s cultural treasures. The experience can be beautifully rounded off by an exquisite lunch at chef Julian Royer’s three-Michelin-star Odette within the same building.

The east side of Singapore — the Peranakan (Straits Chinese) district of Joo Chiat and Katong, as well as the East Coast — is indisputably our most concentrated gastronomic utopia. Not only a feast for the palate with dishes like Katong laksa (noodles in a spicy broth) and a range of Nyonya cuisine, it’s a feast for the eyes too with ornate Peranakan shophouses featuring intricate architectural motifs such as those along Koon Seng Road.

The Peranakan heritage is an intrinsic part of Singapore’s cultural identity, born from the complex fabric of generations of transcultural and interracial marriages between southern Chinese migrants and indigenous Nusantara people. If a rare invitation to visit a perfectly conserved shophouse or a Peranakan bungalow offers itself — such as the Edwardian mansion known as the “Hall of the Phoenix and Peony”, which is privately owned by a doctor and celebrates the unique late-19th/early 20th-century architecture of the Straits Settlements, while splendidly preserving Peranakan culture within its rooms — do grab the opportunity with both hands.

While in the east, take in Singapore’s version of afternoon tea with a robust cup of teh c (Ceylon tea with evaporated milk) and one of food stall Soon Soon Huat’s deliciously flaky curry puffs. The very same curry puffs are also served in Shangri-La Hotel’s elegant lobby lounge on much fancier china plates, but sans true local atmosphere. It’s no coincidence that a number of Singapore artists, gallerists and curators reside in the east, making for a constant stream of good company and food recommendations.

Towards late afternoon, Singapore’s oldest housing estate Tiong Bahru starts to come to life, with its unique blend of chic cafés, vinyl stores, bookshops and galleries mixed in with a hefty dose of old-school charm, thanks to its Streamline Moderne architecture, a late development of the Art Deco movement inspired by technology and modern travel, creating buildings with clean aerodynamic lines. As a young child, I visited my grandmother who lived in one of these walk-up apartments, and some of my earliest memories are of the dark, steep stairwell that suddenly opened up into a large airy balcony with blinding sunlight, against thick white walls designed to keep out the tropical heat, characteristic of Singapore’s prewar colonial buildings.

A great place to catch the Singapore sunset is from the penthouse terrace of 67 Pall Mall, a private members’ wine club that was formerly the residence of movie magnate Runme Shaw. Offering an expansive view over Orchard Road as far as the Singapore Flyer observation wheel, the space intersperses 1920s Shanghai Art Deco with visual elements from the golden age of Asian cinema. As a lightweight, I appreciate the huge selection of over 1,000 wines by the glass, especially the white Burgundies.

Otherwise I might drop into Appetite, a research and development kitchen, record bar and art gallery run by chef Ivan Brehm (who also operates fine-dining restaurant Nouri), to catch their latest talk or art exhibition, as well as one of their exquisite foie-gras-parfait tartines.

Despite the vast array of dining options in Singapore, weekend restaurant-booking is often a competitive sport. Some of the places I enjoy most are those that present innovative recipes but are solidly reminiscent of Asian traditional cooking, such as the Korean-inspired French cuisine at Meta.

For late-night cocktails, one cannot do better than Jigger and Pony, currently 12th (and the highest-ranked Singapore bar) on The World’s Best Bars list. Owned by Indra Kantono and Gan Guoyi, it has become a mainstay of the creative cocktail scene in Singapore. I asked Kantono, who is an expert on Singapore’s after-hours scene, what other venues he personally enjoys. He shared that he is looking forward to the new outpost of Park90, a private members’ wine club at the Regent hotel, now with larger premises at the InterContinental devoted entirely to Italian wines.

Winding down for the night, it’s always a debate whether to go for late-night comfort food such as the guilt-inducing Beach Road Scissor Cut Curry Rice, murtabak (stuffed flatbread) and the iconic sarbat tea at Bhai Sarbat Teh Tarik (great for ensuring you wake up hangover-free), beef kway teow in the Geylang red-light district or a spot of late-night shopping at Mustafa Centre in Little India. But why choose only one? This is Singapore.

Shuyin Yang is Fair Director of ART SG, a new international art fair launching as part of the 11th edition of Singapore Art Week, held from 6 to 15 January 2023 and presenting more than 130 art events across the city.

How would you spend your perfect day in Singapore? Tell us in the comments

Follow FT Globetrotter on Instagram at @FTGlobetrotter





A boom in mainland Chinese family offices setting up in Singapore is drawing in thousands of financial professionals, including from global investment banks, creating what some finance heads are calling a new “hedge fund” industry in the city-state.

Wealthy mainland Chinese moving assets out of President Xi Jinping’s China account for up to half of a rise in Singapore-based single family offices — the private wealth management firms set up for rich individuals and their relatives. Numbers have jumped nearly threefold since the coronavirus pandemic began and, according to some estimates, now total as many as 1,500.

“The large family offices are trying to offer the kind of salary senior wealth professionals at private banks are paid,” said Caroline Lee, a former private banker who manages a Singapore-based single family office for a group of Chinese clients. “A lot [depends] on the individual bankers, but it might appeal to people who feel there is too much politics at a big bank.”

Founders of the family offices often used the structure to secure employment visas and move their families to the city-state, recruitment professionals said. Many of the structures would historically employ family members in important positions, whether or not they had previous experience in asset management.

However, since April this year, Singapore-based family offices have been required to hire at least two investment professionals to qualify for tax exemptions. Larger funds must have at least three.

The rules have created the incentive for a collective hiring spree of thousands of asset management, private wealth management and other banking professionals. This would make it a “lot tougher” to find talent, Lee added. “They must be willing to pay.”

Derrick Tan, who left the Bank of Singapore to start up his own wealth management firm to work with single family offices last year, said “fomo” — fear of missing out — was a key driver for creating the offices.

“I was asking many of them the purpose in setting up a family office, and it seemed like 20 or 30 years ago — when you listed your company because your friend or colleague listed a company,” he said.

​​Kher Sheng Lee, Asia head of the Alternative Investment Management Association in Singapore, said he was seeing many more family offices hire from top banks and asset managers. They look for “individuals with specific investment focus and expertise”, he said.

A Singapore-based investment banking head for a US financial institution said he had lost a number of professionals to family offices. “I know of several other [banks] where they have lost someone senior and that person has gone straight to a family office. We are probably going to see more of them taking whole teams with them.”

Bankers and other advisers said that although the family offices were conservative and largely focused on property and publicly listed equities, their risk appetite was likely to rise over time. Increasingly they were expected to behave like hedge funds, one said.

Caught by surprise by the surging numbers of family office funds, Singapore’s government this year tightened the rules, with higher minimum capital and hiring requirements.

To qualify for tax exemptions and hiring investment professionals, applicants must commit to increasing assets under management to S$20mn (US$15mn) within a two-year period. At least 10 per cent of AUM — or $10mn, whichever is greater — must be invested locally, such as in Singaporean equities or start-ups.



With FTX in tatters, bitcoin in abeyance and the entire fundament of crypto finance in doubt, the technology of blockchain was badly in want of an image boost. What the distributed ledger technology needed, Singapore decided, was the rhetorical skills of former UK prime minister Boris Johnson to burnish its battered image, and here he was at a glittering gathering of the blockchain industry in a five-star hotel last week.

Blockchain in particular and innovation in general, Johnson explained, is always scary at first. “Humanity has been paranoid about this since the Titan Prometheus gave us the first flame,” he said, mixing classical reference and technological detail.

Johnson was giving the keynote speech for the International Symposium on Blockchain Advancements to 80 or so crypto enthusiasts who had braved Singapore’s tropical thundery showers to hear his insights. It felt a fitting location for the event in the same week that Singapore’s state-owned fund Temasek was facing scrutiny for ploughing $275mn into the collapsed crypto exchange FTX after eight-months of due diligence failed to flag up any big concerns. It is clear there was never enough paranoia or fear, one nonplussed conference-goer said after an hour of Johnson’s musings on Brexit, Australian submarines and his time at the Telegraph.

Beyond the free canapés and macarons, the event was hard to read as anything other than a plea from the blockchain industry to be taken seriously. Every sector is entitled to seek the endorsement of disgraced former leaders at times, but Johnson’s paeans of praise for Singapore Slings and his room at the famously expensive Raffles Hotel, delivered alongside his lauding of the potential of blockchain to a half-filled ballroom of men in suits, unsurprisingly was not the panacea for its woes.

One delegate, who gave his name as Kai and said he worked at a local crypto custodian start-up, was excited that someone “so famous” was speaking. What about Johnson’s position on digital currencies and the potential of blockchain? “Oh I don’t know about that,” Kai said with a nervous laugh.

A rare female attendee admitted that she was actually a journalist mainly trying to find out how much Johnson was being paid to headline the conference.

Against this backdrop, Britain’s former prime minister jovially assured the room of “blockchain pioneers” that they were in the right place, going on to remind his audience that technology is “morally neutral”. He dwelt at length on how doctors erroneously claimed in the early days of the railways that the rattling and jolting of trains was likely to cause sexual excitement, why the City of London is “the most productive place on Earth”, and something unclear about nuclear-powered vacuum cleaners. But it was not obvious how these digressions would bolster his case for blockchain.

He did eventually circle back to the technology and cryptocurrencies. He said he has “seen some pretty shocking headlines about this whole venture and we need some way of holding people to account”. But no sooner had he raised the subject of recent events in the cryptosphere than he moved swiftly on to topics closer to his heart: Brexit, the Ukraine war and green technology.

Then came his finale. “I will make a strong argument that the UK will become even more attractive as a place to invest once we deliver on all that Brexit stuff.” On blockchain, he added, he could not comment further without more details.

The blockchain enthusiasts seemed less than enthused. Someone showed enough interest to snap a photo only to be admonished by a man who rushed over hissing there was to be no photography.

The interviewer tried valiantly to bring Johnson back to blockchain. What was his overall message for innovators in the industry? “Apart from Singapore, which is a fantastic place for innovation, come to London. Come to the UK . . . It’s a fantastic country . . . it rains more in Rome by the way,” he replied. “I look forward to watching the progress of the blockchain industry with fascination,” he added to bemused applause.

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com



Singapore and Hong Kong start-ups are sidestepping their home stock exchanges to merge with special purpose acquisition companies (Spacs) in the US, as fundraising vehicles in the Asian financial hubs have yielded little on their exit plans.

Information from financial data provider Refinitiv shows that at least nine Singapore and Hong Kong companies this year have announced plans to go public with Spacs listed in the US, despite the cities offering a number of these shell companies since the first quarter — none of which has merged successfully with a target business.

Spacs, also known as blank-cheque companies, provide promising companies with an alternative way of going public. They raise capital through an initial public offering then acquire or merge with an existing business, bringing the target to public markets without having to go through the traditional — and time-consuming — process of listing.

This usually means a more straightforward and quicker path for companies to go public, as Spacs offer the means to skirt an often-arduous vetting process associated with traditional IPOs.

American stock exchanges have received plenty of attention from investors over the high volume of Spac activity generated in the past few years, catching the eye of bourses in Asia that want to ride the wave.

Refinitiv’s data showed that across the Asia-Pacific region, at least 28 Spac deals have been announced in the first nine months of this year worth a total of $23.4bn. However, none of them involved Spacs from the Singapore or Hong Kong exchanges.

“With Spacs in Singapore and Hong Kong, I think we are a little bit late to the whole overall theme,” said Michael Wu, senior equity analyst at investment research company Morningstar. “The other implication would be just more generally [that] the IPO in the primary market has been quite challenging over the last year and that will likely persist.”

Many Spac deals have favoured high-flying upstarts in the tech space, with such companies seen as having high growth potential, which naturally excites investors. This segment of business deals boomed in the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic, as tech companies saw a surge in demand for digital services when people were in lockdown.

Sponsors of Spacs — many of which are venture capital outfits — typically receive investor support based on their reputation, as backers do not know what target a blank-cheque company will eventually merge with.

By backing Spacs, investors have the opportunity to buy stakes in lucrative tech start-ups as they go public. One prominent example is the listing of Singapore ride-hailing and food delivery unicorn Grab in December last year. Grab merged with a Nasdaq-listed Spac called Altimeter Growth.

But as some investors discover, bets on Spacs do not always pay off as handsomely as they would like. Grab’s introduction in the US market via a Spac, for instance, saw its shares dive nearly 21 per cent at the end of trade on the first day. Its market capitalisation was about $34.6bn as trading closed, falling short of the $40bn expected by Altimeter and underlining the risks investors take when betting on big tech names that do not live up to their promise.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine this year has contributed to geopolitical instability, soaring energy and food prices, and monetary tightening by several central banks to rein in inflation. This has been bad news for Spacs, as in times like these investors tend to shy away from the risky bets associated with tech start-ups that grow quickly but, such as Grab, sacrifice steady profits to do so.

Refinitiv’s data showing $23.4bn worth of Spac deals in the Asia-Pacific region in the first three quarters of this year seemed large but was still a 47.6 per cent decline in value from a year ago.

Anish Ailawadi, global head of investment banking practice at analytics company Acuity Knowledge Partners, noted that “the golden period” for Spac IPOs and mergers — mainly during the first half of 2021 — has passed, with flagging interest in the region also reflecting the global scenario.

Ailawadi noted as well that the minimum market capitalisation in the US for Spacs is lower than in Hong Kong and Singapore, which have set more stringent benchmarks, leading smaller companies to merge with blank-cheque companies in America.

The minimum requirement is $127mn for Hong Kong Spacs and $106mn for their Singapore counterparts, compared with a minimum of $50mn for a Nasdaq listing and $100mn for a New York Stock Exchange listing in US.

“Valuations in the US are generally higher than in Asian markets. Most private companies prefer US-based Spacs over those from other regions,” Ailawadi told Nikkei Asia. “Similarly, US-listed companies attract better analyst coverage, which translates into higher institutional investor interest.”

Hong Kong’s Hypebeast, a digital media and ecommerce company, announced its plans for Nasdaq in April by signalling its intent to merge with Iron Spark I Spac to the tune of $221.8mn — the sole player from Hong Kong to do so via a blank-cheque company this year, Refinitiv’s data showed. Hypebeast opted for a dual listing, with its other presence on the Hong Kong bourse.

The data showed that Singapore had eight counterparts unveil similar Spac plans — seven on Nasdaq and one on the NYSE. In August, for instance, financial technology platform Seamless Group announced a deal valued at $400mn with an NYSE-listed Spac called InFinT Acquisition.

More recently, the city-state’s Asia Innovations Group (ASIG), which operates a platform designed for mobile gaming and ecommerce, announced in late September it would combine with NYSE-listed Magnum Opus Acquisition — a deal representing a total equity valuation of $2.5bn and billed as the largest consumer-internet Spac merger of the year to date.

“The proposed merger will combine the best of macro growth in emerging markets and the benefits of being a publicly listed company in the US to transform ASIG into a global mobile powerhouse,” said ASIG chief executive Andy Tian. “ASIG has built a unique, well-diversified global business in the core verticals of social, games, ecommerce and payments.”

Meanwhile, Asia’s key financial hubs have been keeping a low profile as America continues to scoop up tech players, even though the fervour for Spacs has cooled.

In Singapore, after an initial burst of three Spac IPOs in January, the exchange has seen no such further listings in 2022. In Hong Kong, Aquila Acquisition and Vision Deal HK Acquisition are blank-cheque companies that have listed, with more than 10 others reportedly seeking a place on the hub’s bourse.

As the year draws to a close, investors still have no clear view of what companies will eventually be acquired by these Spacs, if any. Spacs in Singapore must complete a merger or acquisition within 24 months of the IPO date, with an extension of 12 months possible.

In Hong Kong, Spacs should announce a deal or de-Spac transaction within 24 months, or complete the de-Spac within 36 months, with a six-month extension possible.

Peggy Mak, portfolio manager at fund management outfit Haven Capital, reckoned it is highly possible that some of the Singapore and Hong Kong Spacs could miss the two-year deadline.

“The global economic environment has clouded all markets, hence Spacs in both markets are not spared,” she told Nikkei. “As the [deadline] draws near, they might lower their standard for a target, which makes it worse.”

Mak stressed that most Spac targets are growth companies that continue to show a negative operating cash flow — performance that investors are shunning due to rising interest rates and recession risks.

“The number of Spacs globally might have outpaced the number of companies looking to be listed. There is still the overarching concern about the tech sector and growth companies, hence we do not expect much enthusiasm even with a de-Spac announcement.”

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on November 21 2022. ©2022 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



Singapore’s Temasek has launched a review of its $275mn investment in FTX as the state-owned investment fund is scrutinised over the due diligence it performed before backing Sam Bankman-Fried’s crypto exchange.

Lawrence Wong, Singapore’s deputy prime minister, told parliament on Wednesday that Temasek’s losses were “disappointing” and had caused reputational damage for the city-state.

Temasek earlier this month wrote off its investment in FTX, which constituted 0.09 per cent of its S$403bn (US$295bn) portfolio but provided the crypto group with a seal of approval from a major fund manager. In response to queries by the Financial Times, the fund had defended its “eight-month due diligence” process but earlier this month admitted its trust in former chief executive Bankman-Fried appeared “misplaced”.

Temasek’s inquiry comes as filings by FTX’s new management in US bankruptcy court point to a severe lack of financial controls at a group that was once valued at $32bn by a roster of big-name investors that also includes venture capital firm Sequoia and Japan’s SoftBank.

Confidence in Singapore’s ability to regulate the digital assets industry has been undermined by a series of crypto failures connected to the city-state this year, including the collapse of hedge fund Three Arrows Capital and crypto platform Hodlnaut. Singaporean police said last week it was investigating the platform and its directors “for possible cheating and fraud offences”.

The city-state’s sovereign wealth fund GIC is also facing pressure as an investor of crypto broker Genesis. Genesis said following FTX’s collapse earlier this month that it had about $175mn in funds locked in an account on the platform. Several days later, Genesis paused withdrawals at its lending unit, citing “unprecedented market turmoil”.

The fallout over FTX and the losses incurred by retail investors have resulted in unusual public criticism of Temasek, with many questioning its due diligence. Singapore users accounted for the second-largest share of web traffic to FTX.com, accounting for about 5 per cent of traffic share, according to data from CoinGecko.

“It was a moonshot investment, but Temasek looks silly for pushing the line they did eight months of due diligence. They should have just said we took a punt, it didn’t work out, and we are sorry,” said one major investor in the private equity space.

In a Facebook post on Saturday, Ho Ching, the former Temasek chief executive who is the wife of Singapore’s leader, Lee Hsien Loong, called the fund’s loss “egg on our face”. But she defended the investor’s overall strategy, saying “some of Temasek’s best investments were made by being contrarian”.

Wong, who also serves as Singapore’s finance minister, said on Wednesday in response to questions from members of parliament that FTX’s collapse would have a limited impact on the city-state’s broader financial system.



As many as 500 Chinese companies have quietly redomiciled or registered in Singapore over the past 12 months in a bid to hedge against rising geopolitical risk as tensions between Beijing and Washington escalate.

They follow online fast-fashion retailer Shein, electric vehicle maker Nio and IT services provider Cue, who were among the first to switch parent companies or global headquarters to Singapore, list on the stock exchange, acquire local businesses and form joint ventures in the city state.

Chinese businesses setting up in Singapore is not a new phenomenon, but senior bankers say there is now an “acute” rush by mainland groups to establish holding companies to future-proof their businesses as the west steps up its scrutiny of corporate China.

The exact number of Chinese companies being set up is unclear because Singapore does not disclose origin country in its public statistics. However, one lawyer said his firm’s internal research division found more than 500 new Chinese companies had set up this year in Singapore, which experts noted was a rise from previous years.

Another business advisory group in the city-state that had reviewed the data calculated the number at 400, including family offices, but also asked not to be identified due to the sensitivities involved. Analysts expect the number of family offices — many of which are from China — to be well over 1,000 by the end of this year, compared with 400 at the end of 2020.

“China has a huge domestic market, but increasingly, businesses there work around the world. They know sensitivities arise if they remain Chinese, so they market themselves as international. Singapore, with its strong regulatory system and global reputation, allows that platform,” said Ryan Lin, a director at Singapore’s Bayfront Law. “If those numbers are correct, it would be a huge step up from previous years.”

Singapore is expected to benefit from the trend as it works to establish itself as a centre for global finance and capital flows. In September, it overtook Hong Kong as Asia’s biggest financial hub and became third overall behind New York and London, according to the Global Financial Centres Index.

The city-state is also proving to be a better location for networking and dealmaking than China, where border restrictions and rolling coronavirus lockdowns have limited crucial business travel for executives.

“We call it Singapore-washing, and it definitely helps tick boxes when we present a company to investors if we can say it is domiciled or headquartered or even listed in Singapore,” said an executive at a global private equity firm.

The trend has accelerated. Shein, a fashion company popular with western consumers, has aggressively expanded its Singapore office this year. Since 2021, it has been operated by Singapore-registered Roadget Business, according to filings first reported by Reuters, which one lawyer specialising in US equity listing rules said “could make it easier to list in the US”.

Nio, the EV start-up that plans to expand into the US market after entering Europe, listed on the Singapore exchange in May this year, despite already being listed in New York and Hong Kong.

The automaker said the listing was important for its “global business development” and an adviser familiar with the deal said the move was partially a hedge to retain access to international finance.

The flotation came at the same time Nio was put on a list of 80 Chinese companies facing expulsion from US exchanges following a stand-off between Washington and Beijing over accounting practices.

Others have established parent companies in Singapore. Cue Group was formed through a merger of three Chinese companies in Shanghai in 2017. Shi Kan, Cue’s chief executive, who divides his time between Shanghai and Singapore, said the company was originally founded in Singapore, but most of its 2,000 employees, along with most of its deals, were in mainland China.

Shi told the Financial Times its Singapore office was the “growth engine” for global expansion. There were only 20 staff members in Singapore as of September, but that would double by the end of the year, he said.

Traditionally, Hong Kong was the choice for many such companies, said Kia Meng Loh, a senior partner at Dentons Rodyk. But with Beijing “flexing its muscles” in the semi-autonomous rival finance hub, Singapore is the obvious next choice, he said.

Loh said he was seeing instances where Chinese companies were forming joint ventures with Singaporean entities, pursuing a merger or buyout, hiring Singaporean management and employees or including Singaporeans on the board.

One such company is St Louis Medical Devices, a joint venture set up in Singapore in 2020. The shareholders are a US company that specialises in technology to measure blood sugar levels without a needle and its Chinese partner, which injects capital and raises funds. George Chen, managing director of the joint venture, said Singapore was the “gateway to Asia”.

Anti-China sentiment in crucial markets such as India has also created obstacles for some Chinese companies, especially those designing apps for mass consumption. Lawyers and bankers cite instances where Chinese companies had redomiciled in Singapore specifically so they could launch apps in India without the “baggage”.

Singapore’s government is closely watching the trend to ensure no rules are broken. New regulations from December will require Singaporean entities to record nominee shareholders and identify controlling executives.

“There is a bright future for Singapore, but it has to be handled properly, and the government here has been taking the right steps to optimise the opportunity for the country,” said Greg Kallinikos, Asia chief executive of StoneX, a Nasdaq-listed international financial services company. Kallinikos said Singapore’s legal system is reassuring to the global investment community.

“The minute you hear [a company] is Singapore-incorporated, jurisdictionally it gives you a lot of confidence,” he said.



When conversations in Singapore turn to souring geopolitics, there are some who cannot resist pointing out the upside. Of course nobody wants a new cold war, assures one former top official. But if such a situation were unavoidable, and blocs started forming more rigidly and confrontationally around a US-China split, Singapore might be better positioned than anyone to play both sides.

Yet as companies and investors position themselves for what could well be a difficult 2023, little over the past 10 days has resolved the question of whether the November 14 talks between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping set some sort of floor on deteriorating relations, or whether they will continue falling dangerously as many had projected. The cold war lexicon provides easy filler for the gaps created by all this uncertainty.

Lurking behind this ominous shorthand, though, is a more intriguing, Singapore-specific nuance. Even without the risks of a new cold war, the hazards associated with deglobalisation and decoupling merit serious attention from everyone. And Singapore, perhaps sooner than anyone else, appears to have tacitly accepted both as inevitable.

There are several areas where the signs of this acceptance are already showing. The first, according to people close to Singapore’s two sovereign funds and other large institutional investors, is an acknowledgment that investment criteria have significantly changed. The relative certainties of the globalisation era are eroding fast, confides one. Everything must now be scrutinised through a geopolitical lens and with an assumption that pure economic logic, in a world where companies are forced to second-guess or hedge against geopolitics, may no longer be paramount in corporate decision-making.

By extension, said one senior fund manager, the investment prospects of individual companies should now be judged by their navigation of distinct spheres. Companies that would once have had to prove broad global growth prospects to make their investment case, they said, can theoretically now reach the same point by demonstrating an ability to grow in either a China sphere or a western one.

Second, the deglobalisation theme, say Singapore-based investment bank heads, is also making its mark on mergers and acquisitions. Singapore’s increasingly strong position in Asian dealmaking has given its financial services sector a clearer view of how companies are thinking their way into a more decoupled world. Regional dealmaking, predicted one banker, will focus on building resilience in a decoupled world. Globalisation will fade as the central driver in favour of growth within, but not necessarily across, the new lines being drawn by US-China tensions.

A third signal, described by lawyers, is the influx of Chinese capital and the desire by mainland companies to establish themselves as international, Singapore-based entities.

From the beginning of 2020 to the end of 2021, the number of family offices based in Singapore surged from 400 to 700. Lawyers dealing with the deluge say that more than half of these are from China and predict that the number could be over 1,500 by the end of this year, amid a huge backlog of unprocessed applications.

At the same time, Chinese companies are ascribing Singapore a central role in their preparations for a more polarised business environment with less ready access to global capital. A growing number of those that have already felt the pain of decoupling, or can readily envisage it, have initiated processes to redomicile in Singapore. Some are specifically doing it, say lawyers, because their international strategies have been thwarted by geopolitics. Technology companies, their lawyers add, have been the earliest to make the move. Other sectors will surely follow.

Some of the moves have clearly been accelerated by a desire to escape China’s restrictive zero-Covid policies. Others may simply be to do with the protection of family wealth from the uncertainty of existence under Xi. But both the family offices and the redomicilings, say advisers, are symptoms of a growing panic that decoupling is now real, with few options better than Singapore. The wish to make the move there from China, said one lawyer, may have been around for some time; but the need to do so has not been felt until now and it is the decoupling narrative that has caused that change.

Singapore, through luck and judgment, may have made itself the right place at what, for the world at large, is the wrong time.

leo.lewis@ft.com



Temasek has written off its $275mn stake in cryptocurrency company FTX, with the Singapore state investor saying its trust in former chief executive Sam Bankman-Fried appeared “misplaced”.

Temasek invested $210mn in FTX International and $65mm in the company’s US subsidiary across two funding rounds. The total cost of the investment was 0.09 per cent of its S$403bn (US$293bn) portfolio, it said on Thursday.

Temasek was one of the blue-chip investors in Bankman-Fried’s cryptocurrency exchange, which collapsed into bankruptcy this month. SoftBank’s Vision Fund and Sequoia Capital have also had to mark down their FTX investments to zero.

Along with Temasek, the support of international investors including BlackRock and the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan gave FTX credibility.

“It is apparent from this investment that perhaps our belief in the actions, judgment and leadership of Sam Bankman-Fried, formed from our interactions with him and views expressed in our discussions with others, would appear to have been misplaced,” Temasek said.

The Singaporean investor defended its “extensive” eight-month due diligence of FTX in 2021. It is “not practicable to eliminate all risks”, it added.

Temasek’s writedown comes as FTX publicly distances itself from Bankman-Fried, who has repeatedly taken to Twitter to make statements about the company he founded and the events that led to its collapse.

“Mr. Bankman-Fried has no ongoing role at [FTX], FTX US, or Alameda Research Ltd. and does not speak on their behalf,” John Ray, the newly appointed chief restructuring officer and chief executive at FTX, said in a statement.

Bankman-Fried, who resigned as chief executive on November 11, the day FTX filed for bankruptcy protection in Delaware, said on Wednesday that the group became “overconfident and careless” as its brand grew.

“FTX was the darling of Silicon Valley,” he said, adding that he was going to “care less” about a “dumb, contentless, ‘good actor’ framework”. He also said financial services regulators have an “impossible job”.

“Even so, there are regulators who have deeply impressed me with their knowledge and thoughtfulness . . . but most are overwhelmed,” Bankman-Fried said.



In the Hollywood hit Crazy Rich Asians, the main character flies into Singapore’s Changi airport and delights in the fact that it has a butterfly garden and a movie theatre. JFK airport in New York City is “just salmonella and despair”, she remarks.

Changi, which opened in 1981, topped the annual Skytrax World Airport Awards for eight consecutive years before the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. And if it sets a standard for airports, then national flag carrier Singapore Airlines is the airborne embodiment of that modern and cosmopolitan image.

This is why the enduring focus on the “Singapore Girl” — a term for female cabin crew coined in a marketing campaign 50 years ago — has been increasingly called into question by critics as outdated.

Stories abound about the airline’s rules for female cabin crew. On chat rooms and blogs, current and former flight attendants offer advice to those preparing for interviews and training. Many discuss the need to stay below a certain body mass index level and detail how their make-up palette and even hairstyles are chosen for them, while others warn that candidates — who are advised to be “humble” and “elegant” — may be rejected for having a mole on their face.

Singapore Airlines is not the only flag carrier to hire attractive women, of course. But many in the city-state were shocked last month to learn that, up until this year, Singapore Girls were fired when they became pregnant. In October, the airline announced that it had dropped a policy that required female cabin crew to leave the airline after the first trimester of pregnancy.

The change means pregnant cabin crew also receive paid maternity leave for up to 16 weeks before being automatically added to the next flight roster, bringing Singapore Airlines in line with other local employers.

The company said cabin crew “may choose to work in a temporary ground attachment” during their pregnancy, although they would have to apply for such roles. “All eligible cabin crew who have applied for ground positions so far have been offered available positions suitable for their expertise,” it said.

“When you put all of this together — the Singapore Girl, the fact they were one of the last global airlines to hire female pilots, the pregnancy rules — the optics are not great,” said one director at a women’s rights organisation in Singapore.

Singapore Airlines did not provide a reason for the change. Advocacy groups suggest that the airline, which laid off thousands of employees during the pandemic, is desperate to retain staff to meet the rebound in global travel. Changi is one of the world’s busiest airports and a top transfer hub for Asia. Singapore Airlines this month reported a record quarterly operating profit of S$678mn ($493mn).

The Association of Women for Action and Research (Aware), a non-governmental organisation based in Singapore, said in a statement that it was “surprised” that the carrier had continued the practice of forcing pregnant staff to quit for as long as it did.

“We can only speculate as to why [the airline] decided to make the change this year,” it said. “It’s possible that because of the pandemic the job market is currently very tight and it makes sense to not terminate employees’ contracts unnecessarily.”

Employees still have to apply for ground work with no guarantee of securing a position, Aware says. The precise grooming standards remain unclear but may also restrict opportunities for returning mothers, it added.

Maternity discrimination is against the law in Singapore, so the question arises how the government-backed airline was able to enforce the policy until 2022 despite years of criticism. It also casts a pall over state efforts to address workplace discrimination, particularly against women.

Research carried out by Aware shows that maternity discrimination is still a widespread issue in Singapore and other employers do find ways to get around existing laws. Aware says its workplace harassment and discrimination advisory reported 71 maternity discrimination cases in 2021, out of a total of 88 discrimination cases reported to them that year.

Many hope that forthcoming anti-discrimination legislation — a first for Singapore — will be more effective in rooting out such practices by closing loopholes.

Many of the cases examined by Aware are related to small and medium-sized enterprises, not major brands such as Singapore Airlines — which is why how the carrier treats its female employees is so important. Singapore Airlines should be the sky-high bar other employers are held to, rather than a floor.

mercedes.ruehl@ft.com / @mjruehl



Hong Kong has kicked off a contest to become Asia’s crypto capital as investors and executives warn that rival Singapore may be squandering its head start with its pivot to stricter regulation.

The sudden shift in Hong Kong last week towards clear rules for retail investors to trade digital assets follows years of ambiguity from regulators. That made some companies reluctant to build up a greater presence in the city, and capitalise on demand from mainland China, where crypto trading is outlawed.

“This kind of regulation [in Hong Kong], this kind of positive development, I think we have been waiting for [it for] five years,” said Lennix Lai, director of financial markets at OKX, a crypto exchange with offices in Hong Kong and Singapore.

“The regulatory status of Hong Kong is very important on a global scale . . . industry participants are seeking a proper licence everywhere in the world, but what they really want is a regulatory status in a major financial centre,” Lai added.

That delay is reflected in the size of Hong Kong’s market in comparison to its great rival, Singapore. With about $74bn, Hong Kong trails Singapore in terms of the value of crypto assets received in the year to the end of June, with the latter’s total coming in at about $100bn, according to Chainalysis, a consultancy.

The clash between the two financial hubs came to a head last week, when they held overlapping fintech conferences. At their event, Hong Kong officials announced a public consultation on how retail investors could have a suitable degree of access to digital assets under a new licensing regime. Rules at present limit crypto trades to institutional investors with a portfolio of at least HK$8mn (US$1mn).

“I think [Hong Kong] could still regain that [leading global crypto hub] status,” said Sam Bankman-Fried, co-founder and chief executive of FTX. “It’s absolutely not too late for that.” FTX quit Hong Kong for the Bahamas last year owing to the city’s strict Covid-19 restrictions and more regulatory clarity in the Caribbean.

In contrast, the Monetary Authority of Singapore proposed to tighten regulations for retail investors, after years of trying to attract some of the biggest names. The “crypto credit crunch” earlier this year revealed a number of companies with ties to Singapore, such as hedge fund Three Arrows Capital.

Ravi Menon, managing director of the MAS, said in a speech at Singapore’s fintech festival last week that the city-state did not want to be a hub for trading and speculating in the asset class. The central bank has proposed barring retail investors from borrowing to invest in cryptocurrencies and requiring crypto exchanges to check that would-be buyers understand the risks.

The contrasting approaches have already prompted some to change their plans. “With the recent policy announcements, we will be prioritising and accelerating our business plans in Hong Kong over Singapore. Previously we planned to move our headquarters to Singapore, but now that plan is on pause,” said Adrian Wang, chief executive of Metalpha, a crypto asset management service provider.

Hong Kong’s shift comes despite the ban levied on crypto trading in mainland China. “Hong Kong seems to be positioning itself as a much more open jurisdiction for crypto trading as compared to Singapore, which is especially interesting in the context of how hard the mainland has cracked down,” said Zennon Kapron, head of fintech consulting firm Kapronasia.

The city is at pains to emphasise it has a regulatory system that is separate from mainland China. “The key elements that international investors or people come to Hong Kong for is our international connectivity . . . together with our access to China,” said Hong Kong’s financial services secretary Christopher Hui.

Singapore says it is still “embracing” crypto but focusing on institutional markets.

“We are embracing fully the underlying technologies of distributed ledgers and the potential that they have to transform financial markets,” said Lawrence Wong, Singapore’s deputy prime minister, as he opened its conference.

Analysts and industry executives said there would be greater clarity when the two cities published the final versions of their plans. “Hong Kong’s regime will be going into effect in March, and there’s plenty of time for Singapore to issue similar guidelines in the first quarter of next year,” said Vince Turcotte, Hong Kong-based director of digital assets at Eventus.

But Hong Kong’s ambiguity on crypto may have already cost it as the hub of choice for companies and executives.

“I don’t look at the Hong Kong announcement as anything more than the whole region waking up to ‘this is real and here to stay’,” said Brooks Entwistle, a senior vice-president at cryptocurrency company Ripple. “But Singapore has been open for the last several years, making all the right moves to remain the long-term regional or global headquarters of choice for fintech and crypto organisations.”



Civil rights activists in Singapore were puzzled when their government issued a challenge to Sir Richard Branson. The UK billionaire entrepreneur was invited last month to take part in a televised debate in response to his blog post criticising the city-state’s strict drug policy and death penalty.

Home affairs and law minister K. Shanmugam’s offer of a plane ticket and accommodation for him to come and argue his position seemed at odds with Singapore’s stance at home. The government had shown a willingness to use the country’s laws and other means to silence local criticism, discourage opposing views and stop behaviours deemed unacceptable, critics said.

Writing on Twitter, Jolovan Wham asked Shanmugam why the minister could not debate the issue with his local community in Singapore instead. In response, Shanmugam blocked Wham on social media and deleted his comment, the activist told the Financial Times.

The incident serves as a reminder that while Singapore continues to embrace western commerce and has shifted on some issues such as gay rights, the island remains politically authoritarian and socially dirigiste.

Singapore is trying to attract global talent in everything from cryptocurrencies to the metaverse, after leaping ahead of Hong Kong in September to become the world’s biggest financial hub behind London and New York.

As the ruling People’s Action party — in power since independence in 1965 — prepares for new leadership, it has redoubled efforts to protect the cultural status quo, according to experts. But its popularity is in decline and its stance ignores the views of a more liberal, younger generation of Singaporeans.

In October alone, a global fashion magazine has been chided for promoting non-traditional families, a bill has been introduced to amend the constitution to protect the heterosexual definition of marriage, a controversial film has been banned on religious grounds and an adult content creator has been jailed. Unlike Branson, some local activists against the death penalty have been issued with police warnings.

“The government has always taken an interesting position that even if it is unable to really regulate individual activities, it does feel it needs to state its position on values publicly — even as a symbolic act,” said Chua Beng Huat, a professor at Yale-NUS college. “There is a will to govern not just the economy but also social values that are important to political stability.”

One of the biggest moves came a week ago when the government filed bills in parliament to prevent court challenges to laws and policies concerning marriage.

Despite softening attitudes towards homosexuality — the city decriminalised sex between men in August via the repeal of a colonial-era law — Singapore has sought to protect itself against court challenges that could legalise gay marriage. The intervention effectively makes this a political issue the PAP can control, rather than a legal one.

A similar sentiment was at play last month when Vogue Singapore saw its licence cut from one year to six months. The fashion magazine was issued a warning by the information ministry over nudity and content that promoted non-traditional families, the ministry said. Vogue did not respond to a request for comment.

A new film, #LookAtMe by local film-maker Ken Kwek set in Singapore and which premiered in New York, was banned by authorities in October. The movie is about a young man who is offended by a pastor’s stance on homosexuality. Government agencies said the film had the potential to cause social division and denigrated a religious community.

“You’re seeing a series of reactions based on insecurity,” said Michael Barr, an associate professor in international relations at Flinders University and the author of several books on Singapore politics. “I have spoken to a few academics and civil society types and the sense of the creeping level of repression is very real.” He added that decision makers feared losing control of the narrative.

Singapore maintains that the majority of its citizens support the government’s stance. In a speech in August, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong noted longstanding reservations by religious groups on legalising homosexuality. Shanmugam points to public surveys of Singaporeans that show majority support for the death penalty as a deterrent to drug trafficking.

But experts said the liberalisation of Singapore’s cultural scene and the growth in activism were unavoidable. “People are more liberal across generations. It is becoming more visible,” said Chua.

That is especially true of online activity, another area where Singapore has clamped down. A court last month fined and jailed Titus Low, a 22-year-old OnlyFans creator, for three weeks for accessing his account in breach of a police order to stay off the video site. Low’s channel features many sexually explicit videos and photos. He was originally charged with transmitting obscene materials by electronic means last year. Low’s lawyer did not respond to a request for comment.

Even so, some citizens are hopeful the repeal of Section 377A, as the law banning gay sex was known, will mean opportunities to push boundaries without breaking the law.

“If peaceful activism and changing attitudes contributed to [the repeal], maybe there is hope for a softening on other issues, such as the death penalty,” a Singaporean student told the Financial Times. However, even for them, it feels far away. “For now I am still worried about posting my views on Facebook — or in a newspaper.”

Letter in response to this article:

Singapore rejects ‘dirigiste’ and ‘authoritarian’ tags / From TK Lim, High Commissioner of Singapore, London SW1, UK



Welcome to the FT Cryptofinance newsletter. This week we are asking if there are lessons to be learned from Singapore’s approach to regulating the industry.

Broadly speaking, there have been two approaches when it comes to regulating crypto.

Some countries have sprung into action quickly, trying to turn themselves into a “crypto hub”. Usually driven by politicians driven by fear of missing out on the alleged future of finance. Others have been more cautious, worried about a weakening of regulatory standards. Singapore fell into the first camp; the EU the second.

Those jurisdictions trying to claim early mover advantage — that perhaps once looked at Singapore with envy — may want to pause.

This week the city-state effectively performed an inelegant manoeuvre and proposed a series of new regulations aimed at bolstering the jurisdiction’s grip on bad crypto behaviour.

The original plan was to leverage Singapore’s reputation as a stable, tech-friendly, educated country with an attractive tax environment. But that has recently been tarnished by a swath of high-profile controversies.

On Wednesday, the Monetary Authority of Singapore published two consultation papers. My colleague Mercedes Ruehl and I wrote about it here. MAS said:

“Several misconduct cases have been reported by international media, including where legal proceedings were commenced against entities that did not have sufficiently robust business conduct practices in place,” it said.

You can say that again. In just the past few months, Do Kwon’s disappearance, and collapses at Three Arrows Capital and Hodlnaut have undermined Singapore’s crypto approach, and now, the city-state’s regulator seems to have noticed.

Back in June, the MAS’s chief fintech officer Sopnendu Mohanty said Singapore would be “brutal and unrelentingly hard” on bad crypto behaviour. To propose tougher consumer protection laws — after the consumers you are meant to protect were left exposed to some of the worst failures in the crypto industry’s history — just doesn’t strike me as behaviour that lives up to a promise like that.

“This extraordinary Game of Thrones-like battle to be the crypto hub is absurd,” former chief of the SEC’s Office of Internet Enforcement John Reed Stark told me. “While the goal is admirable . . . crypto, blockchain and Web 3 are not the way to get you there. Ironically, they take you in reverse,” he added.

A city-state once described by industry giant Binance as a “crypto paradise” is no longer leading from the front but is instead looking at what Europe has done.

Buried deep in the MAS proposals, the regulator “encourages” digital payment token trading platforms to put “good industry practices” in place to detect and deter unfair trading — things such as market manipulation, misleading conduct and insider trading.

This is remarkably similar to parts of Europe’s long-debated, now imminent, Markets in Crypto-Assets regulation. Indeed, MAS acknowledged the debt, saying: “These practices are similar to regulatory proposals put forward in other jurisdictions such as in Hong Kong and the EU.”

But what it may ultimately reveal is that EU’s marquee legislation becomes the global approach. After all, the EU is a regulatory powerhouse regardless of the industry. It’s one of the world’s biggest markets. Size matters. When it makes decisions, other jurisdictions take notice.

But what was notable about MiCA was the degree of acceptance from the industry itself. Circle’s chief strategy officer and head of policy Dante Disparte said in the summer that MiCA offered a “pathway for Europe to emerge as a competitive region for the safe, sound development of an always-on financial system”.

In my view, industry buy-in can be interpreted two ways: that the crypto has successfully lobbied for rules it likes so it can continue as it likes, or that those rules aren’t going to be so prescriptive, unexpected and stultifying that people will look elsewhere to expand their businesses.

That’s the idea anyway; the question is whether MiCA will meet those goals when it comes into force, probably next year. But if nothing else, the slower approach is more likely to prevent the awkward dance performed by Singapore.

What’s your take on Singapore’s recent crypto moves? Email me at scott.chipolina@ft.com.

You probably noticed WhatsApp go down this week.

Freed from the distractions of group chats, maybe you mused that an outage underlined the risks of relying on a centralised service.

If so, you’re not alone. Paolo Ardoino, chief technology officer at Bitfinex, offered similar counsel.

Yes, that’s an executive of a centralised crypto exchange that, as it happens, suffered a hack of its own in 2016, which earlier this year came sharply back into focus in the wake of an alleged multi-billion dollar money laundering case.

Digital asset investment products, like exchange-traded funds and notes, or closed-ended investment funds established as trusts, have been declining in popularity since the air came out of the crypto market.

According to data shared by data analytics platform CryptoCompare, average daily aggregate product volumes have fallen under $100mn this month. Barring a late surge, that would make it the worst month since June 2020, just as the bull run was about to get going.

The figures are part of a wider story. Last year, when popular cryptocurrency prices were surging, or going “to the moon” as the lingo has it, prices were buoyed by flattering narratives about digital gold or hedging against inflation.

This year’s crash proved those narratives no longer make sense and the result is a lot less excitement about crypto tokens.



Singapore’s regulators have ramped up warnings to retail investors over the “hazards” of speculating in cryptocurrencies and outlined proposals to keep consumers safe, after a series of high-profile crypto failures linked to the city-state.

In two consultation papers issued on Wednesday, the Monetary Authority of Singapore proposed restricting retail investors from borrowing money or using credit cards to buy cryptocurrencies and from lending out their digital tokens in search of yields. It also wants crypto exchanges to test would-be crypto buyers to check they understand risks in what it calls a “highly volatile” asset class.

Singapore has generally provided a welcoming environment for the crypto industry. Exchange Binance once described it as a “crypto paradise” and several prominent firms have established themselves there. But regulators have sounded the alarm after a series of high-profile crypto implosions this year, and are proposing restrictions on some of the most popular speculative tools.

“MAS strongly discourages speculation in cryptocurrencies by consumers,” it said. “Several misconduct cases have been reported by international media, including where legal proceedings were commenced against entities that did not have sufficiently robust business conduct practices in place,” it added.

This year, Singapore-based crypto hedge fund Three Arrows Capital collapsed, taking down exchange Voyager Digital with it. An international manhunt is also under way, with a focus on the city-state, to track down Terraform Labs co-founder Do Kwon, whose stablecoin terraUSD imploded in May.

The MAS has stopped short of an outright crypto ban, saying it welcomes the “transformative economic potential” of the asset class. But trading platforms must ensure retail customers were fully aware of risks and had the financial resources to withstand large losses, it said. “Support for a digital asset ecosystem does not mean support for cryptocurrency speculation,” it noted.

The MAS also said so-called stablecoins, which are designed to track the value of real assets such as the dollar in tokenised form, must be properly backed with reserve assets pegged to the Singapore dollar or other major currencies.

Nizam Ismail, founder of Singapore-based Ethikom Consultancy, told the Financial Times some proposals “may be overly prescriptive and go against the grain of Singapore’s regulatory philosophy”.

“The prohibition against purchase of [tokens] by credit cards or by credit could unwittingly encourage retail investors to trade in crypto derivatives, which are largely unregulated,” Ismail added.

Broader proposals include forcing service providers to ensure customer assets are segregated from their own assets and adopting “good industry practices” against unfair trading, including monitoring trading activity and setting out rules governing trading.

“Digital payment token markets have been susceptible to unfair trading practices of market manipulation, misleading conduct and insider trading by nefarious actors,” the MAS said.

Singapore will be likely to encounter the same issues as other jurisdictions in monitoring and controlling trading by its citizens on platforms domiciled overseas or operating outside regulatory oversight. “The problem of unregulated entities operating in this space in Singapore is not accounted for,” said Kelvin Low, a law professor at the National University of Singapore.

The regulator’s proposals are open to public consultation until December 21.



Singapore’s mixed martial arts promoter One Championship is expecting to reach profitability in a few years, its group president told Nikkei Asia, though he noted that the company was still prioritising investments to cement its global position outside Asia.

From eye-catching short highlights on Facebook to live broadcasts on streaming services such as Amazon’s Prime Video, the combat sports brand’s fights have become ubiquitous across many tech platforms, gaining global reach thanks to more viewers staying at home during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Even as one of the fastest-growing digital sports companies — with as many as 14bn views globally last year across social media platforms — One Championship is still focused on investing in overseas expansions in North America, particularly the US, where US promoter the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) has a stronghold.

“We’re not there yet [to break even]. It could take a few years. The clear thing is that we’re on our way,” One Championship group president Teh Hua Fung said in an interview.

At a time of market uncertainty, when more investors are placing greater scrutiny on profitability, One Championship’s challenge highlights whether high-growth companies needing heavy investments can prove their growth stories from the initial lossmaking stage.

Teh said he was confident the group’s business model was “inherently profitable”, adding that “revenue will grow very quickly” once the company has strong brand recognition and the content to lure viewers in overseas markets.

“It’s like a theme park, or a piece of art — when it’s not done, it’s not worth much,” said Teh, “but when it’s done, it’s worth a lot.”

“If you try to monetise too early, you actually limit your growth,” he added.

Founded in 2011 by chair and chief executive Chatri Sityodtong, a martial arts instructor turned entrepreneur with a Thai father and a Japanese mother, One Championship began mainly as a promoter of live events. Investors include Singapore’s Temasek Holdings and America’s Sequoia Capital.

Since the late 1990s, combat sports have been through a dramatic rise and fall. In Asia, Japan’s K-1 professional kick-boxing reached its height, followed by the mixed martial arts brand Pride, which at one point was one of the biggest competitors to UFC.

But One Championship saw south-east Asia’s potential, with its traditionally rich martial arts culture, including muay Thai, silat melayu in Malaysia, the Philippines’ eskrima or Myanmar’s lethwei.

Apart from mixed martial arts, the company has featured muay Thai, submission grappling and Burmese boxing, making it a bigger platform than UFC in terms of the number of disciplines.

While past Asian promoters had to rely on television broadcasts, One Championship took advantage of the rapid penetration of smartphones in the region.

“In the old days, it was all about TV networks and TV stations,” said Teh. “Digital players are becoming right up there in the game.”

The company has been expanding its media and digital revenue sources, such as media rights and sponsorships, which now account for more than half of its total revenue, according to Teh. In 2018, it became a unicorn, an unlisted company whose value tops $1bn, distributing content to over 150 countries.

“This is an intellectual property business where you have to grow the IP to an appropriate scale before the revenue happens,” said Teh. “The challenge is building the IP and getting it to a point where you have product and brand leadership and big distribution.”

The years of the Covid-19 pandemic had brought a mix of “good and bad”, Teh added. The absence of live events hit ticket sales and hosting fees, which are some of its main revenue sources.

Still, Teh said, 2021 turned out to be a “record year” for revenues, as the company was able to get wider viewership and license fees.

According to a Nielsen report released in April, One Championship ranked second overall in digital viewership for global sports properties, just after the National Basketball Association of North America.

The combat sports company has travelled across platforms and is now venturing overseas with more partnerships to gain an audience beyond its main Asian markets.

In April, it announced a five-year distribution deal with Amazon’s Prime Video to broadcast live events to the US and Canadian markets.

“The more people watch us, the more they will know the brand and we get to acquire new fans in the world’s largest sports market, and we’re aiming to have physical live events in the US next year,” said Teh.

The overseas expansion follows its latest $150mn funding in December last year, led by Guggenheim Investments and the Qatar Investment Authority. The round is reported to have given the group a valuation of $1.35bn.

Whether the company can gain traction in the US, however, will be crucial to proving its growth story ahead of its much-anticipated initial public offering. Parent company Group One Holdings has reportedly chosen the US for an IPO.

“A potential IPO is one of several options we are considering to raise capital in the long term. We want the company to be ready because you never know when markets will turn. But there’s no immediate [plan],” said Teh.

“What we are focused on now is being good stewards of the money that we raised.”

A version of this article was first published by Nikkei Asia on September 26 2022. ©2022 Nikkei Inc. All rights reserved.



The international manhunt for Do Kwon, co-founder of collapsed cryptocurrency operator Terraform Labs, has put the spotlight on Singapore, whose reputation has taken a hit following the failure of several digital asset funds with links to the city-state.

Not only was Kwon’s company, whose stablecoin terraUSD imploded in May, registered in Singapore, but Korean prosecutors believe he travelled to the city-state in April.

Kwon last week showed Singapore as his location on Twitter, writing that he was making “zero effort” to hide. Singapore police have said Kwon is not in the city-state.

Kwon’s case is not the only high-profile crypto controversy unfolding in Singapore, which was until recently pitching itself as a digital asset-friendly destination in competition with global rivals Dubai and Zurich.

Crypto executives and experts said the lengthening list of scandals and collapses has tarnished Singapore’s reputation after officials touted its stability, sophisticated regulation and tax-friendliness as an advantage for crypto companies and investors.

“The reputational damage over the last six months is a lot more serious than has been let on,” said Kelvin Low, a law professor at the National University of Singapore. “Every time one of these companies is brought up, they are mentioned [as being] based in Singapore.”

Some of the biggest crypto collapses can be traced through Singapore, which had attracted digital asset companies from all over the world.

“Singapore has the most liberal regulatory environment after Switzerland in terms of crypto investment,” Kim Hyoung-joong, head of the Cryptocurrency Research Center at Korea University.

“Crypto players prefer to operate in Singapore because of transparent regulations and their easy access to investors for funding,” said Kim.

Three Arrows Capital, a crypto hedge fund that collapsed in June, started as a registered fund management company in Singapore.

Management of the company’s sole fund later shifted to an offshore entity in the British Virgin Islands. Co-founders Su Zhu and Kyle Davies have not revealed their location since Three Arrows’ failure.

Singapore’s regulator reprimanded Three Arrows for providing false information and breaching certain asset management thresholds. It added that it was assessing whether further regulatory breaches occurred.

Hodlnaut, a Singaporean crypto lender that received in-principle licensing approval from the Monetary Authority of Singapore, halted withdrawals and cut the majority of its employees earlier this year.

In August, Hodlnaut was placed under interim judicial management. The company said this decision would “provide a better chance of recovery”. Singapore police said that they were “looking into” Hodlnaut.

Singapore police did not investigate the terraUSD collapse despite a complaint being filed, according to local media. Police did not respond to a request for comment regarding Terraform Labs and Kwon.

MAS said “none of these troubled companies are licensed by the Monetary Authority of Singapore” under its Payment Services Act, which regulates payments systems, and so were not under its jurisdiction.

It said Three Arrows Capital had “ceased to manage funds [in Singapore] prior to the problems leading to its insolvency”. It added that Hodlnaut had withdrawn its licence application, so the “suspension of services is not in breach” of Singapore regulations.

“In Singapore, as is the case in all other jurisdictions, not all activities related to cryptocurrencies are regulated,” said MAS, adding that its “evolving regulatory approach makes Singapore one of the most comprehensive in managing the risks of digital assets”.

As the crypto crunch set in, regulators in Singapore have started taking a tougher line, with officials promising to be “unrelentingly hard” on bad behaviour in the sector.

But experts said Singapore was not doing enough to punish or investigate possible fraud as a crisis has swept through the digital asset industry, causing an avalanche of losses for retail investors.

“I do think there is an extent to which [Singapore] is willing to say one thing and do something quite different,” an executive at a crypto company active in Singapore said.

The same executive said they believe Singapore was in a “tight spot” in trying to balance being seen as a “serious player in the world economy” and “trying to promote themselves as a hub for innovation in a nascent industry which is clearly showing itself to have more and more bad actors”.

In August, MAS managing director Ravi Menon distanced the regulator from the scandals and said it would take “further measures to reduce consumer harm”.

Most steps have been preventive measures to protect Singaporean retail investors, such as a crackdown on advertising, rather than disciplinary ones.

The changing tone from officials including Menon has caused some crypto companies to reassess their Singapore operations.

Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange, has abandoned plans to make the city a hub despite its chief executive Changpeng Zhao living there for much of 2021. Last year, it was also placed on the MAS investor alert list.

“Singapore is not a big focus for us,” said Gleb Kostarev, regional head of Asia for Binance. “A lot depends on regulation . . . previously Singapore was some kind of like crypto paradise . . . times changed.”

Others have come to the defence of Singapore’s status as a crypto hub, suggesting it would be unfair to blame the city-state.

“I think it’s somewhat also unfair to try to put all the onus and responsibility on the regulators, when often the party to blame in many instances are the crypto markets players who frankly, in many cases, should know better,” said one individual familiar with the matter.

Teresa Goody Guillén, partner at US law firm BakerHostetler, said an Interpol red notice for Kwon was “unlikely to have an impact on legitimate companies’ interest in forming or operating in Singapore”.

The crypto industry “does not appear to react negatively to law enforcement investigating allegations of criminal activity, fraud, and the like,” she added.

ChainUp, a blockchain company that offers technology to crypto exchanges and other clients said it was expanding in the city-state.

The start-up relocated its headquarters from China to Singapore in 2019 as Beijing was signalling it was clamping down on the sector.

“I am confident in the approach of regulators,” said Sailor Zhong, ChainUp’s chief executive.

“No one country can do it all and it is hard for Singapore’s government to enforce rule of law for companies with operations abroad.”



The convention centre at Marina Bay Sands, 55 storeys below the world’s longest rooftop infinity pool and surrounded by designer shops and celebrity chef restaurants, is a fitting place to find S$25,000 ($17,000) sculpted glass exercise bikes, displays by petrochemical companies, crystal chandeliers and a man in Balenciaga trainers aggressively painting a canvas to promote a new piano, being played by his twin brother.

Perhaps less so the objects made from cow dung, cigarette butts, old newspapers and sweepings from dog groomers. But all of these were at the first FIND design fair, one of the sources of surprise at Singapore Design Week.

Launched in 2014, Singapore Design Week returned in 2022 after a two-year break. “You can really feel the city come alive again,” says Dawn Lim, executive director of the Design Singapore Council. “And we’re ready”.

The Design Week organisers say that the 2022 edition, which ran September 16-25, aimed to promote Singapore and its “distinctive brand of creativity” globally. The hiatus, due to pandemic restrictions, was a “good time to hit the refresh button”, says festival director Mark Wee.

The programme had three themes, or “pillars”: Design Futures, which builds on the idea of Singapore as a futuristic prototype for the world; Design Marketplace, which looks at design trends in south-east Asia and positions Singapore as a “global-Asia hub”; and the socially conscious Design Impact.

Events across Singapore included public installations, exhibitions and tours, as well as the Design Futures symposium at Victoria Theatre.

Developed by creative director Paola Antonelli, curator and director of R&D at MoMA, the symposium was titled “Agency for the Future: Design and the Quest for a Better World”. Speakers included the architect Thomas Heatherwick — creator of huge public spectacles such as New York’s Vessel, the B of the Bang in Manchester and London’s unrealised Garden Bridge — who decried “boring” architecture.

Gerontologist Emi Kiyota, who has advised on building communities for retired monks in Bhutan, spoke about the need to create homes for seniors without segregating them. “Older people don’t want to live only with other older people,” she said.

“Agropolitan” expert Stephen Cairns, of ETH Zurich’s Future Cities Laboratory in Singapore, discussed how to turn a place that imports 90 per cent of its food into one that produces 30 per cent, as Singapore aims to do by 2030. His solution is to use black soldier flies to quickly process food waste into fertiliser for more crops. One question arose from the audience, though — is it halal?

Singapore might not be “giving all the answers yet”, says Antonelli. “Butit’s asking the right questions, questions that can be extrapolated in the outside world.” There is one certain conclusion drawn from Singapore Design Week. Design is “not only cute chairs”, in her words.

These are the highlights from a week showcasing the best design.

FIND design fair

Marina Bay Sands hosted the first edition of new annual trade show FIND — Design Fair Asia. The show had more than 11,000 visitors over three days and more than 500 interior and furniture design companies, from Singapore and abroad. Partnered with Fiera Milano, home of Salone del Mobile, and with speakers including Low Yen Ling, minister of state for trade and industry, and Italian ambassador Mario Andrea Vattani, the programme was aimed at introducing Singapore to the global design circuit.

But for something more radical, there was the Emerge @ Find showcase, featuring 55 innovative upcoming design studios from south-east Asia, curated by Suzy Annetta, editor-in-chief of magazine Design Anthology.

Many of these designers subverted traditional techniques and materials to create contemporary objects, such as 14th-century Thai celadon pottery glazing on insulated double-walled tea cups and bamboo sculptures by Piboon Amornjiraporn of Plural Designs. Weaving was used to create psychedelic geometric shapes, as in the vast digital loom jacquard piece by Tiffany Loy from Singapore.

The bendiness of locally grown cane and rattan was exploited in unfamiliar new shapes.

Indonesian designer Alvin Tjitrowirjo showed a flowing Log bench, and Teerapoj Teeropas of design studio Kitt-Ta-Khon, from Thailand, added nylon to create arresting black-and- white stripes in his Qing dynasty-style Chino console table.

Sustainable and salvaged materials were another theme. Cynthia Chan from Singapore created woven and felted “pelts” and upholstery from clipped dog hair that would otherwise end up in landfill, recovered from local pet groomers. Adhi Nugraha from Indonesia made use of (thoroughly cleaned) cow dung and cigarette butts in curvy lamps, speakers and stools.

Anybody drawn to dramatic shapes and sleek luxury was well served by a litany of pieces — including Dear Spirits, a series of jagged welded altars by Tan Wei Ming of Sputnik Forest Labs, Malaysia, and the gleaming blue-green resin Fossil chair and cabinet by Charif Lona of Thailand’s Studio AOK.

New Optimistic Works by Studio Juju

At the National Design Centre, which houses studios, gallery space and the offices of the Design Singapore Council, was an exhibition by designers-in-residence Studio Juju. New Optimistic Works aims to “work with the possibilities and constraints of manufacturing within Singapore” and develop a design identity for the country. Some goods are produced in part here, says Studio Juju’s Timo Wong, but shipped elsewhere to be turned into finished products.

Pieces included a galvanised metal lamp, a collaboration with Chop Wah Hin Sheet Metal Works, which traditionally manufactures kettles, dustbins and industrial parts; a colourful metal side table that was finished in a car- spraying workshop; and recycled glassware fused in local kilns.

N*thing is Possible by Potato Head, OMA & Friends

Also at the National Design Centre was an exhibition by hospitality group Potato Head in collaboration with architects OMA. Illustrating the company’s dedication to reducing waste — it sends 5 per cent to landfill now compared with 50 per cent in 2018 — the installation featured slick furniture and other amenities for its Bali locations, created from hotel waste, displayed perched on top of their raw materials.

The average tourist in Bali produces 1.7kg of waste per day, which is a lot of free material. “It’s not trash,” says Simon Pestridge, chief experience officer of Potato Head. “it’s a raw product that can be turned into something beautiful.”

Max Lamb has designed colourful chairs from recycled plastic bottles. Each chair contains 830 of them, and offcuts of the resulting material are used to weld the panels together, ensuring no extra resources are required. Used cooking oil from the restaurants is cleaned and turned into scented candles in offcut wine bottles — for the Singapore exhibition the NDC on-site restaurant provided the oil. Damaged towels are turned into rugs and textiles by designers Toogood, Lamb and natural dye company Tarum, while a composite of styrofoam, oyster shells and plastics is used in toothbrush holders and bins for the hotel rooms.

The interiors of the Potato Head Studios hotel also feature recycled elements. Woven fabric by BYO Living covers the ceilings, made from 9,500 green plastic bottles per 2 square metre panel. “Turning plastic into a material that will stand the test of time in a building is the best way to use it,” says Pestridge.

Potato Head is also salvaging discarded timber to create a series of furniture with Japanese architect Kengo Kuma. OMA and Max Lamb are utilising Ijuk fibre — discarded palm tree bark — to create beach umbrellas and lamps.

Good Design Research pop up

Located outside the Bugis+ shopping centre, this public display featured 17 projects that have received grants from Design Singapore’s Good Design Research initiative, which supports designers working on social cohesion, sustainable processes or new materials.

The pop-up was described as showing “design research revealing its presence and relevance in our everyday lives”. Projects included a renewable replacement for reinforced concrete by design studio Produce; a proposal for using trees felled in public spaces by Roger & Sons; underwear enabling people with physical disabilities to dress independently by Will and Well LLP; and an alternative to disposable packing used at hawker food centres by Forest & Whale.

Lucy Watson travelled as a guest of Design Singapore Council

Find out about our latest stories first — follow @FTProperty on Twitter or @ft_houseandhome on Instagram