Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales) 
Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Ministry  of Housing,  Communities  and Local 
Government,  with the consent  of Tracy Gilbert  the member  in charge of the Bill, are published 
separately  as Bill 23—EN. 
59/1 Bill 23 
Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
Absent  vote applications 
1 Local  government  elections  (Scotland  and Wales) 
2 Elections  to the Scottish  Parliament 
3 Elections  to Senedd  Cymru 
General 
4 Commencement  and transitional  provision 
5 Extent  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 23 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  absent  voting  in connection  with  local  government 
elections  in Scotland  and Wales,  elections  to the Scottish  Parliament  and 
elections  to Senedd  Cymru;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
Absent  vote applications 
1 Local  government  elections  (Scotland  and Wales) 
(1) Schedule  2 to the Representation  of the People  Act 1983  (provisions  which 
5may  be contained  in regulations  as to registration  etc) is amended  in 
accordance  with  subsections  (2) and (3). 
(2) In paragraph  1(5A)(a)(ii),  omit  the words  from  “, other”  to the end. 
(3) After  paragraph  5ZA,  insert— 
“5ZB (1) Provision  about  the use of the UK digital  service  in relation  to relevant 
devolved  absent  voting  applications. 
10 (2) Provision  made  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may include  provision— 
(a) conferring  functions  on a Minister  of the Crown  to enable  relevant 
devolved  absent  voting  applications  to be submitted  through  the 
UK digital  service; 
(b) where  such applications  are, or are to be, so submitted— 
15 (i) authorising  a Minister  of the Crown,  in prescribed 
circumstances,  to complete  applications  in part for people; 
(ii) about  how any requirement  for an applicant  to provide  a 
signature  in connection  with an application  may be 
satisfied; 
20 (c) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  through 
the UK digital  service; 
(d) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  in 
connection  with a relevant  devolved  absent  voting  application  in 
relation  to which  the UK digital  service  is, or is to be, used. 
59/1 Bill 23 1 Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 
(3) Except  as provided  by sub-paragraph  (4), the disclosure  or other  processing 
of information  in accordance  with provision  made  under  this paragraph 
does not breach— 
(a) 
5any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  processing  the 
information; 
(b) any other  restriction  on the processing  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(4) Provision  made  under  this paragraph  does not require  or authorise  the 
10disclosure  or other  processing  of personal  data that would  contravene  the 
data protection  legislation  (but in determining  whether  particular  processing 
of data would  do so, take into account  the duty  imposed  or the powers 
conferred  by such provision). 
(5) In this paragraph— 
15“the data protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act); 
“personal  data”  and “processing”  have the same  meaning  as in 
the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(2) and (4) of that 
Act); 
20“relevant  devolved  absent  voting  application”  means  an application 
(including  a partially  completed  application)  under  paragraph  3, 
4 or 6 of Schedule  4 to the Representation  of the People  Act 2000 
in relation  to a local government  election,  or local government 
elections,  in Scotland  or Wales; 
25“the UK digital  service”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph 
3ZA(7),  and a reference  to a relevant  devolved  absent  voting 
application  submitted  through  the UK digital  service  is a reference 
to such an application  submitted  using  that service  as an 
intermediary. ” 
(4) 
30Schedule  4 to the Representation  of the People  Act 2000  (absent  voting  in 
Great  Britain)  is amended  in accordance  with  subsections  (5) and (6). 
(5) In paragraph  3 (absent  vote  at elections  for a period)— 
(a) in sub-paragraph  (1)(b),  omit  the words  from  “and,  in the” to the end; 
(b) in sub-paragraph  (1A),  omit  “in England”; 
(c) in sub-paragraph  (4)(aa),  omit  “in England”; 
35 (d) in sub-paragraph  (4)(ab)— 
(i) omit  sub-paragraph  (i); 
(ii) in the words  after  sub-paragraph  (ii), omit  “post  or”; 
(e) in sub-paragraph  (5)(ca),  omit  “in England”; 
(f) 
40in sub-paragraph  (5)(d),  omit  the words  from  “by post”  to “or who 
applied  to vote”; 
(g) in sub-paragraph  (7), omit  the words  from  “and,  in the” to “the period”; 
(h) in sub-paragraph  (7A),  omit  “in England”. 
(6) In paragraph  7 (voting  as proxy)— 
(a) in sub-paragraph  (5)(c),  omit  the words  from  “and,  in the” to the end; 
45 (b) in sub-paragraph  (5A),  omit  “in England”; Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 2 
(c) in sub-paragraph  (6)— 
(i) in paragraph  (aa),  omit  “in England”; 
(ii) omit  paragraph  (ab) (but not the “and”  at the end); 
(d) in sub-paragraph  (9)— 
5 (i) at the end of paragraph  (c), insert  “or”; 
(ii) in paragraph  (ca), omit  “in England”; 
(iii) omit  paragraph  (d) and the “or” before  it. 
2 Elections  to the Scottish  Parliament 
(1) The Scotland  Act 1998  is amended  as follows. 
10 (2) After  section  12A insert— 
“12B Power  to make  provision  about  the use of the UK digital  service  for 
absent  voting  applications 
(1) A Minister  of the Crown  or the Scottish  Ministers  may by regulations  make 
15provision  about  the use of the UK digital  service  in relation  to absent  voting 
applications. 
(2) The provision  that may be made  under  subsection  (1) includes,  in particular, 
provision— 
(a) conferring  functions  on a Minister  of the Crown  to enable  absent 
voting  applications  to be submitted  through  the UK digital  service; 
20 (b) where  such applications  are, or are to be, so submitted— 
(i) authorising  a Minister  of the Crown,  in prescribed 
circumstances,  to complete  applications  in part for people; 
(ii) about  how any requirement  for an applicant  to provide  a 
signature  in connection  with an application  may be satisfied; 
25 (c) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  through 
the UK digital  service; 
(d) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  in 
connection  with an absent  voting  application  in relation  to which 
the UK digital  service  is, or is to be, used. 
30 (3) Subject  to subsection  (4), the disclosure  or other  processing  of information 
in accordance  with provision  made  under  this section  does not breach — 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  processing  the 
information; 
(b) 
35any other  restriction  on the processing  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(4) Provision  made  under  this section  does not require  or authorise  the disclosure 
or other  processing  of personal  data that would  contravene  the data protection 
legislation  (but in determining  whether  particular  processing  of data would 
40do so, take into account  the duty  imposed  or the powers  conferred  by such 
provision) . 
(5) The Scottish  Ministers  may not make  regulations  under  this section  without 
the agreement  of a Minister  of the Crown. 3 Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 
(6) In this section— 
“absent  voting  application”  means  an application  (including  a 
partially  completed  application)  to vote by post or proxy  at an election 
5for membership  of the Parliament,  or at elections  for membership  of 
the Parliament,  in accordance  with an order  under  section  12; 
“the data protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act); 
“personal  data”  and “processing”  have the same  meaning  as in the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(2) and (4) of that Act); 
10 “prescribed”  means  prescribed  by regulations  made  under  this section; 
“the UK digital  service”  means  a digital  service  provided  by a 
Minister  of the Crown  for the registration  of electors,  and a reference 
to an absent  voting  application  submitted  through  the UK digital 
15service  is a reference  to such an application  submitted  using  that 
service  as an intermediary. ” 
(3) In section  113 (subordinate  legislation:  scope  of powers),  in subsection  (1A), 
after  “12”  insert  “or regulations  under  section  12B”. 
(4) In Schedule  7 (procedure  for subordinate  legislation),  in paragraph  1(2),  in 
the appropriate  place  insert— 
20 Where  the regulations  are made  by the Scottish  Ministers: 
Type  L 20 “Section  12B 
Where  the regulations  are made  by a Minister  of the 
Crown:  Type  C”. 
3 Elections  to Senedd  Cymru 
25 After  section  13A of the Government  of Wales  Act 2006  insert— 
“13B Power  to make  provision  about  the use of the UK digital  service  for 
absent  voting  applications 
(1) A Minister  of the Crown  or the Welsh  Ministers  may by regulations  make 
30provision  about  the use of the UK digital  service  in relation  to absent  voting 
applications. 
(2) The provision  that may be made  under  subsection  (1) includes,  in particular, 
provision— 
(a) conferring  functions  on a Minister  of the Crown  to enable  absent 
voting  applications  to be submitted  through  the UK digital  service; 
35 (b) where  such applications  are, or are to be, so submitted— 
(i) authorising  a Minister  of the Crown,  in prescribed 
circumstances,  to complete  applications  in part for people; 
(ii) about  how any requirement  for an applicant  to provide  a 
signature  in connection  with an application  may be satisfied; 
40 (c) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  through 
the UK digital  service; Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 4 
(d) about  the disclosure  of prescribed  information  or evidence  in 
connection  with an absent  voting  application  in relation  to which 
the UK digital  service  is, or is to be, used. 
(3) 
5Subject  to subsection  (4),  the disclosure  or other  processing  of information 
in accordance  with provision  made  under  this section  does not breach — 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  processing  the 
information; 
(b) any other  restriction  on the processing  of information  (however 
imposed). 
10 (4) Provision  made  under  this section  does not require  or authorise  the disclosure 
or other  processing  of personal  data that would  contravene  the data protection 
legislation  (but in determining  whether  particular  processing  of data would 
do so, take into account  the duty  imposed  or the powers  conferred  by such 
provision ). 
15 (5) The Welsh  Ministers  may not make  regulations  under  this section  without 
the agreement  of a Minister  of the Crown. 
(6) No regulations  may be made  under  this section  by a Minister  of the Crown 
unless  a draft  of a statutory  instrument  containing  them  has been laid before, 
and approved  by a resolution  of, each House  of Parliament. 
20 (7) No regulations  may be made  under  this section  by the Welsh  Ministers  unless 
a draft  of a statutory  instrument  containing  them  has been laid before,  and 
approved  by a resolution  of, the Senedd. 
(8) In this section— 
25“absent  voting  application”  means  an application  (including  a 
partially  completed  application)  to vote by post or proxy  at an election 
for membership  of the Senedd,  or at elections  for membership  of the 
Senedd,  in accordance  with an order  under  section  13; 
“the data protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act); 
30 “personal  data”  and “processing”  have the same  meaning  as in the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(2) and (4) of that Act); 
“prescribed”  means  prescribed  by regulations  made  under  this section; 
“the UK digital  service”  means  a digital  service  provided  by a 
35Minister  of the Crown  for the registration  of electors,  and a reference 
to an absent  voting  application  submitted  through  the UK digital 
service  is a reference  to such an application  submitted  using  that 
service  as an intermediary. ” 
General 
4 Commencement  and transitional  provision 
40 (1) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed,  subject  to 
subsection  (2). 5 Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 
(2) Section  1(4) to (6) comes  into force  on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may 
by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
5such  transitional  or saving  provision  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
appropriate  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of any provision  of this 
Act. 
(4) Regulations  under  subsection  (3) may  make  provision  for, or in connection 
with,  the expiry  of some  or all devolved  election  postal  vote  entitlements  or 
devolved  election  proxy  appointments. 
10 (5) Regulations  under  subsection  (3) that make  provision  for, or in connection 
with,  the expiry  of the devolved  election  postal  vote  entitlement  of a person 
who  also has a parliamentary  election  postal  vote  entitlement  may  make 
provision  for the purpose  of aligning  the expiry  of those  entitlements 
15(including  provision  specifying  or changing  the date  on which  either  or both 
of those  entitlements  expire). 
(6) In this section— 
“devolved  election  postal  vote  entitlement”  means  an entitlement  to vote 
by post  (whether  as elector  or proxy)  at local  government  elections  in 
20Wales  or Scotland,  where  the entitlement  was granted  before  the 
specified  date  on an application  under  paragraph  3(1) or 7(4)(a)  of 
Schedule  4 to the Representation  of the People  Act 2000; 
“devolved  election  proxy  appointment”  means  the appointment  of a 
person  as a proxy  to vote  for another  person  at local  government 
25elections  in Wales  or Scotland,  where  the appointment  was made 
before  the specified  date  on an application  under  paragraph  6(7) of 
Schedule  4 to the Representation  of the People  Act 2000; 
“parliamentary  election  postal  vote  entitlement”  means  an entitlement 
to vote  by post (whether  as elector  or proxy)  at parliamentary  elections 
30in England  and Wales  or Scotland,  where  the entitlement  was granted 
before  the specified  date  on an application  under  paragraph  3(1) or 
7(4)(a)  of Schedule  4 to the Representation  of the People  Act 2000; 
“specified  date”  means  the date  specified  in the regulations. 
(7) Regulations  under  this section  may  make  different  provision  for different 
purposes  or areas. 
35 5 Extent  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act may  be cited  as the Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales) 
Act 2025. Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales)  Bill 6 
Absent  Voting  (Elections  in Scotland  and Wales) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  absent  voting  in connection  with  local  government  elections  in 
Scotland  and Wales,  elections  to the Scottish  Parliament  and elections  to Senedd  Cymru; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Tracy  Gilbert 
supported  by Patricia  Ferguson , Kirsteen  Sullivan 
and Douglas  McAllister . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 23



Access  to Telecommunications  Networks  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to share  apparatus 
2 Penalties  for failure  to comply  with  requirement  to share  apparatus 
3 Proposals  for incentivising  use of other  operators’  networks 
4 Consequential  provision 
5 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
58/4 Bill 44 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  providers  of electronic  communications  networks  to grant  other  such 
providers  access  to their  apparatus  where  that is necessary  to ensure  consistent 
network  coverage;  to prevent  those  providers  from  charging  more  than  the 
standard  market  rate for such  access;  to require  the regulator  to impose 
penalties  on providers  who  unreasonably  fail to grant  such  access;  to make 
provision  for the purpose  of incentivising  providers  to allow  customers  of 
other  providers  to use their  networks  where  access  cannot  be granted  to their 
apparatus;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to share  apparatus 
(1) The electronic  communications  code  set out in Schedule  3A to the 
Communications  Act 2003  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  paragraph  3, insert— 
5 “Mandatory  sharing  of apparatus 
3A (1) An operator  of electronic  communications  apparatus  must  share 
with  another  operator  the use of that apparatus  where  such  sharing 
is necessary  for the provision  of consistent  network  coverage. 
(2) 
10Where  electronic  apparatus  is shared  as required  by sub-paragraph 
(1), any charge  made  for use of the apparatus  may  not exceed  the 
standard  market  rate. 
(3) OFCOM  must  publish  annual  guidance  about  the standard  market 
rate for the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (2).” 
2 Penalties  for failure  to comply  with  requirement  to share  apparatus 
15 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  require  OFCOM  to impose  penalties 
on providers  who  unreasonably  fail to share  their  apparatus  in accordance 
with  paragraph  3A of the electronic  communications  code  set out in Schedule 
3A to the Communications  Act 2003. 
58/4 Bill 44 1 Access  to Telecommunications  Networks  Bill 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  must— 
(a) make  provision  about  the penalties  which  may  be imposed  by OFCOM, 
(b) make  provision  about  the circumstances  in which  a refusal  to share 
apparatus  may  be considered  to be unreasonable. 
5 (3) Regulations  under  this section  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory 
instrument  containing  them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution 
of, each  House  of Parliament. 
3 Proposals  for incentivising  use of other  operators’  networks 
(1) 
10Within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  lay 
before  Parliament  proposals  for incentivising  providers  of mobile  telephone 
services  to allow  customers  of other  such  providers  to use their  networks  in 
circumstances  where  access  cannot  be granted  to their  apparatus. 
(2) Proposals  under  subsection  (1) must  include  measures  intended  to improve 
access  to mobile  telephone  services  for customers  in rural  areas. 
15 4 Consequential  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
further  provision  consequential  on the provisions  of this Act. 
(2) The power  to make  regulations  under  subsection  (1) may  (among  other  things) 
be exercised  by modifying  any provision  made  by or under  an enactment. 
20 (3) Regulations  under  this section  may  make  transitional  and saving  provision. 
5 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
25This  Act may  be cited  as the Access  to Telecommunications  Networks  Act 
2024. Access  to Telecommunications  Networks  Bill 2 
Access  to Telecommunications  Networks  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  providers  of electronic  communications  networks  to grant  other  such  providers 
access  to their  apparatus  where  that is necessary  to ensure  consistent  network  coverage; 
to prevent  those  providers  from  charging  more  than  the standard  market  rate for such 
access;  to require  the regulator  to impose  penalties  on providers  who  unreasonably  fail 
to grant  such  access;  to make  provision  for the purpose  of incentivising  providers  to 
allow  customers  of other  providers  to use their  networks  where  access  cannot  be granted 
to their  apparatus;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Helen  Morgan 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 44



OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
1 
  
ANIMAL WELFARE (IMPORT OF DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS) BILL  
 
Memorandum from the  Department  for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs  
to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee  
 
A. INTRODUCTION  
 
1. This memorandum has been prepared for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory 
Reform  Committee to assist with its scrutiny of the  Animal Welfare  (Import of Dogs, 
Cats and Ferrets ) Bill (“the Bill”). The Bill was introduced in the House of 
Commons  on 16th October 2024 and is schedule d for second read ing on 29 
November 2024 . This memorandum identifies the  provisions of the Bill that confer 
powers to make delegated legislation. It explains in  each case why the power has 
been taken and explain s the nature of, and the reason for, the procedure selected.  
 
B.  PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE BILL  
 
2. The Bill aims to address the issues of illegal puppy smuggling and the increasing 
volume of low -welfare movement of pet animals into the United Kingdom from 
third countries. These movements raise serious welfare issues, as evidence 
suggests that many imported puppies and kittens are being sourced from facilities 
with low welfare standards, with concerns about the way in which the animals 
have been kept and treated and the conditions in which they have been 
transported, which leads to poor health and welfare outcomes.  
 
3. The Bill aims to improve the welfare of imported dogs, cats and ferrets through : 
 
(1) making amendments to the pet travel scheme rules to prevent 
commercial imports being disguised  as non -commercial movements , 
specifically : 
 
a) reducing the number of dogs , cats  and ferrets that can travel under 
the non -commercial rules from five per person to five per vehicle, or 
three per foot or air passenger ; and 
b) ensuring that when a non -commercial movement of a dog, cat or 
ferret is carried out by an authorised person, it may only take place 
within five days of the movement of the owner ; and    
(2) introduc ing enabling powers to allow an appropriate national authority, 
for the purpose of promoting the welfare of dogs, cats and ferrets, to 
make regulations about the bringing of any of those animals into the 
United Kingdom  and related matters . 
  
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
2 
 C. DELEGATED POWERS  
 
Clause  1: Regulations about bringing  dogs, cats and ferrets into the United 
Kingdom  
 
(1) Power to make provision in relation to b ringing dogs, cats and ferrets into the 
United Kingdom  for the purpose of animal welfare  
 
Power conferred  on: the appropriate national authority  
 
Power exercised by : regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure : affirmative  procedure  or, where the regulations only 
contain provision on fees in relation to perm it applications, negative procedure . 
 
(6) Power to make provision about dogs, cats or ferrets that are seized or detained  
Power conferred on : the appropriate national authority  
 
Power exercised by : regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure : affirmative procedure  
 
 
(8) Power to impose monetary penalties  
 
Power conferred on : the appropriate national authority  
 
Power exercised by : regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure : affirmative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
4. This Clause will allow the appropriate national authority , which is defined in Clause 
3(1) as the Secretary of State  or provided they have legislative competence, the 
Scottish Ministers, the Welsh Ministers or the Department of Agriculture 
Environment and Rural Affairs in Northern Ireland (DAERA), to introduce 
regulations prohibiting or  restricting imports of dogs, cats or ferrets on welfare 
grounds . DAERA may , however,  need to obtain the Secretary of State’s consent 
before exe rcising this power  depending on the content of the proposed regulations.  
5. Pursuant to subsection (2), this Clause will also enable the appropriate national 
authority to make provision about enforcement (which as set out in Clause 2( 1) 
may include provision conferring functions or powers of entry, inspection, search, 
seizure or detention, provision about the keeping of records or the revocations of 
licences or approvals or the creation of criminal offences); and to introduce 
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
3 
 exemptions to any prohibitions  or restrictions , including a permitting scheme.  
6. Pursuant to subsection s (3) and (4) , in respect of England , Wales and Scotland, 
the first time the power is exercised in relation to dogs or cats, the regulations 
must contain provision prohibiting the bringing into the relevant part of the United 
Kingdom  of a dog or cat (as applicable) belonging to any of the following 
categories : 
(1) a dog or cat that is below six months of age;  
(2) a dog or cat that is more than 42 days’ pregnant; and 
(3) a dog or cat that has been mutilated (i.e., a dog with cropped ears or a 
docked tail or a declawed cat).  
7. Pursuant to subsections ( 6) and ( 7), the appropriate national authority may make 
provision about dogs, cats or ferrets that are seized or detained for contravention 
of any animal welfare or health legislation that relates to the bringing of dogs, cats 
or ferrets into the United Kingdom , including in relation to meeting the costs of 
detention and transferring ownership of such animals . 
8. Pursuant to subsection ( 8), the appropriate national authority may  impos e 
monetary penalties for contravention of any animal welfare or health legislation 
that relates to the bringing of dogs, cats or ferrets into the United Kingdom . 
 
Justification for taking the power s 
 
9. The power s will ensure that the Department, the Welsh Ministers and the Scottish 
Ministers are able to act to prohibit the current main focus of our concerns, i.e. 
import s of young puppies and kittens , which , as well as raising welfare concerns, 
often do not comply with the current animal health rules, heavily pregnant dogs 
and cats , and those that have been mutilated.  
 
10. The powers will also enable the appropriate national authority to tackle low -
welfare imports of dogs, cats and ferrets through a range of enforcement tools 
and to tackle these imports dynamically. They will enable the appropriate national 
authority to address existing issues, for example , around how to proceed with an 
animal which has been seized and /or detained by the authorities for non -
compliance with relevant animal health and welfare rules, and subsequently 
abandoned , but they will also provide the mea ns to act in the future to close down 
emerging low -welfare practices, including attempts to circumvent restrictions. For 
example, t he powers will allow for the introduction of similar measures for ferrets 
in the future if low -welfare trade in this species escalates or evidence of welfare 
concerns is produced by stakeholders and regulators.  Illicit trade is quick to react 
to legislative and enforcement changes and so this ability to make future changes 
will be important to ensure that the policy aims are met.  Appropriate safeguards 
are included in relation to the powers of entry that may be conferred on 
enforcement authorities and the criminal offences that may be created.  
 
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
4 
 11. The regulations setting out the prohibitions, exemptions, enforcement provisions , 
offences  and penalties made under the enabling power s will be complex and 
technical . The existing legislative regime governing the non -commercial 
movement and commercial import of dogs, cats and ferrets , and enforcement 
against non -compliance,  is complicated and involves the interaction of a  number 
of pieces of distinct but interlinked assimilated direct and domestic legislation.  
 
12. The Department believes that i ntroducing these measures in secondary 
legislation will be more suitable to the ir complexity, as well as  provid ing sufficient 
time to engage with Devolved Governments  and enforcement bodies to ensure 
that regulations are robust, comprehensive and can be implement ed effectively.   
 
13. Using power s, rather than including provisions on the face of the Bill, will also 
enable the U nited Kingdom  to meet its World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) 
obligations. The Department anticipates that the prohibitio ns that will be 
introduced under this power to address the kind of low -welfare imports currently 
entering the United Kingdom  may amount to technical regulations for the purposes 
of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade. Where a WTO member is 
proposing to adopt technical regulations, which may have a significant effect on 
trade, it is obliged to consult other WTO members on the proposed technical 
regulations. The power will allow for appropriate consultation  with other WTO 
members to take place before any suc h technical regulations are adopted.  
Justification for the procedure  
 
14. The Department has considered the scope of the power s carefully and has 
balanced the need to be dynamic, and to be able to address new concerns 
regarding low -welfare imports quickly, against the need for Parliamentary 
oversight.  
 
15. Any measures delivered via the delegated power s will be made by Statutory 
Instrument subject to the draft affirmative procedure , except where the regulations 
only contain provision on the fees payable in relation to applications for permits . 
We consider the affirmative procedure to apply the appropriate level of scrutiny in 
its assessment of these measures, its impacts, and any evidence supplied, which 
must be actively approved in both Houses of Parliament.  We consider that the 
negative procedure is appropr iate for regulations which set fees, which will need 
to be set to recover the costs incurred in determining applications for permits and 
will need to b e adjusted to reflect those costs from time to time.  
 
Clause 2: Regulations under section 1: supplementary  
 
(1)(h) Power to amend primary legislation  
 
Power conferred on:  the appropriate national authority  
 
Power exercised by:  regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:  affirmative procedure  
 
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
5 
  
Context and Purpose  
 
16. This Clause provides that regulations  made under Clause 1 may amend , repeal 
or revoke primary legislation.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
17. This power may only be exercised in connection with exercising the powers in 
Claus e 1 of the Bill. It is not possible to establish in advance all supplementary, 
incidental and consequential provision that may be required, and these may 
include a future requirement to make consequential amendments to primary 
legislation , e.g. to create or amend offences and increase penalties, which may 
include imprisonment, and create powers of entry; or to  make further amendments 
to those provisions of the  pet travel scheme rules  that are  being amended by the 
Bill such as the maximum number of pets permitted to enter Great Britain non -
commercially in a vehicle . A power is needed to bring certainty to the statute book 
where a provision of the Bill might otherwise give rise to any legal uncertainty or 
legal lacunas after the Bill comes into force.   
 
Justification for the procedure  
  
18. The Department believes that, on balance, the increased parliamentary scrutiny 
of the affirmative procedure is appropriate and is consistent with the level of 
parliamentary scrutiny required of regulations to promote welfare under the Animal 
Welfare Act 2006 , the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006  and the 
Welfare of Animals Act (Northern Ireland) 2011 .  
 
Clause 6: Consequential provision  
 
(3) Power to make consequential provision  
 
Power conferred on:  the Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:  regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:  negative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
19. This Clause gives a power to the Secretary of State to make regulations to make 
any provision which  is consequential on the provision made by Clause s 4 or 5 , 
which make  changes to the rules governing the non -commercial movement of pet 
animals .  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
20. This power may only be exercised in connection with Clauses 4 or 5 ; it is not to 
be used in isolation to make unwarranted supplementary, incidental or 
consequential provisions. Given that the existing legislative regime governing the 
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
6 
 non-commercial movement and commercial import of dogs, cats and ferrets, and 
enforcement against non -compliance, is complicated and involves the interaction 
of a number of pieces of distinct but interlinked assimilated direct and domestic 
legislation,  it is not possible to establish in advance all supplementary, incidental 
and consequential provisions that may be required. A power is needed to bring 
certainty to the statute book where a provision of the Bill might otherwise give rise 
any legal uncertaint y or legal lacunas after the Bill comes into force.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
21. The changes to legislation are likely to be technical matters for which the negative 
resolution procedure is appropriate ( e.g., making consequential amendments to 
existing secondary legislation).  
 
Clause 7: Regulations  
 
(1) Power to make consequential provision etc  
 
Power conferred on:  the appropriate national authority  
 
Power exercised by:  regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:  affirmative procedure  or, where the regulations only 
contain provision on fees in relation to permit applications, negative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
22. This Clause provides that regulations made under the Bill may make 
consequential, transitional or saving provisions and make different provision for 
different purposes or different areas.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
23. Given that the existing legislative regime governing the non -commercial 
movement and commercial import of dogs, cats and ferrets, and enforcement 
against non -compliance, is complicated and involves the interaction of a number 
of pieces of distinct but inte rlinked assimilated direct and domestic legislation, i t is 
not possible to establish in advance all supplementary, incidental and 
consequential provisions that may be required. A power is needed to bring 
certainty to the statute book where a provision of t he Bill might otherwise give rise 
to any legal uncertainty or legal lacunas after the Bill comes into force.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
  
24. The Department believes that, on balance, the increased parliamentary scrutiny 
of the affirmative procedure is appropriate and is consistent with the level of 
parliamentary scrutiny required of regulations to promote welfare under the Animal 
Welfare Act 2006, the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 and the 
Welfare of Animals Act (Northern Ire land) 2011.  
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
7 
  
 
Clause 8: Extent, commencement and short title  
 
(3) Power to make regulations to commence Clauses 1 to 7 ; 
 
Power conferred on:  the Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:  regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:  no procedure  
 
 
(5) Power to make transitional provision ; 
 
Power conferred on:  the Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:  regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:  no procedure  
 
 
 
Context and Purpose  
 
25. Sub-section (3) provides that Clauses 1 to 7 come into force on such day as the 
Secretary of State may by regulations appoint.   Pursuant to sub -section (6), this 
includes the power to make different provision for different purposes . 
 
26. Sub-section (5) provides that t he Secretary of State may by regulations make such 
transitional or saving provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in 
connection with the coming into force of any provision of the Bill.  
 
Justification for taking the power s 
27. It is appropriate to provide for commencement of the provisions of the Bill by 
regulations and to include transitional provision in relation to their commencement  
to allow for the provisions to be brought into force at an appropriate time . 
Commencement of provisions of a Bill by way of regulations is standard pr actice.   
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
28. Consistent with common practice in relation to commencement regulations and 
associated transitional provision, regulations made under this clause are not 
subject to any Parliamentary procedure. Parliament has approved the principle of 
the provisions to be commenced by enacting them; commencement by 
regulations enables the provisions to be brought into force at the appropriate time 
and in an orderly manner  
 
OFFICIAL – SENSITIVE  
8



Animals  in Medical  Research  (Prohibition)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Prohibition  of use of animals  in medical  research 
2 Requirement  to issue  guidance  in connection  with  section  1 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 50 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Prohibit  the use of animals  in medical  research;  to require  the use of 
non-animal  methods  for conducting  medical  research;  and for connected 
purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Prohibition  of use of animals  in medical  research 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  prohibit  the use of animals  in 
medical  research  from  1 January  2035. 
(2) Regulations  made  under  subsection  (1) must— 
5 (a) prohibit  the use of live animals  or animal-derived  biomaterials,  and 
(b) require  the use of non-animal  methods 
in research  into human  diseases  or in the testing  of medicines  or medical 
devices  being  developed  for human  use. 
(3) Regulations  under  this section  may  include  provision— 
10 (a) creating  criminal  offences  in respect  of failures  to comply  with  the 
regulations, 
(b) about  such  offences,  and 
(c) for, about  or connected  with  the imposition  of civil  sanctions. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
15 (5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(6) Before  laying  before  Parliament  a draft  of an instrument  under  this section, 
the Secretary  of State  must  consult— 
20 (a) the Animals  in Science  Regulation  Unit; 
(b) the Animals  in Science  Committee; 
(c) the Commission  on Human  Medicines; 
(d) the Medicines  and Healthcare  products  Regulatory  Agency; 
(e) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
59/1 Bill 50 1 Animals  in Medical  Research  (Prohibition)  Bill 
2 Requirement  to issue  guidance  in connection  with  section  1 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  guidance  for persons— 
(a) undertaking  research  into human  diseases,  or 
(b) 
5carrying  out testing  of medicines  or medical  devices  being  developed 
for human  use 
on the regulations  made  under  section  1 of this Act. 
(2) Guidance  under  this section  must  include— 
(a) advice  and information  about  non-animal  research  methods, 
(b) 
10information  about  any support  available  from  the Government  or 
other  sources  for the use and development  of non-animal  research 
methods. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  revise  guidance  issued  under  this section. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  arrange  for guidance  issued  under  this section 
to be published. 
15 3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Animals  in Medical  Research  (Prohibition)  Act 
2025. Animals  in Medical  Research  (Prohibition)  Bill 2 
Animals  in Medical  Research  (Prohibition)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Prohibit  the use of animals  in medical  research;  to require  the use of non-animal  methods 
for conducting  medical  research;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Steve  Race 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 50



Anonymity  of Suspects  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Offence  of disclosing  identity  of suspect 
2 Offences  by bodies  corporate 
3 Penalties 
4 Interpretation 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 93 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of disclosing  the identity  of a person  who  is the subject  of 
an investigation  in respect  of the alleged  commission  of an offence;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Offence  of disclosing  identity  of suspect 
(1) Subject  to the exception  in subsection  (2), it is an offence  knowingly  to disclose 
any information  that is likely  to lead  members  of the public  to identify  a 
5person  who  is the subject  of an investigation  in respect  of the alleged 
commission  of an offence. 
(2) The exception  is where  the disclosure  is reasonably  necessary  for— 
(a) the prevention  or detection  of crime, 
(b) the apprehension  or prosecution  of offenders, 
(c) the administration  of justice, 
10 (d) the assessment  or collection  of any tax or duty  or of any imposition 
of a similar  nature, 
(e) the operation  of the immigration  controls,  or 
(f) the maintenance  of security  and good  order  in prisons  or in other 
institutions  where  persons  are lawfully  detained. 
15 (3) It is a defence  for a person  charged  with  an offence  under  this section  to 
prove  that the disclosure— 
(a) was necessary  for the purposes  of preventing  or detecting  crime, 
(b) was required  or authorised  by an enactment,  by a rule of law or by 
the order  of a court  or tribunal,  or 
20 (c) in the particular  circumstances,  was justified  as being  in the public 
interest. 
2 Offences  by bodies  corporate 
(1) This  section  applies  if an offence  under  this Act is committed  by a body 
corporate. 
59/1 Bill 93 1 Anonymity  of Suspects  Bill 
(2) If the offence  is proved  to have  been  committed  with  the consent  or 
connivance  of— 
(a) a senior  officer  of the body  corporate,  or 
(b) a person  purporting  to act in such  a capacity, 
5 the senior  officer  or person  (as well  as the body  corporate)  is guilty  of the 
offence  and liable  to be proceeded  against  and punished  accordingly. 
(3) In this section— 
“director” , in relation  to a body  corporate  whose  affairs  are managed  by 
its members,  means  a member  of the body  corporate; 
10 “senior  officer” , in relation  to a body  corporate,  means  a director, 
manager,  secretary  or other  similar  officer  of the body  corporate. 
3 Penalties 
(1) An individual  guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 is liable  on conviction  to 
15imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  6 months,  or to a fine not exceeding 
the statutory  maximum,  or to both. 
(2) Any  other  person  guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 is liable  on conviction 
to a fine not exceeding  the statutory  maximum. 
4 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
20 “investigation”  means  an investigation,  conducted  by any public  authority 
with  the power  to investigate  offences,  with  a view  to ascertaining 
whether  a person  should  be arrested  for, or charged  with,  an offence, 
“offence”  means  any summary  or indictable  offence  against  the laws  of 
England  and Wales. 
25 5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of 90 days  beginning  with 
the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Anonymity  of Suspects  Act 2025. Anonymity  of Suspects  Bill 2 
Anonymity  of Suspects  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of disclosing  the identity  of a person  who  is the subject  of an 
investigation  in respect  of the alleged  commission  of an offence;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 93



Mr Tom Goldsmith   
Clerk of the House of Commons  
House of Commons  
LONDON  
SW1A 0AA  
 
Mr Simon Burton   
Clerk of the Parliaments  
House of Lords  
LONDON  
SW1A 0PW  
  
10 December  2024  
 
 
Dear Tom and Simon  
 
LEGISLATIVE CONSENT MOTION  
 
I am writing to notify you that, on 9 December 2024, the Northern Ireland Assembly 
agreed a Legislative Consent Motion relating to the Arbitration Bill, currently under 
consideration at Westminster.  
 
I attach an extract from our Official Report for the re levant sitting. Full details can be 
found at:  
 
https://aims.niassembly.gov.uk/officialreport/report.aspx?&eveDate=2024/12/09&docI
D=42041 7#4698721  
 
 
Yours sincerely  
 
LESLEY HOGG  
Clerk to the Assembly/Chief Executive  
 
Enc 
Clerk to the Assembly/Chief Executive  
Parliament Buildings, Ballymiscaw, Stormont  
Belfast BT4 3XX  
Tel:  +44 (0)28 9052 1199  
email:   lesley.hogg@niassembly.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL REPORT – MONDAY 9 DECEMBER 2024  
 
 Arbitration Bill:  Legislative Consent Motion  
 
Mrs Long (The Minister of Justice:  I beg to move  
 
That this Assembly endorses the principle of the extension to Northern Ireland of the 
provisio ns in the Arbitration Bill.  
 
Question put and agreed to.  
 
Resolved:  
 
That this Assembly endorses the principle of the extension to Northern Ireland of the 
provisions in the Arbitration Bill.



ARMED FORCES COMMISSIONER BILL  
 
Memorandum from the Ministry of Defence to the Delegated Powers and 
Regulatory Reform Committee  
 
 
A. INTRODUCTION  
 
1. This memorandum has been prepared for the Delegated Powers and 
Regulatory Reform  Committee to assist with its scrutiny of the  Armed Forces 
Commissioner Bill  (“the Bill”). The Bill was introduced in the House of 
Commons  on 6 November 2024 . This memorandum identifies the  provisions 
of the Bill that confer powers to make delegated legislation. It explains in  each 
case why the power has been taken and explain s the nature of, and the reason 
for, the procedure selected.  
 
B.  PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE BILL  
2. The Armed Forces Commissioner Bill will establish and confer functions on the 
office of the Armed Forces Commissioner  and abolish the office of the Service 
Complaints Ombudsman  for the Armed Forces  (SCO AF). The Commissioner 
will be able to proactively launch independent investigations  into issues 
affecting service personnel and their families more widely, and to lay those 
reports before Parliament. The Commissioner will be a direct point of contact 
for serving personnel and their families, providing a strong, independent voice 
and increas ing parliamentary oversight and  Ministerial and departmental 
accountability to those who serve our nation.  
 
3. The Armed Forces Continuous Attitude Survey has shown a fall in morale in 
our Armed Forces over the last decade and has also indicated systemic 
challenges in terms of retaining our personnel. One of the first steps towards 
tackling this will be the establishment of a new Armed Forces Commissioner. 
This is a Government manifesto commitment and is the first in a series of steps 
that will be taken by the new Government to renew the nation’s contra ct with 
those who serve, and to improve service life. 
 
4. The current remit of the SCO AF provides for the independent and impartial 
oversight of the service complaints system for members of the UK Armed 
Forces and is set out in the Armed Forces Act 2006. The current functions of 
the office of SCO AF provide powers for them to help service personnel access 
the service complaints system, investigate complaints and report to the 
Secretary of State annually on the operation of the service complaints 
system.  However, the SCO AF’s remit  is narrow. The Ombudsman can only 
look into individual complaints, following completion of the service complaints 
process. Their remit is reactive and does not allow proactive investigations into 
issues facing our Armed Forces.  The office of the SCO AF will be abolished 
and, in addition to their new powers,  the Commissioner will incorporate the 
functions currently undertaken by the SCO AF.  
 
 
  
5. The main elements of the Bill are:  
 
a) Establish ing the office of the  Armed Forces Commissioner  in the Armed 
Forces Act 2006.   
 
b) The Commissioner’s new powers to investigate general service welfare 
matters and the scope of such investigations. This will include an 
obligation on the Secretary of State to facilitate and co-operate with the 
Commissioner and consider any findings or recommendations made by 
the Commissioner in connection with such an investigation.  
 
c) The Commissioner’s new powers to enter service premises in 
connection with an investigation into a general service welfare matter.  
This will include an ability for the Commissioner to access service 
premises with or without notice, subject to certain restrictions in relation 
to national security and personal safety.  
 
d) The Commissioner’s expanded powers ( from those currently set out in 
the Armed Forces Act 2006) to require information and documents for 
the purposes of their investigations and related enforcement 
mechanisms.  
 
e) The Commissioner’s new powers and requirements in relation to 
reports that are provided to the Secretary of State to lay before 
Parliament. This will cover annual reporting requirements as well as 
specific reports containing the results of investigations into general 
service welfare matters.   
 
f) Making a technical amendment to the service complaints process to 
ensure that admissibility decisions can be made by civilians, as this is 
currently limited to certain officers.  
 
g) Abolishing the current office of the SCOAF  and transferring their 
existing functions to the Commissioner.   
 
6. The Bill has been drafted in a way which minimises the use of delegated 
powers, with as much detail as possible contained on the face of the Bill . The 
Bill therefore creates only 3 new powers.  Details of these are set out at 
section C below.    
 
 
C. DELEGATED POWERS  
 
Clause 4(2): Commissioner’s role in relation to general service welfare  (new 
section 3 40IA (4)(e) (Commissioner investigations of general service welfare 
matters ) 
 
 
Power conferred on : Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by : Regulations  
 
 
 
 Parliamentary Procedure : Affirmative  procedure  
 
 
Context and Purpose  
 
7. Clause 4(2) inserts new section 3 40IA into the Armed Forces Act 2006 , which  
creates a power for the Commissioner to conduct  investigations into general 
service welfare matters.  Subject to the following, the Bill provides that a 
“general service welfare matter” is a matter which in the Commissioner’s 
opinion arises in connection with the ongoing service of persons subject to 
service law and may materially affect the welfare of those persons or relevant 
family members.  
 
8. Subsection  (4) provides a list of matters that must be excluded. This list 
includes matters which should more appropriately be dealt with via the service 
complaint system, or which relate to a service  inquiry, criminal investigation or 
criminal proceedings , or public inquiry . Subsection (4)(e) then provides that 
this list includes such other matters as may be specified by regulations made 
by the Secretary of  State .  
 
 
Justification  for taking the power  
 
9. MOD anticipates that certain defence matters  should not be within the remit of 
the Commissioner’s thematic reports.  However,  due to the evolving (and 
sometimes urgent) nature of UK defence, there is a need to preserve the ability 
to respond and update the remit regularly and quickly.  It is therefore not 
considered appropriate to provide full detail on the face of the bill and  it would 
run the risk of  becom ing quickly  outdated . 
 
10. However, t he regulation -making power is limited by subsection (6), which 
states that an y such  matter may only be one in  which the Secretary of State 
considers would impinge on  national security or might jeopardise the safety of 
any person . This  narrowing of the power ensur es minimal  restriction  (generally 
or in a particular case)  of the Commissioner’s discretion to launch 
investigations into a wide range of matters and thus supports their 
independence  whilst providing that there are appropriate safeguards in place . 
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
11. Given the  potential for any regulations made under the power in subsection 
(4)(e) to contain important limit s to the scope of the Commissioner’s 
investigations (a fundamental  power in the exercise  of their functions), it is 
considered appropriate to ensure that they re ceive a high degree of scrutiny  
and therefore should be subject to the affirmative procedure . This is achieved 
by amending section 373 Armed Forces Act.  
 
Clause 4(2): Commissioner’s role in relation to general service welfare ( new 
section 3 40IA(8) (Commissioner investigations of general service welfare 
matters )) 
 
Power conferred on : Secretary of State  
 
 
  
Power exercised by : Regulations  
 
Parliamentary Procedure : Negative  procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
12. Clause 1(1) inserts new section 3 65AA and clause 4(2) inserts new section 
340IA into the Armed Forces Act 2006. Subsection (2)(a)(ii)  and (ii) of new 
section 365AA  provide that the functions of the Commissioner are to promote 
the welfare of persons subject to service law and relevant family members, 
and to  improve the public’s  understanding of the issues faced by persons 
subject to service law and by relevant family members . New section 3 40IA 
creates a power for the Commissioner to conduct investigations into general 
service welfare matters. Subsection s (2)(a) and ( 2)(b) provide  that a “general 
service welfare matter” is a matter which in the Commissioner’s opinion arises 
in connection with the ongoing service of person s subject to service law and 
may materially affect the welfare of those persons or relevant family members.  
 
13. To enable these provisions to be properly understood and applied, it is 
therefore necessary to define a “relevant family member ”. Subsection (8) 
provides that this may be specified  in regulations made by the Secretary of 
State.   
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
14. There is potentially a wide range of individuals who may be considered 
sufficiently connected to a service person to constitute a family member for the 
purposes of the Commissioner’s functions under new section 3 65AA and new 
section 3 40IA. Trying to overly constrain  this definition may risk suggesting 
that family in this context is more of a traditional nuclear family  and may not 
reflect differing circumstances (such as the bereaved) and changing 
understandings of what constitutes “family” in this context. There is therefore 
likely to be a degree of fine and technical detail that would not be appropriate 
to set out on the face of the bill. In addition, t here is a desire to not overly 
restrict the definition in primary legislation to provide a degree of flexibility with 
regards to the definition and ensure that it is adequately future -proofed.  
 
15. In addition to the above, there is  existing precedent contained in section 
343B(4) Armed Forces Act 2006 which similarly provides that the definition of 
“relevant family member” is contained in secondary legislation , relevant for the 
Armed Forces Covenant . The principles under the Covenant and the remit of 
the Commissioner will operate in a similar policy space (the welfare / effect of 
service on service persons and their families). There is therefore a strong 
policy desire to ensure that the two definition s of “relevant family member” 
retain parity as far as possible. It may be impractical to be relying on almost 
the same definition but having different procedures for amending them, and 
also inconsistent if the definition for the Commissioner was contained in the 
Armed Forces Act 2006 but the definition for the Covenant was not.   
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
 
 
 16. The negative resolution procedure is considered to provide an appropriate 
level of scrutiny as the subject matter of the regulations is not controversial in 
nature and there is nothing about the drafting of the enabling power that is 
novel, contentious or unusual. The regulations would be a procedural matter 
to simply ensure that the legislation works most appropriately to the different 
circumstances in which it will be applied.  
 
17. The power has been tightly drafted, so that it only applies to the 
Commissioner’s functions under new section 3 65AA and new section 3 40IA. 
 
 
Clause 7: Commencement   
  
Power conferred on : Secretary of State   
  
Power exercised by : Regulations made by statutory instrument   
  
Parliamentary Procedure : None   
  
Context and Purpose   
 
18. Subsection (1) of c lause 7 of the Bill confers on the Secretary of State a 
regulation -making power to bring into force the Bill (except clauses 6, 7 and 8) 
on such day as they may appoint.  Subsection (3) provides that the Secretary 
of State may also by regulations make transitional, transitory or saving 
provision in connection with the coming into force of any provision of the Bill.  
  
Justification for taking the power   
  
19. This is a standard clause for commencing the provisions of an Act, and making 
saving and transitional provisions related to commencement, by regulations.    
 
20. Leaving a subset of provisions in the Bill, other than those for which the Bill 
itself provides the commencement date, to be brought into force by regulations 
will afford the necessary flexibility to commence the provisions of the Bill at the 
appropriate t ime, having regard to the need to make any necessary secondary 
legislation,  appoint and set up the Commissioner’s office, issue guidance  and 
update policies as appropriate , and put the necessary systems and 
procedures in place, as the case may be.    
  
Justification for the procedure   
 
21. It is standard practice for the power to bring into force the provisions of an Act 
on a specified day not to require any further Parliamentary procedure.   
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence  
21 January 2025



Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 End use of arms  inquiry 
2 Suspension  of arms  sales 
3 Consequential  provision 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 42 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for an inquiry  into the end use of arms  sold to foreign  states 
to determine  whether  they  have  been  used  in violation  of international  law; 
to immediately  suspend  the sale of arms  to foreign  states  where  it cannot  be 
demonstrated  that arms  sold will not be used  in violation  of international  law; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 End use of arms  inquiry 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  no later than 60 days after the day on which  this Act 
is passed,  commission  an independent  inquiry  (‘the  inquiry”)  into the end use of 
5arms  sold to foreign  states,  with a view  to determining  whether  they have been used 
in violation  of international  law. 
(2) The inquiry  commissioned  under  subsection  (1) is to be known  as the Arms 
Sales  Inquiry  (“the  Inquiry”). 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) 
10appoint  to chair  the Inquiry  any candidate  recommended  by resolution 
of the Foreign  Affairs  Committee  of the House  of Commons;  and 
(b) appoint  as panel  members  to the Inquiry  any candidates  recommended 
by resolution  of the Foreign  Affairs  Committee  of the House  of 
Commons. 
(4) The Arms  Sales  Inquiry  must  conduct  an investigation  into— 
15 (a) the end use of UK arms  exports, 
(b) compliance  with  international  law by states  in respect  of which  arms 
export  licenses  have  been  granted, 
(c) the application  of export  licensing  criteria  in respect  of previous  arms 
20exports,  with  specific  reference  to Strategic  Export  Licensing  Criteria 
1 to 3 and to the Arms  Trade  Treaty. 
(5) The Inquiry  must  also — 
(a) consider  the effectiveness  of the current  legislation  and processes  for 
arms  export  licensing,  and identify  any deficiencies, 
58/4 Bill 42 1 Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Bill 
(b) recommend  any improvements  it considers  necessary  to reduce  or 
eliminate  the risk of arms  being  exported  to states  that may  use them 
in violation  of international  law. 
(6) 
5In carrying  out its duties  under  subsections  (4) and (5), the Inquiry  must 
consult  persons  who  appear  to the chair  and panel  members  to represent 
communities  impacted  by, or at risk of being  impacted  by, potential  or actual 
violations  of international  law committed  using  UK arms  exports. 
(7) The Inquiry  must  prepare— 
(a) 
10an interim  report,  which  must  be published  6 months  after  the Inquiry 
begins  its work,  and 
(b) a final  report. 
(8) Reports  under  subsection  (7) must  be published  in accordance  with  the 
provisions  of section  25 of the Inquiries  Act 2005  (publication  of reports),  save 
that subsection  (4)(b)  shall  not apply. 
15 (9) After  the final  report  of the Inquiry  has been  published,  a Minister  of the 
Crown  must  make  an oral statement  to both  Houses  of Parliament,  setting 
out the Government’s  response  to the report. 
2 Suspension  of arms  sales 
(1) 
20Where  it cannot  be demonstrated  that arms  sold to a foreign  state  will not 
be used  in violation  of international  law, the Secretary  of State  must 
immediately  take all steps  necessary  to suspend  the sale of arms  to that state. 
(2) The steps  necessary  under  subsection  (1) include— 
(a) the immediate  suspension  of any arms  export  licence  granted  in respect 
of that state, 
25 (b) the immediate  suspension  of any application  for an arms  export  licence 
in respect  of that state. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  any assessment  they  have  made  of the 
risk that— 
(a) 
30arms  sold to a foreign  state  may  be used  in violation  of international 
law, or 
(b) that a foreign  state  is acting  in violation  of international  law 
for the purposes  of complying  with  their  duty  under  subsection  (1). 
3 Consequential  provision 
(1) 
35The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  consequential  provision  for 
the purposes  of, or in connection  with,  giving  full effect  to a provision  of this 
Act. 
(2) The regulations  may  (among  other  things)  amend,  repeal  or revoke  a provision 
contained  in, or in an instrument  made  under,  an Act of Parliament. Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Bill 2 
(3) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  made  under  this section  is 
subject  to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of 
Parliament. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
5 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Act 2024. 3 Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Bill 
Arms  Trade  (Inquiry  and Suspension)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for an inquiry  into the end use of arms  sold to foreign  states  to determine 
whether  they  have  been  used  in violation  of international  law; to immediately  suspend 
the sale of arms  to foreign  states  where  it cannot  be demonstrated  that arms  sold will 
not be used  in violation  of international  law; and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Zarah  Sultana 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 42



Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Assisted  dying 
2 Terminal  illness 
3 Declaration 
4 Assistance  in dying 
5 Conscientious  objection 
6 Criminal  liability 
7 Inquests,  death  certification  etc 
8 Codes  of practice 
9 Monitoring 
10 Offences 
11 Regulations 
12 Interpretation 
13 Review 
14 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
Form  of declaration Schedule  —  
59/1 HL Bill 7 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Allow  adults  who  are terminally  ill, subject  to safeguards,  to be assisted  to 
end their  own  life; and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Assisted  dying 
(1) Subject  to the consent  of the High  Court  (Family  Division)  pursuant  to 
subsection  (2), a person  who  is terminally  ill may  request  and lawfully  be 
provided  with  assistance  to end their  own  life. 
5 (2) Subsection  (1) applies  only  if the High  Court  (Family  Division),  by order, 
confirms  that it is satisfied  that the person— 
(a) has a voluntary,  clear,  settled  and informed  wish  to end their  own 
life, 
(b) has made  a declaration  to that effect  in accordance  with  section  3, and 
10 (c) on the day the declaration  is made— 
(i) is aged  18 or over, 
(ii) has capacity  to make  the decision  to end their  own  life, and 
(iii) has been  ordinarily  resident  in England  and Wales  for not less 
than  one year. 
15 2 Terminal  illness 
(1) For the purposes  of this Act, a person  is terminally  ill if that person— 
(a) has been  diagnosed  by a registered  medical  practitioner  as having  an 
inevitably  progressive  condition  which  cannot  be reversed  by treatment 
(“a terminal  illness”),  and 
20 (b) as a consequence  of that terminal  illness,  is reasonably  expected  to 
die within  six months. 
(2) Treatment  which  only  relieves  the symptoms  of an inevitably  progressive 
condition  temporarily  is not to be regarded  as treatment  which  can reverse 
that condition. 
25 (3) A person  is not considered  to be terminally  ill solely  by reason  of— 
59/1 HL Bill 7 1 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
(a) being  diagnosed  with  a mental  illness,  within  the meaning  of the 
Mental  Health  Act 1983,  or 
(b) having  a disability,  within  the meaning  of section  6 of the Equality 
Act 2010; 
5 unless  the person  is also considered  to be terminally  ill as defined  in subsection 
2(1). 
3 Declaration 
(1) An application  may  be made  to the High  Court  (Family  Division)  under 
section  1(1) only  if— 
10 (a) the person  has made  and signed  a declaration  that they  have  a 
voluntary,  clear,  settled  and informed  wish  to end their  life in the 
form  in the Schedule  in the presence  of a witness  (who  must  not be 
a relative  or directly  involved  in the person’s  care or treatment  or 
15likely  to receive  any benefit  directly  or indirectly  from  the person’s 
death)  who  signed  the declaration  in the person’s  presence,  and 
(b) that declaration  has been  countersigned  in accordance  with  subsection 
(4) by— 
(i) a suitably  qualified  registered  medical  practitioner  from  whom 
20the person  has requested  assistance  to end their  life (“the 
attending  doctor”);  and 
(ii) another  suitably  qualified  registered  medical  practitioner  (“the 
independent  doctor”)  who  is not a relative,  partner  or colleague 
in the same  practice  or clinical  team,  of the attending  doctor; 
25neither  of whom  may  also be the witness  required  under  paragraph 
(a). 
(2) The attending  doctor  (but not the independent  doctor)  may  be, but need  not 
be, the registered  medical  practitioner  who  diagnosed  that the person  is 
terminally  ill or first informed  the person  of that diagnosis. 
(3) The attending  doctor  or the independent  doctor— 
30 (a) may  not be a relative  or partner  of, nor have  any personal  relationship 
with,  the person  making  the request, 
(b) may  not expect  to receive  any benefit,  whether  directly  or indirectly, 
from  the death  of the person  making  the declaration,  and 
(c) 
35must  be able to communicate  with  the person  making  the declaration 
in the language  of that person’s  choice,  if necessary  via an interpreter 
who  is not a relative  of the person. 
(4) Before  countersigning  a person’s  declaration,  the attending  doctor  and the 
independent  doctor,  having  separately  examined  the person  and the person’s 
40medical  records  and each  acting  independently  of the other,  must  be satisfied 
that the person— 
(a) is terminally  ill, 
(b) has the capacity  to make  the decision  to end their  own  life, and Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 2 
(c) has a clear  and settled  intention  to end their  own  life which  has been 
reached  voluntarily,  on an informed  basis  and without  undue  influence, 
coercion  or duress. 
(5) 
5For the purposes  of subsection  (4)(c), the attending  doctor  and independent 
doctor  can regard  the person  as having  a clear  and settled  intention  to end 
their  own  life if they  are satisfied,  on the basis  of in-depth  discussions  with 
the person,  that the person  is acting  on their  own  free will,  without  undue 
influence,  coercion  or duress. 
(6) 
10In deciding  whether  to countersign  a declaration  under  subsection  (4), the 
attending  doctor  and the independent  doctor  must  be satisfied  that the person 
making  it has been  fully  informed  of the palliative,  hospice  and other  care 
which  is available  to that person. 
(7) If the attending  doctor  or independent  doctor  has doubt  as to a person’s 
15capacity  to make  a decision  under  subsection  (4)(b), before  deciding  whether 
to countersign  a declaration  made  by that person  the doctor  must— 
(a) refer  the person  for assessment  by an appropriate  specialist,  and 
(b) take account  of any opinion  provided  by the appropriate  specialist  in 
respect  of that person. 
(8) 
20A declaration  under  this section  is valid  and takes  effect  on such  date  as the 
High  Court  (Family  Division)  may  order. 
(9) A person  who  has made  a declaration  under  this section  may  revoke  it at 
any time  and revocation  need  not be in writing. 
(10) For the purpose  of subsection  (1)(b)(ii), an attending  or independent  doctor 
25is suitably  qualified  if that doctor  holds  such  qualification  or has such 
experience,  including  in respect  of the diagnosis  and management  of terminal 
illness,  as the Secretary  of State  may  specify  in regulations  (which  may  make 
different  provision  for different  purposes). 
(11) In this section , “appropriate  specialist”  means  a registered  practitioner  (other 
30than  the attending  doctor  or independent  doctor)  who  is registered  in the 
specialty  of psychiatry  in the Special  Register  kept  by the General  Medical 
Council. 
4 Assistance  in dying 
(1) The attending  doctor  of a person  who  has made  a valid  declaration  and 
35obtained  the consent  of the High  Court  may  prescribe  medicines  for that 
person  to enable  that person  to end their  own  life. 
(2) Any  medicines  prescribed  under  subsection  (1) may  only  be delivered  to the 
person  for whom  they  are prescribed— 
(a) by the attending  doctor,  or 
(b) by— 
40 (i) another  registered  medical  practitioner,  or 
(ii) a registered  nurse 
who  has been  authorised  to do so by the attending  doctor, 3 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
(c) after  the assisting  health  professional  has confirmed  that the person 
has not revoked  and does  not wish  to revoke  their  declaration,  and 
(d) after  a period  of not less than  14 days  has elapsed  since  the day on 
which  consent  under  section  1 is given  by the High  Court. 
5 (3) If the attending  doctor  and the independent  doctor  agree  that a person’s 
death  from  terminal  illness  is reasonably  expected  to occur  within  one month 
of the day on which  consent  under  section  1 is given  by the High  Court,  the 
period  specified  in subsection  (2)(d) is reduced  to six days. 
(4) 
10In respect  of a medicine  which  has been  prescribed  for a person  under 
subsection  (1), an assisting  health  professional  may— 
(a) prepare  that medicine  for self-administration  by that person, 
(b) prepare  a medical  device  which  will enable  that person  to 
self-administer  the medicine,  and 
(c) assist  that person  to ingest  or otherwise  self-administer  the medicine, 
15 but the decision  to self-administer  the medicine  and the final  act of doing  so 
must  be taken  by the person  for whom  the medicine  has been  prescribed. 
(5) Subsection  (4) does  not authorise  an assisting  health  professional  to administer 
a medicine  to another  person  with  the intention  of causing  that person’s 
death. 
20 (6) The assisting  health  professional  must  remain  with  the person  until  the person 
has— 
(a) self-administered  the medicine  and died,  or 
(b) decided  not to self-administer  the medicine, 
25and for the purpose  of this subsection  the assisting  health  professional  is to 
be regarded  as remaining  with  the person  if the assisting  health  professional 
is in close  proximity  to, but not necessarily  in the same  room  as, the person. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  specify— 
(a) the medicines  which  may  be prescribed  under  this section , 
(b) 
30the form  and manner  in which  such  prescriptions  are to be issued, 
and 
(c) the manner  and conditions  under  which  such  medicines  are to be 
dispensed,  stored,  transported,  used  and destroyed. 
(8) Regulations  under  subsection  (7)(c) must  provide  that an assisting  health 
professional— 
35 (a) must  only  deliver  any medicines  prescribed  under  this section  to the 
person  for whom  they  have  been  prescribed  immediately  before  their 
intended  use, and 
(b) in the event  that the person  decides  not to self-administer  the medicine, 
40must  immediately  remove  it from  that person  and,  as soon  as 
reasonably  practicable,  return  it to the pharmacy  from  which  it was 
dispensed. 
(9) Regulations  under  subsection  (7) may— 
(a) make  different  provision  for different  purposes;  and Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 4 
(b) include  consequential,  incidental,  supplementary  or transitional 
provisions. 
(10) Regulations  under  this section  must  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory 
5instrument  containing  them  has been  laid before  Parliament  and approved 
by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(11) In this section , “assisting  health  professional”  means  the attending  doctor  or 
a person  authorised  by the attending  doctor  in accordance  with  subsection 
(2)(b). 
5 Conscientious  objection 
10 A person  is not under  any duty  (whether  by contract  or arising  from  any 
statutory  or other  legal  requirement)  to participate  in anything  authorised  by 
this Act to which  that person  has a conscientious  objection. 
6 Criminal  liability 
(1) 
15A person  who  provides  any assistance  in accordance  with  this Act is not 
guilty  of an offence. 
(2) A person  who  is in breach  of the requirements  of this Act, save  for acts or 
omissions  in good  faith  and without  negligence,  will be guilty  of a criminal 
offence  and will be liable,  on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for 
a term  not exceeding  14 years. 
20 (3) In the Suicide  Act 1961,  after  section  2B (course  of conduct),  insert— 
“2C Assisted  dying 
Sections  2, 2A and 2B do not apply  to any person  in respect  of the 
provision  of assistance  to another  person  in accordance  with  the 
Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Act 2024. ” 
25 7 Inquests,  death  certification  etc 
(1) A person  is not to be regarded  as having  died  in circumstances  to which 
section  1(2)(a)  or (b) of the Coroners  and Justice  Act 2009  (duty  to investigate 
certain  deaths)  applies  only  because  the person  died  as a consequence  of the 
provision  of assistance  in accordance  with  this Act. 
30 (2) In the Births  and Deaths  Registration  Act 1953,  after  section  39A (regulations 
made  by the Minister:  further  provisions),  insert— 
“39B Regulations:  assisted  dying 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  make  regulations— 
(a) 
35providing  for any provision  of this Act relating  to the 
registration  of deaths  to apply  in respect  of deaths  which  arise 
from  the provision  of assistance  in accordance  with  the Assisted 
Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Act 2024  with  such 
modifications  as may  be prescribed  in respect  of— 5 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
(i) the information  which  is to be provided  concerning 
such  deaths, 
(ii) the form  and manner  in which  the cause  of such  deaths 
is to be certified,  and 
5 (iii) the form  and manner  in which  such  deaths  are to be 
registered,  and 
(b) containing  such  incidental,  supplemental  and transitional 
provisions  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(2) 
10Any  regulations  made  under  subsection  (1)(a)(ii)  must  provide  for the 
cause  of death  to be recorded  as “assisted  death”. 
(3) The power  of the Secretary  of State  to make  regulations  under  this 
section  is exercisable  by statutory  instrument. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  made  under  this section 
15by the Secretary  of State  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the 
instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a resolution  of each 
House  of Parliament. ” 
(3) The Registrar  General  must,  at least  once  each  year,  prepare  and lay before 
Parliament  a report  providing  a statistical  analysis  of deaths  which  have  arisen 
from  the provision  of assistance  in accordance  with  this Act. 
20 8 Codes  of practice 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  issue  one or more  codes  of practice  in connection 
with— 
(a) the assessment  of whether  a person  has a clear  and settled  intention 
to end their  own  life, including— 
25 (i) assessing  whether  the person  has capacity  to make  such  a 
decision; 
(ii) recognising  and taking  account  of the effects  of depression  or 
other  psychological  disorders  that may  impair  a person’s 
decision-making; 
30 (iii) the information  which  is made  available  on treatment  and end 
of life care options  available  to them  and on the consequences 
of deciding  to end their  own  life, 
(b) the counselling  and guidance  which  should  be made  available  to a 
person  who  wishes  to end their  own  life, 
35 (c) the arrangements  for delivering  medicines  to the person  for whom 
they  have  been  prescribed  under  section  4, and the assistance  which 
such  a person  may  be given  to ingest  or self-administer  them,  and 
(d) such  other  matters  relating  to the operation  of this Act as the Secretary 
of State  thinks  fit. 
40 (2) Before  issuing  a code  under  this section  the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  thinks  appropriate. 
(3) A code  issued  under  subsection  (1) does  not come  into operation  until  the 
Secretary  of State  by order  so provides. Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 6 
(4) An order  bringing  a code  into operation  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of 
the order  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution  of, both  Houses 
of Parliament. 
(5) When  a draft  order  is laid,  the code  to which  it relates  must  also be laid. 
5 (6) A person  performing  any function  under  this Act must  have  regard  to any 
relevant  provision  of a code  and failure  to do so does  not of itself  render  a 
person  liable  to any criminal  or civil  proceedings  but may  be taken  into 
account  in any proceedings. 
9 Monitoring 
10 (1) The relevant  Chief  Medical  Officer  must— 
(a) monitor  the operation  of the Act, including  compliance  with  its 
provisions  and any regulations  or code  of practice  made  under  it, 
(b) inspect  and report  to the relevant  national  authority  on any matter 
15connected  with  the operation  of the Act which  the relevant  national 
authority  refers  to the relevant  Chief  Medical  Officer,  and 
(c) submit  an annual  report  to the relevant  national  authority  on the 
operation  of the Act. 
(2) The Chief  Medical  Officer’s  report  must  include  the numbers  of requests 
20under  this Act that are rejected  by an attending  doctor,  an independent  doctor 
or the High  Court  and the reasons  for their  rejection. 
(3) The Chief  Medical  Officers  may  combine  their  annual  reports  for the same 
year  in a single  document  (“a combined  report”)  in such  manner  as they 
consider  appropriate. 
(4) 
25The relevant  national  authority  must  publish  each  annual  report  or combined 
report  it receives  under  this section  and— 
(a) the Secretary  of State  must  lay a copy  of each  report  before  Parliament, 
and 
(b) the Welsh  Ministers  must  lay a copy  of each  report  before  Senedd 
Cymru. 
30 (5) In this section— 
“relevant  Chief  Medical  Officer”  means— 
(a) in England,  the Chief  Medical  Officer  to the Department  of 
Health,  and 
(b) in Wales,  the Chief  Medical  Officer  to the Welsh  Government; 
35 “relevant  national  authority”  means— 
(a) in England,  the Secretary  of State,  and 
(b) in Wales,  the Welsh  Ministers. 
10 Offences 
(1) A person  commits  an offence  if the person— 
40 (a) makes  or knowingly  uses  a false  instrument  which  purports  to be a 
declaration  made  under  section  3 by another  person,  or 7 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
(b) wilfully  conceals  or destroys  a declaration  made  under  section  3 by 
another  person. 
(2) A person  (A) commits  an offence  if, in relation  to another  person  (B) who  is 
5seeking  to make  or has made  a declaration  under  section  3, A knowingly  or 
recklessly  provides  a medical  or other  professional  opinion  in respect  of B 
which  is false  or misleading  in a material  particular. 
(3) A person  commits  an offence  if the person,  dishonestly  or by coercion,  induces 
another  person  to make,  or revoke,  a request  for assistance  to die. 
(4) 
10A person  commits  an offence  if the person,  dishonestly  or by coercion,  induces 
another  person  to self-administer  life-ending  medication. 
(5) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  subsections  (1), (3) and (4) which  was 
committed  with  the intention  of causing  the death  of another  person  is liable, 
on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for life or a fine or both. 
(6) 
15Unless  subsection  (5) applies,  a person  convicted  of an offence  under  this 
section  is liable— 
(a) on summary  conviction,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  6 
months  or a fine not exceeding  the statutory  maximum  or both; 
(b) on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for a period  not 
exceeding  five years  or a fine or both. 
20 11 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State  under  this Act are to be made  by 
statutory  instrument. 
(2) Except  as otherwise  provided,  a statutory  instrument  containing  regulations 
25under  this Act is subject  to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either 
House  of Parliament. 
12 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
“attending  doctor”  has the meaning  given  in section  3; 
30“capacity”  is to be construed  in accordance  with  the Mental  Capacity 
Act 2005; 
“independent  doctor”  has the meaning  given  in section  3; 
“relative” , in relation  to any person,  means— 
(a) the spouse  or civil  partner  of that person, 
(b) 
35any lineal  ancestor,  lineal  descendant,  sibling,  aunt,  uncle  or 
cousin  of that person  or the person’s  spouse  or civil  partner, 
or 
(c) the spouse  or civil  partner  of any relative  mentioned  in 
paragraph  (b), 
40and for the purposes  of deducing  any such  relationship  a spouse  or 
civil  partner  includes  a former  spouse  or civil  partner,  a partner  to 
whom  the person  is not married,  and a partner  of the same  sex, and Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 8 
“terminal  illness”  has the meaning  given  in section  2(1)(a). 
13 Review 
(1) At any time  during  the period  of 12 months  beginning  on the day five years 
after  the provisions  in this Act come  into force,  the Secretary  of State  must— 
5 (a) undertake  a review  of the operation  of this Act, 
(b) prepare  a report  on that review,  and 
(c) as soon  as reasonably  practicable,  publish  and lay the report  before 
Parliament. 
(2) The report  must,  in particular,  set out— 
10 (a) the extent  to which  the Act has been  successful  in supporting 
terminally  ill adults  in being  lawfully  provided  with  assistance  to end 
their  own  lives, 
(b) any concerns  with  the operation  of the Act which  have  been  raised, 
and 
15 (c) the Secretary  of State’s  response  to any such  concerns,  including  any 
recommendations  for changes  to guidance  or in relation  to changes 
to any enactment,  including  this Act. 
14 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
20 (2) The following  come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed— 
(a) sections  4 and 7 so far as they  confer  a power  to make  regulations; 
(b) section  8 so far as it confers  a power  to issue  codes  of practice  or 
orders; 
(c) sections  11 and 12; and 
25 (d) this section . 
(3) Subject  to subsection  (2), the provisions  of this Act come  into force  two years 
after  the day on which  it is passed. 
(4) This  Act may  be cited  as the Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Act 
2024. 9 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
Section  3 SCHEDULE 
FORM OF DECLARATION 
Declaration:  Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Act 2024 
Date  of Birth: 4 Name  of Declarant: 
5 Address: 
I have  [condition],  a terminal  condition  from  which  I am expected  to die 
within  six months  of the date  of this declaration. 
The Attending  Doctor  and Independent  Doctor  identified  below  have  each 
10fully  informed  me about  that diagnosis  and prognosis  and the treatments 
available  to me, including  pain  control  and palliative  care. 
Having  considered  all this information,  I have  a clear  and settled  intention 
to end my own  life and,  in order  to assist  me to do so, I have  asked  my 
attending  doctor  to prescribe  medicines  for me for that purpose. 
15I make  this declaration  voluntarily  and in the full knowledge  of its 
significance. 
I understand  that I may  revoke  this declaration  at any time. 
Date: 17 Signature: 
Witness 
Name  of witness: 
20 Address: 
This  declaration  was signed  by [name  of declarant]  in my presence  and 
signed  by me in [his/her]  presence. 
Date: 23 Signature: 
Countersignature:  Attending  Doctor 
25 I confirm  that [name],  who  at the date  of this declaration  is [age]  years  of 
age and has been  ordinarily  resident  in England  and Wales  for [time]: 
(1) is terminally  ill and that the diagnosis  and prognosis  set out above  is 
correct; Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 10 
Schedule—Form  of declaration 
(2) has the capacity  to make  the decision  to end their  own  life; and 
(3) has a clear  and settled  intention  to do so, which  has been  reached  on 
an informed  basis,  without  coercion  or duress,  and having  been  informed 
of the palliative,  hospice  and other  care which  is available  to [him/her]. 
5 Date: 5 Signature: 
Name  and Address  of Attending  Doctor: 
Countersignature:  Independent  Doctor 
I confirm  that [name],  who  at the date  of this declaration  is [age]  years  of 
age and has been  ordinarily  resident  in England  and Wales  for [time]: 
10 (1) is terminally  ill and that the diagnosis  and prognosis  set out above  is 
correct; 
(2) has the capacity  to make  the decision  to end their  own  life; and 
(3) has a clear  and settled  intention  to do so, which  has been  reached  on 
15an informed  basis,  without  coercion  or duress,  and having  been  informed 
of the palliative,  hospice  and other  care which  is available  to [him/her]. 
Date: 16 Signature: 
Name  and Address  of Independent  Doctor: 11 Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
Schedule—Form  of declaration 
Assisted  Dying  for Terminally  Ill Adults  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Allow  adults  who  are terminally  ill, subject  to safeguards,  to be assisted  to end their 
own  life; and for connected  purposes. 
Lord  Falconer  of Thoroton 
Ordered  to be Printed,   26th  July 2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 7



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



Bill 257 57/1Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill
CONTENTS
1 Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill
2 Provision of disabled spaces at airport car parks3N a m e d  p e r s o n4 Working group on aircraft design5 Interpretation6R e g u l a t i o n s7 Extent, commencement and short title
Bill 257 57/1Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Make provision about the ac cessibility of air travel fo r people with disabilities;
to establish requirements about p arking at airports for people with
disabilities; to require airports and airl ines to report steps taken to improve
accessibility; to require a named person  to be responsibl e for air passengers
with disabilities; to make provision abou t the design and adaptation of aircraft
to meet the needs of passengers with disabilities; and for connected purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill
(1) Airport operators and airlines have a duty to make reasonable adjustments so
that the services they provide are as ac cessible for disabled persons as they are
for non-disabled persons.
(2) “Reasonable adjustments” in clude but are not limited to—
(a) providing support to access or use services;
(b) training staff or co ntractors in understand ing physical and hidden
disabilities; 
(c) changing physical infrastructure or equipment so that it can be used by
disabled persons; 
(d) communicating with other airpor t operators and airlines about the
needs of disabled passengers;
(e) providing information about services and the adjustments.
(3) Each airport operator and airline must send an annual report to the Civil
Aviation Authority (“CAA”).
(4) An annual report must include—
(a) a statement of whether and why the airport operator or airline believes
it has met the duty in subsection (1),
(b) what steps they have taken in pursuance of that duty, andB
5
10
15
Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill 2
(c) the complaints and compensation procedure for disabled persons,
including the compensation payabl e for damage to wheelchairs and
other medical or mobility equipment.
(5) An annual report of an airline must include details of how they provide
sufficient wheelchair storage space in th e cabins of the aircraft they use to
provide air transport services. 
(6) The CAA may, in such form as it considers approp riate, prescribe—
(a) dates by which annual reports must be submitted,
(b) requirements relating to the publication of annual reports, and
(c) further information to be provided in annual reports.
(7) Before prescribing further informatio n under subsection (6)(c) the CAA must
consult representatives of—
(a) disabled persons,
(b) airport operators, and
(c) airlines.
2 Provision of disabled spaces at airport car parks
(1) Airport operators have a duty to prov ide a sufficient number of parking spaces
in airport car parks for disabled persons who wish to use serv ices at the airport.
(2) The Secretary of State may by regula tions set a minimum pr oportion of spaces
in an airport car park that must be reserved for holders of a disabled parkingbadge.
(3) Those regulations may—
(a) specify the method used to calcul ate the proportion in subsection (2);
and 
(b) apply only to airports of certain sizes by numbers of passengers,
runways or such other metric as the Secretary of State considersappropriate.
(4) Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State must
consult representatives of —
(a) the CAA,
(b) disabled persons,
(c) airport operators, and
(d) airlines.
3 Named person
(1) The Secretary of State ma y by regulations require ai rport operators and airlines
to nominate a named person responsible for the experience of  disabled persons
on each flight arriving into or departing from an airport.
(2) The named person must work for either  the airport operator  or the airline. 
(3) The named person shall be responsible for coordinating assistance for disabled
passengers between airports and airlines. 
(4) Before making regulations under this section the Secretary of State must
consult representatives of—
(a) the CAA,5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill 3
(b) disabled persons,
(c) airport operators, and
(d) airlines.
4 Working group on aircraft design
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations establish a working group to consider the
design and adaptation of aircraft to  meet the needs of disabled persons.
(2) Those regulations may determine the co mposition of the group, including any
chairs or deputy chairs. 
(3) The working group shall (subject to subsection (5)) meet at least once a year.
(4) The working group shall produce a repo rt for the Secretary of State on their
findings at least once a year, which shall be laid before Parliament.
(5) The Secretary of State may di ssolve the group by regulations.
5 Interpretation
In this Act—
“airport” has the same meaning as in section 66 of the Civil Aviation Act
2012;
“airport car park” means a qualifying car park under section 67 of the
Civil Aviation Act 2012;
“airport operator” means a person  who provides airport operation
services under section 68 of the Civil Aviation Act 2012;
“airline” means a person who provides air transport services under
section 69 of the Civil Aviation Act 2012;
“disabled parking badge” means a badg e issued under section 21 of the
Chronically Sick and Disa bled Persons Act 1970.
6 Regulations
(1) A power to make regulations under this Act—
(a) is exercisable by statutory instrument;
(b) includes power to make different  provision for different purposes;
(c) includes power to make supplem entary, incidental, consequential,
transitional, transitory  and saving provision.
(2) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Act (other than
section 7) is subject to annulment in pu rsuance of a resoluti on of either House
of Parliament.
7 Extent, commencement and short title
(1) This Act extends to England and Wa les, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
(2) This Act comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by
regulations appoint. 
(3) This Act may be cited as the Civi l Aviation (Accessibility) Act 2018. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Bill 257 57/1Civil Aviation (Accessibility) Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2018
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONSA
BILL
To make provision about the accessibility of air travel for people with disabilities; to
establish requirements about parking at airports for people with disabilities; to
require airports and airlines to report steps taken to improve accessibility; to require a
named person to be responsible for air passengers with disabilities; to make provisionabout the design and adaptation of aircra ft to meet the needs of passengers with
disabilities; and for connected purposes.
Ordered to be brought in by Helen Whately,
Heidi Allen, Dr Lisa Cameron,
Alex Chalk, John McNally,
Alex Cunningham, Michael Fabricant,
Kate Green, Lady Hermon,
Jeremy Lefroy, Mr s Maria Miller
and Dr Sarah Wollaston.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 24th July  2018.



Committee  Stage:  Monday  27 January  2025 
Bank  Resolution  (Recapitalisation)  Bill [HL] 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments tabled to the Bank  Resolution (Recapitalisation) Bill [HL].  Any 
withdrawn amendments are listed at the end of the document.  The amendments are arranged in the 
order  in which it is expected they will be decided. 
Emma  Reynolds 
That, subject to the discretion of the Chair, any written evidence received by the  Committee 
shall  be reported  to the House for publication. 
Order  of the House 
[22 January  2024] 
That  the following  provisions shall  apply  to the Bank  Resolution (Recapitalisation) Bill 
[Lords]: 
Committal 
1.The Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee.
Proceedings in Public  Bill Committee 
2.Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)
be brought  to a conclusion  on Thursday  13 February  2025.
3.The Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it
meets.

4.Proceedings on Consideration shall (so far as  not previously concluded) be brought
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which
proceedings  on Consideration  are commenced.
5.Proceedings on Third Reading shall (so far as  not previously concluded) be brought
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day.
6.Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings
on Consideration  and Third  Reading.
Other proceedings 
7.Any other  proceedings  on the Bill may be programmed.COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  27 January  2025 2 
Proceedings on Consideration  and Third Reading



BBC  Licence  Fee Non-Payment  (Decriminalisation 
for Over-75s)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendments  to the Communications  Act 2003 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/2 Bill 98 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
De-criminalise  the non-payment  of the BBC  licence  fee by persons  aged  over 
seventy  five;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendments  to the Communications  Act 2003 
(1) Section  363 of the Communications  Act 2003  (licence  required  for use of TV 
receiver)  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (2), after  “person”  insert  “aged  under  75”. 
5 (3) In subsection  (3), after  “person”  insert  “aged  under  75”. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) Any  amendment  made  by this Act has the same  extent  as the provision 
amended. 
(2) 
10This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of 30 days  beginning  with 
the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This Act may  be cited  as the BBC  Licence  Fee Non-Payment  (Decriminalisation 
for Over-75s)  Act 2021. 
58/2 Bill 98 1 BBC  Licence  Fee Non-Payment  (Decriminalisation  for Over-75s)  Bill 
BBC  Licence  Fee Non-Payment  (Decriminalisation 
for Over-75s)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
De-criminalise  the non-payment  of the BBC  licence  fee by persons  aged  over  seventy 
five;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  21st June  2021 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2021 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/2 Bill 98



Bereavement  Support  (Children  and Young  People) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to provide  information  about  bereavement  services 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 176 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  specified  organisations  and public  bodies  to inform  children  and 
young  people  of local,  national  and online  support  services  available  to them 
following  a bereavement;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to provide  information  about  bereavement  services 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  establish  a protocol  for the collection 
and dissemination  of information  relating  to bereavement  support  services 
for children  and young  people. 
5 (2) The protocol  in regulations  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) define  the bereavement  support  services  to which  the protocol  applies, 
which  must  include  services  provided  by— 
(i) local  authorities, 
(ii) NHS  bodies, 
10 (iii) charities  and other  third  sector  organisations, 
(b) place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to publish  information,  including 
online,  about  services  to which  the protocol  applies, 
(c) place  a duty  on specified  public  bodies  and other  persons  to provide 
15information  to children  and young  people  about  services  to which  the 
protocol  applies,  including  in particular— 
(i) specialist  services  for children  and young  people, 
(ii) services  provided  online, 
(iii) accessible  services  for deaf  and disabled  children  and young 
people, 
20 (d) where  a duty  under  paragraph  (c) above  applies,  provide  for a 
requirement  to identify  children  or young  people  who  may  require  a 
service  to which  the protocol  applies. 
(3) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(4) 
25A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
58/4 Bill 176 1 Bereavement  Support  (Children  and Young  People)  Bill 
(5) A draft  of a statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section 
must  be laid before  Parliament  within  12 months  of the passing  of this Act. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
5 (2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Bereavement  Support  (Children  and Young 
People)  Act 2024. Bereavement  Support  (Children  and Young  People)  Bill 2 
Bereavement  Support  (Children  and Young  People) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  specified  organisations  and public  bodies  to inform  children  and young  people 
of local,  national  and online  support  services  available  to them  following  a bereavement; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Christine  Jardine 
supported  by Wendy  Chamberlain , 
Mrs Flick  Drummond , Mr Tobias  Ellwood , 
Richard  Foord , Tim Loughton , Rachael  Maskell , 
Jim Shannon  and Munira  Wilson . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   12th  March  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 176



1 
 BORDER SECURITY, ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION  BILL  
 
Memorandum from the Home Office to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory 
Reform Committee  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
1. This memorandum has been prepared for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory 
Reform Committee to assist with its scrutiny of the  Border Security, Asylum and 
Immigration  Bill (“the Bill”). The Bill was introduced in the House of Commons on 
30 January 2025.   
 
2. This memorandum identifies the provisions of the Bill which  confer new or 
amended powers to make delegated legislation. It explains in each case why the 
power has been taken and explains the nature of, and the reason for, the 
procedure selected.  
 
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE BILL  
 
3. The Bill makes provision for a variety of measures relating to border security, 
asylum and immigration , falling into four pillars .  
 
4. Pillar 1 provides the framework which enables the Border Security Commander, 
and the Border Security Command (BSC ), to fulfil their  role as an effective border 
security system leader, cohering and driving improvements to  the collective 
response to current and future threats . 
 
5. Pillar 2 expands data sharing capabilities between government departments and 
agencies to assist in developing the intelligence picture for organised immigration 
crime (OIC)  and other threats to UK border security. The improved sharing of data 
will enhance abilities to identify risks, whether for policing, customs, immigration, 
or wider law enforcement ( OIC and/or serious and organised crime) purposes; as 
well as to prevent the loss of human life.  
 
6. Pillar 3 creates new and enhanced measures  to strengthen border security . This 
includes an array of new, stronger powers for law enforcement agencies to 
investigate and prosecute OIC, and it provides additional deterrents and 
penalties for criminals involved in OIC. Pillar 3 also introduces n ew and 
enhanced tools that will allow for faster interventions against those suspected of 
being involved in serious and organised crime  and enables  restrictions to be 
placed  on them.  
 
7. Pillar 4 introduces new, additional measures to support and strengthen the UK’s 
immigration and asylum system.  The Bill repeals the Safety of Rwanda (Asylum 
and Immigration) Act 2024  and parts within  the Illegal Migration Act 2023.  
 
8. To support its policy objectives and ensure the ability  to adapt to future threats to 
border security, the Bill includes a number of delegated powers. In general terms, 
the bulk of the powers will allow for proportionate changes to the environment in 
which partners across the border security and law enforcement systems operate. 
Where possible, regulation -making powers are subject to consultation 
requirements.  
 
2 
 DELEGATED POWERS  
9. The Bill includes the following measures which contain new or amended 
delegated powers : 
i. Enhanced OIC Powers: Supplying and handling articles for use in 
immigration crime ; 
ii. Enhanced OIC Powers : Powers of search and seizure in relation to 
electronic devices ; 
iii. Sharing of trailer registration information ; 
iv. Extension  of personnel who can take biometric information ; 
v. New criminal offences to criminalise the making, adapting, importing, 
supplying, offering to supply and possession of articles for use in 
serious crime;  and 
vi. New powers to strengthen the operation of Serious Crime Prevention 
Orders . 
 
Analysis of delegated powers by clause  
 
Clause 15(3)  - Power to add to the list of articles which are not relevant articles 
for the purposes of the possession and handling OIC offences  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    Draft a ffirmative  procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
10. Clause 13 creates an offence in relation to supplying articles for use in immigration 
crime. Clause 14 create s an offence in relation to handling articles  for use in 
immigration crime.  Clause 15(1) provides that for the purposes of these offences, 
“relevant article” means anything or substance other than the items listed in 
paragraph (a) to (h).  
 
11. Clause 15(3) confers a power on the Secretary of State by regulations to add  
items or substances  to that list, and to make provision which is consequential on 
provision made under 15(3)  to add  any items or substances to that list.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
12. The power to add to the list is required  so that, if necessary , in view of the policy 
objective that it should not be an offence to supply or handle articles listed in 
clause 15(1), it is possible to add items to the list if appropriate to do so in the 
future  to ensure that the list of items carved out from the offence remains up to 
date and relevant with any changes to methods of irregular entry to the UK and 
any technological updates to life saving equipment . The power  to make provision 
which is consequential on adding any items or substances woul d, for example, 
enabl e the addition of a new subsection in the clause if a new item or substance 
being added to subsection 15(1) required a definition. It would also enable, if 
appropriat e, in light of any item or substance to be added, subsection 15(2) to be 
amended  so that it were to apply in relation to the new item or substance.   
 
3 
 Justification for the procedure  
 
13. The regulation -making power in clause 15(3) is subject to the draft affirmative 
procedure. This is considered appropriate as this power , if exercised, would 
change the scope of a criminal offence . The draft affirmative procedure is also 
appropriate given that this is a Henry VIII power. Parliament should have the 
opportunity to debate and approve any new articles that the power would allow to 
be added to the list in clause 15(1).  
 
Clause 25(1)(a) and (b) – Power through  regulations to make references to an 
authorised officer  or an immigration officer , to include a person of a description 
specified in the regulations and permit the use of reasonable force in the 
exercise of any function  
 
Power conferred on :   Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by :   Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure :   Negative  procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
14. Clauses 1 9 to 26 create powers for immigration officers and police constables 
(who receive  authorisation by a police officer of at least the rank of superintendent , 
in England and Wales ) (“authorised officers ”) to search persons who have arrived 
or entered the UK in the way described in clause 19(3) for anything which appears 
to an authorised officer  to be a thing on which information that relates, or may 
relate, to the commission (whether in the past or future) of an offence under 
section 25 or 25A of the Immigration Act 1971 is, or may be, stored in electronic 
form. Those clauses also create powers of retention and use in relation to such 
items , alongside powers for immigration officers to pass on articles to other law 
enforcement in  certain  circumstances . 
 
15. Clause 2 5 creates two new powers:  
 
a. Clause 25(1)(a) gives the Secretary of State the power through regulations 
to provide that references to an authorised  officer in the provisions in 
relation to electronic devices include a person of a description specified in 
the regulations.  Clause 2 5(2) provides that the descriptions of person that 
may be so specified include persons designated by the Secretary of State 
in accordance with the regulations . 
b. Clause 25(1)(b) gives the Secretary of State power through those 
regulations to provide that a person so specified may, if necessary, use 
reasonable force in the exercise of any function conferred by virtue of the 
regulations.  Immigration officers are already empowered, if necessary, to 
use reasonable force by section 146  of the  Immigration and Asylum Act 
1999.  Clause 20(8) also provides this power for constables.  
 
16. Clause 25(3) provides that where persons are designated by the Secretary of 
State as mentioned in subsection (2), the regulations must contain such 
safeguards relating to the designation as the Secretary of State considers 
appropriate.  
 
4 
 Justification for taking the power  
 
17. The Home Office’s policy intention is that the new provisions will be made 
available immediately to authorised  officers. However, it wishes to preserve the 
ability to expand the scope of those who can use the powers. This will enable the 
Secretary of State in the future to authorise other cohorts of officials, to use the 
powers  if that proves necessary and appropriate. There are analogous powers 
(exercisable administratively rather than via secondary legislation) that enable the 
Secretary of State to confer  certain coercive powers on other specified categories 
of person, see 25CA to 25CC of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971  for 
example paragraphs .  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
18. The negative procedure is considered to afford an appropriate level of 
parliamentary scrutiny . Any regulations made would not create any new powers 
but would extend the cohort of people who can use them. Additionally, clause 
25(3) provides that if any such regulations include persons designated by the 
Secretary of State, the regulations must contain such safeguards relating to the 
designation of persons as the Secretary of State considers necessary.  
 
Clause  33(8) – Power to make regulations “specif ying purposes relat ed to 
policing ” for which information may be supplied under clauses 30(7)(a) and 
31(1)(iii) 
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    Draft a ffirmative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
19. Clause 33(8) gives the Secretary of State the power to specify in regulations any 
purposes related to policing for which the Secretary of State for Transport may 
supply trailer registration information to a UK Authorised Person  (specified 
persons within UK police bodies) , and for which recipients of trailer registration 
information may further disclose that information to a person exercising public 
functions. A UK Authorised Person is defined by reference to a table set out at 
33(3), which lists a range of recipients who are  members of UK policing bodies.  
 
20. The Home Office policy intention is to define the purposes related to policing in -
line with paragraph 1.6 of the Police information and records management (PIRM) 
Code of Practice  (published July 2023); section 5 of the Code of Practice for the 
Police National Computer (PNC) and the Law Enforcement Data Service (LEDS)  
(published February 2023) ; and as set out in part 1 of the Police Service of 
Northern Ireland (PSNI) Service Policy on Information Management (SP0816)  
(published October 2016 ). The Codes were laid before Parliament pursuant to 
Section 39A(5) of the Police Act 1996. Both Codes and the PSNI Service Policy 
contain a common core definition of police purposes as follows:  
 
• protecting life and property  
 
5 
 • preserving order  
• preventing the commission of offences  
• bringing offenders to justice  
• any other police duty or responsibility arising from common or statute law . 
 
21. The Home Office wishes to preserve the ability to amend the scope of those 
policing purposes in  line with wider developments in policing policy that may occur 
from time  to time – including to the above Codes – and therefore require s a 
regulation -making power. This will enable the Secretary of State in future to use 
this power, with the consent of Parliament, if necessary and appropriate to do so.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
22. The reason  for taking this power is two -fold:  
 
a) Firstly, defining “purposes related to policing” in regulations, rather than 
on the face of the Bill, will mitigate the risk of unintended consequences. 
While there is a recognised core definition of “purposes related to 
policing” in both the Codes of Prac tice and the Service Policy referred, 
there is no such definition to be found in primary legislation. The policy 
intention is not to fill this void and risk unintended consequences, such as 
the definition being read across to wider police law in the UK. This 
measure is intended to relate only to the supply of trailer registration 
information taking this power will help ensure that this is clear.  
 
b) Secondly, the ability to update the list by way of regulations will enable 
the legislation to keep step with any changes that are made to policing 
codes of practice. This will help avoid unnecessary  inconsistencies 
across  the definitions that may emerge between those applicable to the 
trailer registration data, and the Codes of Practice regulating police 
information and records management , and the L aw Enforcement Data 
System ( LEDS ), respectively. LEDS will be  the principal  system through 
which trailer registration data will be made available to the police (in -line 
with clause 30(7)). Were the Secretary of State minded to amend the 
definition of the purposes related to policing in the Codes of Practice, the 
ability to  dynamically  amend the same with respect to trailer registration 
information will be vital to avoiding a divergence  in operational definitions 
by putting draft regulations to  Parliament at a similar time.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
23. Clause 33(9) will place a duty on the Secretary of State to consult such persons 
as they consider appropriate before exercising this power. Further more , the 
regulation making power will be subject to the affirmative procedure, which will 
ensure an appropriate level of parliamentary scrutiny.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Clause 42(2)(b)  Prescribe through regulations ‘other authorised persons’ to 
capture biometric information  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrumen t 
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    Negative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
24. Section 141 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (fingerprinting) is amended 
to confer a power on the Secretary of State to designate additional persons as an 
authorised person  who can take fingerprints from foreign nationals under the 
section.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
25. The principal policy objective is to create greater legislative flexibility as to the 
persons that can be designated an authorised person , with the aim of providing 
greater resilience in biometric information  capturing capabilities during a crisis/at 
times of high demand . The measure s might be used, for example, to add trained 
army officers to the list of authorised person s so that they can take biometric 
information  when facilitating an evacuation.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
26. This is to ensure a quick  response  to emergency situations. This power would 
have proved helpful following  the evacuation from Afghanistan in August 2021, 
when a large number of people’s biometrics needed to be enrolled when they 
arrived at the UK’s border. If an affirmative approach  was adopted , changes  may 
not be capable of being implement ed quickly, affecting the ability to adapt as 
quickly as needed.  
 
Clause 44(3), (4) and (5) - Power to amend meaning of “relevant article” for use 
in serious crime  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    Draft affirmative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
27. Clause 43(1) and (2) create two new criminal offences:  
 
a. An offence of possessing a relevant article in circumstances which give rise 
to a reasonable suspicion that the relevant article will be used in connection 
with any serious offence; and  
 
 
7 
 b. An offence of importing, making, adapting, supplying or offering to supply 
a relevant article in circumstances which give rise to a reasonable 
suspicion that the relevant article will be used in connection with any 
serious offence. Serious offence means an offence specified or described 
in Schedule 1 of the Serious Crime Act 2007.  
 
28. It is a defence for a person charged with one of these offences to show that they 
did not intend or suspect that the relevant article would be used in connection with 
a serious offence.  
 
29. Clause 44(1) defines a relevant article for the purpose of these new offences, 
namely:  
• any document that may be used in conjunction with a 3D printer to 
produce any part of a firearm ;  
• encapsulators or pill presses used to produce tablets or capsules;  
• a vehicle concealment that forms part of or is intended to form part of a 
vehicle that conceals people or things.  
 
30. Manufacturers, modifiers, and suppliers profit from the supply of such articles that 
could then be used by criminals to commit serious crime. These articles will 
change over time as technology changes. Clause 4 4(3), (4) and (5)  will enable 
the Secretary of State, by regulations, to amend this section so as to add to or 
amend the list of relevant articles for the purposes of the offences in clause 43(1) 
and (2) . Clause 44(4) provides that relevant articles may only be added to the list 
if the Secretary of State considers that there is a significant risk of such an article 
being used in connection with any serious offence as set out in clause 43(1) and 
(2). 
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
31. The Bill provides on its face for new offences criminalising the possession, 
import ing, making, modifying, supplying, offering to supply of a relevant article in 
circumstances which give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the relevant article 
will be used in connection with any serious offence. It further contains a list of 
relevant articles for the purpose of the offences. Given the dynamic and fast -
paced nature of technological development and the readiness of criminals to 
exploit new opportunities to engage in crime, it is considered appropriate that the 
Secretary of State should have the ability to update the definition of a relevant 
article for the purposes of the offences through secondary legislation. This 
delegated power  would ensure that the list of specific articles used in serious 
crime remains up to date  by enabl ing the government to amend the specified list. 
This will allow the list to be kept up to date in response to the actions of individuals 
who facilitate and commit serious crime and changes in criminal tactics.  
 
32. Regular consultation will take place with all stakeholders including law 
enforcement agencies to identify tools or articles which enable serious crime to 
take place which are not captured under existing legislation. Each article will be 
considered carefull y, examining the effects of listing new articles under this 
legislation and the impact it would have on the public, specifically exploring the 
effects on those with protected characteristics, ensuring law abiding individuals 
and/or legitimate organisations  are not disproportionately affected.  
 
 
8 
 Justification for the procedure  
 
33. The regulation -making power in clause  44(3), (4) and (5)  is subject to the draft 
affirmative procedure. This is considered appropriate as this power will amend the 
scope of a criminal offence; the draft affirmative procedure is also appropriate 
given that this is a Henry VIII power. Parliament should have the opportunity to 
debate and approve any new articles that w ould be added to this criminal offence 
before they take effect, given the impact that this could have on citizens.  
 
Clause 46(2) – New section 5B( 5) of the Serious Crime Act 2007: Power to 
specify description of “responsible person”  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercisable by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary procedure:    None  
 
Context and purpose  
 
34. By Part 1 of the Serious Crime Act 2007 (“the 2007 Act”) provides for Serious 
Crime Prevention Orders (“SCPOs”). SCPOs are civil preventative orders which 
can impose tailored prohibitions, restrictions and requirements on a person for a 
period of up to five y ears to prevent or disrupt their involvement in serious crime. 
There is an indicative list of “serious offences ” in Schedule 1 to the 2007 Act to 
which an SCPO can be applied. A “person” includes bodies corporate, 
partnerships and unincorporated associatio ns as well as individuals. The terms of 
an SCPO might relate to, for example: business and financial dealings, use of 
premises or items, provision of goods or services, employment of staff, 
association with individuals, means of communication or travel.  
 
35. Clause 46(2) amends the provisions relating to SCPOs to allow for the court to 
expressly attach an electronic monitoring requirement to an order. An electronic 
monitoring requirement may be imposed to support the monitoring of an 
individual’s compliance with other req uirements of the order (for example, where 
an exclusion/inclusion zone or a curfew are imposed). Electronic monitoring is 
undertaken using an electronic tag usually fitted to a person’s ankle.  
 
36. The tag worn by the person transmits data to a monitoring centre where it is 
processed and stored. The monitoring centre, operated by a “responsible person”, 
reviews this data to see whether an individual being electronically monitored is 
complying with th e conditions of the SCPO. Where a person has failed to comply, 
the responsible person provides information to the relevant authority, in this case 
the police, responsible for the enforcement of the order.  
 
37. The 2007 Act, as amended by clause 46(2), sets out further provision about 
electronic monitoring requirements. New section 5B( 4) of the 2007 Act provides 
that an SCPO which includes an electronic monitoring requirement must specify 
the person who is responsible for the monitoring (“the responsible person”). New 
section 5B( 5) of the 2007 Act provides that the responsible person must be of a 
description specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State. There is 
precedent in legislation for this approac h. Similar enabling powers are contained 
 
9 
 in, for example, section 3AC(2) of the Bail Act 1976, section 215(3) of the Criminal 
Justice Act 2003 and section 37(7) of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021. The relevant 
statutory instrument made under the first two of those powers is the Criminal 
Justice (Electronic Monitoring) (Responsible Person) Order 2017 (SI  2017/235).  
 
Justification for the power  
 
38. The regulations will provide a description of the person with whom the Secretary 
of State has made arrangements for providing the electronic monitoring services 
for the purposes of the SCPO regime. Providing a description of the responsible 
person is prope rly an administrative procedure. For that reason, the designation 
of the responsible person is considered an appropriate matter for secondary 
legislation.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
39. The regulations made under new section 5B( 5) of the 2007 Act are not subject to 
any Parliamentary procedure (see section 89 of the 2007 Act as amended by 
clause 46(8)). The primary purpose of these regulations is simply to put into the 
public domain the name of one or more persons contracted to provide electronic 
monitoring services for the purposes of SCPOs. As set out above, the selection 
of the contractor(s) is properly an administrative matter for the executive. Given 
this, no form of Parliamentary scrutiny is considered  necessary. This mirrors the 
approach taken in the analogous delegated powers in section 3AC(2) of the Bail 
Act 1976, section 215(3) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 and section 37(7) of the 
Domestic Abuse Act 2021.  
 
Clause 46(2) – New section 5D(1) of the Serious Crime Act 2007: Duty to issue 
code of practice relating to data from electronic monitoring  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercisable by:    Statutory code of practice  
 
Parliamentary procedure:    None  
 
Context and purpose  
 
40. The amendments to the 2007 Act made by clause 46(2) include a power for the 
court to attach to a n SCPO an electronic monitoring requirement. Clause 46(2) 
inserts  a new section 5D into the 2007 Act which requires the Secretary of State 
to issue a code of practice on the processing of data gathered in the course of an 
electronic monitoring requirement of an SCPO.  
 
41. The processing of such data will be subject to the requirements in the UK General 
Data Protection Regulation and the Data Protection Act 2018. The code of 
practice issued under new section 5D of the 2007 Act is intended to set out the 
appropriate tests and  safeguards for the processing of such data, in order to 
ensure compliance with the data protection legislation. For example, the 
government envisages that the code will set out the length of time for which data 
may be retained and the circumstances in whi ch it may be permissible to share 
data with the police to assist with crime detection. It is intended that the code will 
 
10 
 cover the collection, retention and sharing of personal data gathered under a 
requirement that is imposed for the purpose of monitoring compliance with another 
requirement.  
 
42. Similar provision for a code of practice in respect of the processing of data from 
electronic monitoring is included in section 215A of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 
(as inserted by the Crime and Courts Act 2013). Section 51 of the Domestic Abuse 
Act 2021 also makes similar provision in relation to Domestic Abuse Prevention 
Orders.  
 
Justification for the power  
 
43. The government considers that a code of practice is the most appropriate vehicle 
to set out expectations and responsibilities in relation to the processing of data 
gathered under the electronic monitoring requirement. There is a range of 
statutory guidance issu ed each year and it is important that guidance can be 
updated to keep pace with such changes and with operational good practice.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
44. Given the likely content and nature of the code, the fact that it will not define or 
create new legal responsibilities and that the processing of data must be in 
accordance with the requirements of data protection legislation, the government 
does not consider it is necessary for the code to be subject to any Parliamentary 
procedure. This approach is consistent with the code provided for in section 215A 
of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 and section 51 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 . 
 
Clause 4 9(3) - New paragraph 2(5)(j) of Schedule 1A of the Serious Crime Act 
2007: Power to add to the list of notification requirements  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    Draft affirmative procedure  
 
Context and purpose  
 
45. Clause 49(2) and (3)  inserts new section 15A and Schedule 1A into the Serious 
Crime Act 2007 which require a person subject to an SCPO to supply certain 
information to the police and keep such information up to date. Failure to do so 
without reasonable excuse, or knowingly supplying false information, is an offence 
(new  paragraph 3 of Schedule 1A). The relevant information is the person’s name 
(if the person uses one or more other names, each of those names); home 
address (and the address of any other premises in the United Kingdom at which 
the person regularly resides or  stays); telephone numbers and email addresses; 
usernames for a social media service including video games; identifying 
information of motor vehicles kept or routinely used by the person; specified 
financial information; specified information about identification documents; the 
name and address of each of the person’s employer (new paragraph 2(5)((a) to 
(i)). 
 
 
11 
 46. Such information will assist law enforcement agencies in monitoring the person’s 
compliance with the provisions of the SCPO and assessing the risk they may pose 
to the public. Additionally, standardising notification requirements helps to ensure 
greater co nsistency in the way individuals are managed, including improving law 
enforcement agencies’ ability to share information with each other and manage 
SCPO cases proactively. New paragraph 2(5)(j) of Schedule 1A enables the 
Secretary of State, by regulations,  to specify further categories of information 
which persons subject to a n SCPO must notify to the police.  
 
Justification for the power  
 
47. The previous government published a public consultation1 on improving law 
enforcement agencies’ response to serious and organised crime. It sought views 
on which personal details should be provided under the notification requirements 
for those subject to an SCPO, including most of those listed above. Current 
notification requirements can, but need not, include all the information listed above 
as part of the stipulations of an SCPO on a case -by-case basis.  
 
48. Most consultation respondents agreed with the previous government’s proposal 
that all SCPOs automatically include a prescribed set of notification requirements 
and agreed with all the suggested notifications requirements. Many respondents 
highlighted that standardising notification requirements would create con sistency 
and enable effective monitoring by law enforcement agencies, whilst enabling the 
courts to retain the flexibility to impose additional notification requirements where 
necessary. Those respond ents who disagreed with the proposal suggested that 
no prescribed notifications should be imposed, with all requirements to be 
selected on the basis that they were necessary and appropriate to the offending 
history of the subject in each case.  
 
49. There are notification regimes in Part 2 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 in respect 
of sex offenders and Part 4 of the Counter -Terrorism Act 2008 (as amended by 
the Counter -Terrorism and Border Security Act 2019) in respect of terrorism 
offenders. Both the se regimes require a wide range of information to be provided 
by those subject to the notification requirements. There is also a notification 
regime in Part 3 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021, in respect of a person who has 
abused a person aged 16 or over to  whom they are personally connected. The 
differing notification requirements reflect the different nature of these crimes. The 
government has selected the notification requirements that are most appropriate 
for individuals subject to SCPOs, reflecting the breadth of serious and organised 
crime.  
 
50. The government will continue to work with law enforcement and criminal justice 
partners to consider additional notification requirements. A power to add to the 
notification requirement by regulations will enable the list to be amended in the 
light of operationa l experience and as technology and criminal activity change.  
 
51. This approach has i ts precedents. There are comparable powers in section 
83(5)(h) of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 and section 47(2)(h) of the Counter -
Terrorism Act 2008.  
 
 
1 Consultation document (accessible) - GOV.UK  
 
12 
 Justification for the procedur e 
 
52. By virtue of section 89(3) of the 2007 Act, as substituted by clause 49(7) 
regulations made under new  paragraph 2(5)(j) of Schedule 1A are subject to the 
affirmative procedure. The affirmative procedure is considered appropriate given 
that such regulations would enable the Secretary of State to add to the notification 
requirements on persons subject to an SCPO, which would not have previously 
been considered by Parliament and which might be applied to individuals who 
have not been convicted of any offence. Moreover, a failure to comply with any 
notification requirement, including any additional notification requirement, would 
constitute a criminal offence punishable on conviction with imprisonment of up to 
five years. The analogous powers under the Sexual Of fences Act 2003 and the 
Counter -Terrorism Act 2008 are also subject to the affirmative procedure.  
 
Clause 53(1) – Power to make consequential amendments  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:   Negative procedure  (if it does not amend primary 
legislation), otherwise affirmative procedure  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
53. Clause 53(1) confers a power on the Secretary of State to make consequential 
provision for the purposes of the Bill. Such provision may include repealing, 
revoking or otherwise amending primary and secondary legislation. It therefore 
includes a Henry VIII power.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
54. The powers conferred by this clause are wide, but they are limited by the fact that 
any amendments made under the regulation -making power must be 
consequential on provisions made by or under the Bill. There are various 
precedents for such provisions, includ ing section 84(2) of the Nationality and 
Borders Act 2022. The Bill already includes some changes to other enactments 
as a consequence of the substantive provisions in the Bill, but it is possible that 
not all of the necessary consequential amendments hav e been identified in the 
Bill's preparation. The Home Office considers it appropriate to enable 
consequential amendments to be made by regulation in order to ensure that the 
changes effected by this Bill can be effectively delivered, mitigating the risk of  
undermining the effective operation of the provisions in the Bill if a provision were 
missed.   
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
55. If regulations under this clause do not repeal, revoke or otherwise amend primary 
legislation they will be subject to the negative procedure. If regulations under this 
clause amend or repeal provision in primary legislation, they will be subject to the 
affirmative procedure as befitting a Henry VIII power of this type. It is considered 
 
13 
 that this provides the appropriate level of parliamentary scrutiny for the powers 
conferred by this clause.  
 
Clause 56(1) - Power to bring certain provisions of the Bill into force by 
commencement regulations  
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    None  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
56. Clause 56(1) contains a standard power for the Secretary of State to bring certain 
provisions of the Bill into force by commencement regulations.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
57. Leaving provisions in the Bill to be brought into force by regulations will afford the 
necessary flexibility to commence the provisions of the Bill at the appropriate time, 
having regard to the need to make any necessary secondary legislation, issue 
guidan ce, undertake appropriate training and put the necessary systems and 
procedures in place, as the case may be.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
58. As is usual with commencement powers, regulations made under this clause are 
not subject to any parliamentary procedure. The principle of the provisions to be 
commenced will already have been considered by Parliament during the passage 
of the Bill. Commenc ement by regulations enables the provisions to be brought 
into force at a convenient time.  
 
Clause 56(5) - Power to make transitional, transitory or saving provision s 
 
Power conferred on:    Secretary of State  
 
Power exercised by:    Regulations made by statutory instrument  
 
Parliamentary Procedure:    None  
 
Context and Purpose  
 
59. Clause 56(5) confers on the Secretary of State  the power to make such 
transitional, transitory or saving provisions as they consider appropriate in 
connection with the coming into force of the provisions in the Bill, including the 
power to make different provision for different purposes or areas.  
 
Justification for taking the power  
 
60. This standard power ensures that the Secretary of State can provide a smooth 
commencement of new legislation and transition between existing legislation and 
 
14 
 the Bill, without creating any undue difficulty or unfairness in making these 
changes. There are numerous precedents for such a power.  
 
Justification for the procedure  
 
61. Such a power is commonly included as part of a Bill’s power to make 
commencement regulations and such regulations are not usually subject to any 
parliamentary procedure on the grounds that Parliament has already approved 
the principle of the provisions in the Bill by enacting them.



British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Privatisation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Transfer  of property  etc. of the British  Broadcasting  Corporation 
2 Shareholders  of the successor  company 
3 Repeal  of Royal  Charter 
4 Consequential  provision 
5 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 98 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the privatisation  of the British  Broadcasting  Corporation; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Transfer  of property  etc. of the British  Broadcasting  Corporation 
(1) Within  one year  of this Act coming  into force,  the Secretary  of State  must 
specify  a date  (“the  transfer  date”)  on which  all the property,  rights  and 
5liabilities  of the British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (“the  BBC”)  shall,  by virtue 
of this section,  become  the property,  rights  and liabilities  of a limited  company 
established  by the Secretary  of State  for that purpose  (“the  successor 
company”). 
(2) The transfer  date  must  be a day no later  than  1 April  2028. 
(3) 
10This  section  applies  to all property,  rights  and liabilities  of the BBC,  whether 
or not they  are capable  of being  transferred  or assigned  by the BBC,  and 
whether  they  are located  in the United  Kingdom  or elsewhere. 
2 Shareholders  of the successor  company 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  arrange  for ownership  of the successor  company 
15to be transferred  to its shareholders,  in the form  of shares,  within  one week 
of the transfer  date. 
(2) Every  person  who  holds  a TV licence  on the transfer  date,  and who  has held 
a TV licence  (whether  or not it is the same  licence)  continuously  for the period 
of one year  before  the transfer  date,  shall  be a shareholder  of the successor 
company. 
20 (3) For the purposes  of this section,  the Secretary  of State  may  not— 
(a) issue  shares  in the successor  company  to any person  other  than  a 
person  specified  in subsection  (2), or 
(b) retain  any shares  in the successor  company. 
59/1 Bill 98 1 British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Privatisation)  Bill 
3 Repeal  of Royal  Charter 
Any  Royal  Charter  for the establishment  or continuance  of the BBC  then  in 
force  shall  be repealed  on the transfer  date. 
4 Consequential  provision 
5 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument 
make  amendments  consequential  on the provisions  of this Act to Part 4 of 
the Communications  Act 2003  (Licensing  of TV reception). 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
further  provision  consequential  on the provisions  of this Act. 
10 (3) The power  to make  regulations  under  subsections  (1) and (2) may  (among 
other  things)  be exercised  by modifying  any provision  made  by or under  an 
enactment. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section — 
(a) may  make  transitional  and saving  provision; 
15 (b) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of them  has been  laid before  and 
approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
5 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) 
20This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Privatisation) 
Act 2025. British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Privatisation)  Bill 2 
British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (Privatisation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the privatisation  of the British  Broadcasting  Corporation;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 98



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  1st Report of Session 2024–25
 Lithium-ion Battery Safety Bill [HL]
  Arbitration Bill [HL]
  Bank Resolution (Recapitalisation) Bill [HL]
  Budget Responsibility Bill
  Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
and International Committee of the Red Cross 
(Status) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate Bill [HL]
  Holocaust Memorial Bill
Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015 (Extension) 
Bill [HL]
Support for Infants and Parents etc 
(Information) Bill [HL]
Education (Values of British Citizenship) Bill 
[HL]
Statutory Instruments (Amendment) Bill [HL]
 Ordered to be printed 4 September 2024 and published 5 September 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 6
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 First Report
 PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.  This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to a private 
member’s Bill. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
 LITHIUM-ION BATTERY SAFETY BILL [HL]
2. This private member’s Bill is intended to make provision for the safe storage, 
use and disposal of lithium-ion batteries. It is due to have its second reading 
on 6 September. There is no delegated powers memorandum as the Bill has 
not been produced with the help of the Government.
3. The Bill contains five regulation making powers each of which would appear 
to allow for the creation of criminal offences:
• Two of the regulation making powers are explicit in conferring powers 
to create offences. In those cases, there is also a power to provide for 
the imposition of civil sanctions (clauses 3 and 4).
• In one case the power to create an offence appears to be a necessary 
consequence of the power being conferred (clause 2).
• In the other two cases, the nature of the regulation making power 
requires an enforcement mechanism, but without making it explicit 
what the nature of the enforcement mechanism is. Such a mechanism 
would have to be the creation of offences or the imposition of civil 
sanctions (clauses 5 and 6).
4. All of the powers in the Bill are subject to the negative resolution procedure. 
In our guidance to Departments1, we make it clear that the use of subordinate 
legislation to create criminal offences should be treated as exceptional and 
that it should only be done where there is a compelling justification. We 
also consider that, where subordinate legislation is used to create criminal 
offences (or where it is used to impose civil sanctions), it should be subject to 
the affirmative resolution procedure.
5. In the circumstances, we consider that the Bill should be amended 
so that the regulation making powers conferred by it are all made 
subject to the affirmative resolution procedure .
6. Clause 5 requires the Secretary of State to make regulations regarding the 
safety standards for conversion kits for use with micromobility vehicles that 
run on lithium-ion batteries, and relating to the use of charging systems for 
electric-powered micromobility vehicles. Clause 6 requires the Secretary of 
1 Paragraph 12 of the Guidance for Departments , December 2023.
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
State to make regulations with respect to the disposal of lithium-ion batteries. 
In both cases, although any requirements imposed by the regulations would 
need to be enforced in order to be effective, nothing is said on the face of the 
Bill as to what provision may be made in the regulations for the enforcement 
of their requirements. As noted above, it seems to us that the only possible 
enforcement mechanisms would be either the creation of criminal offences 
or the imposition of civil sanctions.
7. We consider that clauses 5 and 6 are defective in failing to specify 
the provision which is to be made in the regulations to enforce the 
requirements imposed by them. We consider that the failure to 
specify the enforcement mechanisms is particularly objectionable 
if the intention is that they should include the creation of criminal 
offences, given the constitutional significance of using subordinate 
legislation in this way.
 ARBITRATION BILL [HL]
8. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BANK RESOLUTION (RECAPITALISATION) BILL [HL]
9. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BUDGET RESPONSIBILITY BILL
10. There is nothing in this Money Bill which we would wish to draw to the 
attention of the House.
 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION AND 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (STATUS) 
BILL [HL]
11. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 CROWN ESTATE BILL [HL]
12. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL BILL
13. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LORDS SPIRITUAL (WOMEN) ACT 2015 (EXTENSION) BILL 
[HL]
14. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 SUPPORT FOR INFANTS AND PARENTS ETC (INFORMATION) 
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
BILL [HL]
15. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (VALUES OF BRITISH CITIZENSHIP) BILL [HL]
16. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL [HL]
17. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
For the business taken at the meeting on 4 September 2024, Members declared 
no interests.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by Lord Rooker, The Earl of Lindsay, Baroness 
Humphreys, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, Baroness Chakrabarti, Lord Carlile of 
Berriew, Baroness Bakewell of Hardington of Mandeville.



Bus Services  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Bus services:  duty  of Secretary  of State 
2 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
59/1 Bill 77 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Government  to ensure  that every  town  with  a population 
of more  than  10,000  people  has a regular  bus service  operating  seven  days  a 
week,  and that local  health  services,  including  hospitals  and GP surgeries,  are 
served  by those  buses;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Bus services:  duty  of Secretary  of State 
(1) The Secretary  of State  has a duty  to ensure  that every  town  in England  with a 
population  of more  than 10,000  people  has bus services  which— 
(a) operate  seven  days a week, 
5 (b) serve  local health  services,  including  hospitals  and GP surgeries. 
(2) In carrying  out the duty  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult— 
(a) local  authorities  for the areas  to which  the duty  applies, 
(b) integrated  care boards  for the areas  to which  the duty  applies, 
10 (c) residents,  or organisations  representing  residents,  of the areas  to which 
the duty  applies. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may by regulations  make  further  provision  for the purpose  of 
complying  with the duty  under  subsection  (1). 
(4) 
15Regulations  under  subsection  (3) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the 
statutory  instrument  containing  them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by 
a resolution  of, each  House  of Parliament. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
20 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Bus Services  Act 2024. 
59/1 Bill 77 1 Bus Services  Bill 
Bus Services  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Government  to ensure  that every  town  with  a population  of more 
than  10,000  people  has a regular  bus service  operating  seven  days  a week,  and that 
local  health  services,  including  hospitals  and GP surgeries,  are served  by those  buses; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Helen  Morgan 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 77



Bus Services  (No.  2) Bill [HL] 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
The amendments  have been marshalled  in accordance  with the Instruction  of  8th January  2025,  as follows— 
Clauses  11 to 31 Clauses  1 to 10 
Title Schedule 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Before  Clause  1 Amendment 
No. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
1★_ Before  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Purpose:  improvement  of bus passenger  services 
(1) The purpose  of this Act is to improve  the performance  and quality  of bus passenger 
services  in Great  Britain. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must,  in taking  any actions  under  the provisions  of this Act, 
have  regard  to this purpose. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to have regard  to the purpose  of the 
Act, namely  the improved  performance  and quality  of bus passenger  services  in Great  Britain. 
Clause  4 
LORD  GODDARD  OF STOCKPORT 
2_ Clause  4, page  3, line 2, at end insert  “, and more  than  one day” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government  on whether  there  is no longer  any minimum 
period  from  which  the provisions  proposed  by a franchising  authority  may be mobilised. 
59/1 HL Bill 54—I 
Clause  6 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
3★_ Clause  6, page  3, line 17, leave  out subsection  (2) and insert— 
“(2) In subsection  (5), omit  from  “if” to end of subsection  (5).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to remove  restrictions  or conditions  that could  impede  private  operators 
from applying  for service  permits,  with the intention  of supporting  the free entry  of private  operators 
into the market. 
Clause  9 
BARONESS  PINNOCK 
4_ Clause  9, page  6, line 2, at end insert— 
“(A1) Section  123B  of the Transport  Act 2000  (assessment  of proposed  scheme)  is 
amended  in accordance  with  subsections  (A2)  to (A4). 
(A2) In subsection  (2)(a)  omit  “and”; 
(A3) After  subsection  (2)(b)  insert  “, and 
(c) assess  the adequacy  of central  government  funding  to support  the 
provision  of bus services  under  the scheme. 
(2A) The assessment  under  subsection  (2)(c)  must  include— 
(a) an evaluation  of whether  available  funding  is sufficient  to meet 
the projected  costs  of the franchising  scheme,  and 
(b) an analysis  of the funding  required  to maintain  or improve  service 
levels  across  all affected  communities. ” 
(A4) After  subsection  (6) insert— 
“(6A) An assessment  under  this section  must  be made  publicly  available  and 
submitted  to the Secretary  of State. ”” 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
5★_ Clause  9, page  6, line 21, at end insert— 
“(c) the types  of data  to be collected  and published  in relation  to local 
transport  services,  including  public  subsidy  per journey  and service 
performance  metrics, 
(d) the criteria  to be used  by independent  auditors  in assessing  the 
performance  of local  transport  services,  and Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 2 
(e) how  the data  collected  will be used  to identify  opportunities  for more 
efficient  transport  options. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  clarity  on the type of data to be collected  and published  under 
Clause  9, including  information  on public  subsidy  per journey  and service  performance  metrics. 
BARONESS  BRINTON 
6_ Clause  9, page  6, line 33, at end insert— 
“(11) The Secretary  of State  must,  no later  than  three  months  after  the day on which 
this section  comes  into force,  lay before  Parliament  regulations  specifying  the 
qualifications  and criteria  required  for a person  to be considered  an “approved 
person”  for the purposes  of section  123D  of the Transport  Act 2000. 
(12) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection  (11) may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This is a probing  amendment  to inquire  whether  the Secretary  of State  intends  to issue  the criteria 
for the 'approved  persons'  role in the near future. 
Clause  10 
LORD  WOODLEY 
7★_ Clause  10, page  7, line 25, at end insert— 
“(3A) In section  123V(4)(d)  (transitional  provision  about  schemes),  omit  “, not exceeding 
112 days,”. ” 
The Schedule 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
8_ The Schedule,  page  37, line 7, leave  out “in the area”  and insert  “which  have  one or more 
stopping  places  in the area or areas” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  brings  paragraph  9(3)(a)  of new Schedule  9A to the Transport  Act 2000  into 
line with paragraph  5(4)(a)  of that Schedule. 3 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
Clause  11 
LORD  WOODLEY 
9★_ Clause  11, page  7, line 33, at end insert— 
“(a) either— ” 
LORD  WOODLEY 
10★_ Clause  11, page  8, line 2, at end insert  “, or 
(b) the contract  is awarded  to a local  authority  bus company. ” 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
11★_ Clause  11, page  8, line 2, at end insert— 
“(1A) A franchising  authority  may  not make  a direct  award  of a public  service 
contract  under  this regulation  until  it has conducted  an evaluation  of the 
operator’s  previous  performance  in meeting  accessibility  targets,  including 
specific  improvements  to service  accessibility  for disabled  passengers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that franchising  authorities  evaluate  the incumbent  operator’s  past 
performance  on accessibility  metrics,  including  improvements  for disabled  passengers,  before 
granting  a direct  award. 
After  Clause  11 
LORD  GODDARD  OF STOCKPORT 
12_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Reporting  on the implementation  of franchising 
(1) A franchising  authority  must  prepare  and publish  a report  no later  than  one year 
after  the commencement  of bus operations  in a franchised  area. 
(2) The report  must  include— 
(a) an assessment  of the quality  of outcomes  resulting  from  the implementation 
of franchised  bus services,  including  reviews  of— 
(i) passenger  satisfaction, 
(ii) changes  in service  reliability  and coverage, 
(iii) accessibility  improvements,  and 
(iv) environmental  impacts, 
(b) a review  of the process  of establishing  and implementing  the franchising 
scheme,  including— Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 4 
challenges  encountered, (i) 
(ii) costs  incurred,  and 
(iii) timelines  achieved, 
(c) a list of recommendations  for other  authorities  considering  the introduction 
of franchising  schemes,  based  on the authority’s  experience,  and 
(d) any other  matters  the franchising  authority  considers  relevant  to the 
operation  and outcomes  of the franchising  scheme. 
(3) The report  must  be made  publicly  available  and a copy  submitted  to the Secretary 
of State. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  issue  guidance  on the content  and format  of reports 
prepared  under  this section,  and franchising  authorities  must  have  regard  to this 
guidance. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  franchising  authorities  to publish  a report  a year after the commencement 
of operations  with recommendations  for other  authorities  considering  implementing  a franchised 
bus service. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
13★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of direct  awards  of contracts 
The Secretary  of State  must  conduct  an annual  review  of all direct  awards  made 
under  section  11 and publish  a report  assessing  their  impact  on service  quality, 
passenger  satisfaction,  and market  competition. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  ongoing  oversight  of direct  awards  by requiring  the Secretary  of State 
to review  and report  on their  effectiveness  annually. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
14★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Actions  in the event  of poor  performance  of a franchising  authority 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulations,  define  the minimum  service  levels 
that must  be met by franchising  authorities,  which  must  include,  but need  not be 
limited  to— 
(a) the frequency,  reliability,  and accessibility  of bus services, 
(b) passenger  satisfaction  and accessibility,  including  for vulnerable  groups, 
(c) financial  viability  and sustainability  of bus services  within  the authority’s 
area,  and 
(d) environmental  and operational  standards  as set out in this Act. 5 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
(2) If a franchising  authority  is found  not to meet  the defined  minimum  service  levels, 
the Secretary  of State  must  undertake  a review  of the franchising  authority’s  ability 
to effectively  run bus services  within  its area. 
(3) Based  on a review  conducted  under  subsection  (2), the Secretary  of State  may— 
(a) initiate  corrective  actions  to address  service  deficiencies, 
(b) require  the franchising  authority  to enter  into a new  arrangement  with 
alternative  operators, 
(c) require  the franchising  authority  to implement  a remedial  plan  to improve 
service  provision  within  a set period,  or 
(d) implement  a clawback  agreement  to secure  the return  of funding  previously 
granted. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  the findings  of any reviews  conducted  under 
subsection  (2) and outline  any actions  taken  as a result  of the review,  including 
steps  to ensure  the continued  provision  of high-quality  bus services  for 
passengers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  ensures  that the Secretary  of State  sets clear  service  standards,  holds  LTAs 
accountable  for meeting  those  standards,  and provides  a framework  for action  when  service  levels 
fall short,  including  the option  of a clawback  provision. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
15★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Requirement  for preliminary  case  for franchising 
Before  commissioning  an assessment  under  section  123D(1)  of the Transport  Act 
2000  (audit),  local  transport  authorities  must  prepare  and publish  a preliminary 
case setting  out— 
(a) the objectives  of franchising  in the area, 
(b) the expected  benefits  to passengers,  including  improvements  in service 
quality,  accessibility,  and coverage, 
(c) a cost-benefit  analysis  outlining  the anticipated  financial  implications,  and 
(d) an evaluation  of alternative  approaches,  including  enhanced  partnerships 
or other  mechanisms,  to ensure  franchising  represents  the best option. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that LTAs  establish  a clear,  evidence-based  case for franchising 
before  initiating  an assessment,  with the intention  of safeguarding  public  funds  and ensuring  that 
franchising  is pursued  only when  it is the most  viable  and beneficial  option. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 6 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
16★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Restriction  on repeated  franchising  assessments 
(1) Where  a local  transport  authority  decides  not to proceed  with  a franchising  scheme 
in light  of an assessment  carried  out under  section  123D(1)  of the Transport  Act 
2000  (audit),  the authority  must  not initiate  another  franchising  assessment  for 
the same  area or a substantially  similar  area for a period  of five years  from  the 
date  of that decision. 
(2) The prohibition  in subsection  (1) may  only  be waived  if— 
(a) there  is a material  change  in circumstances  that would  significantly  alter 
the conclusions  of the previous  franchising  assessment,  and 
(b) the Secretary  of State  grants  approval  for a new  assessment,  based  on 
evidence  provided  by the local  transport  authority. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  introduces  a five-year  moratorium  on repeating  franchising  assessments  in the 
same  area if an LTA  decides  not to proceed  with franchising. 
LORD  WOODLEY 
17★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Franchising  authorities:  joint  forum 
(1) When  operating  a franchise  scheme,  the franchising  authority  must  establish  a 
joint  forum  with  operators  and trades  unions. 
(2) The purpose  of the joint  forum  is to address  bus service  staffing  and employment 
issues  in the area covered  by that franchising  authority. ” 
LORD  WOODLEY 
18★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Application  of TUPE:  local  authority  bus services 
In section  123X  of the Transport  Act 2000  (local  service  contracts:  application  of 
TUPE),  after  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(2A) Subsection  (3) also applies  to a situation  in which  a local  service  is 
transferred  to a local  authority  bus company. ”” 7 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
LORD  WOODLEY 
19★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Franchising:  termination  of employment 
(1) Section  123X  of the Transport  Act 2000  (local  service  contracts:  application  of 
TUPE)  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (7), omit  paragraph  (a). 
(3) After  subsection  (7), insert— 
“(7A) For the purposes  of subsection  (4), whether  a person’s  employment  is 
principally  connected  with  the provision  of any particular  local  services 
must  be determined  by agreement  between  the local  authority,  bus service 
operators  and trades  unions. ” 
(4) After  subsection  (9), insert— 
“(9A) Any  termination  of employment  for a reason  connected  to the introduction 
of a franchise  or the transfer  to a newly  franchised  bus service  under  the 
provisions  in this Act is considered  unfair  dismissal  under  section  94 of 
the Employment  Rights  Act 1996. 
(9B) The terms  and conditions  of workers  who  are transferred  to a new  local 
service  contract  must  not be inferior  to those  of their  previous  contract  for 
the duration  of that contract  and the terms  and conditions  of new 
employees  must  not be inferior  to existing  employees. ”” 
LORD  WOODLEY 
20★_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Franchising  consultation:  Transfer  of Undertakings  (Protection  of Employment) 
regulations 
In regulation  3 of the Transfer  of Undertakings  (Protection  of Employment) 
Regulations  2006  (S.I. 2006/246)  (a relevant  transfer),  after  paragraph  (1)(b)  insert— 
“(c) the introduction  or transfer  of a bus franchise  under  section  123A 
of the Transport  Act 2000  (franchising  schemes). ”” 
Clause  12 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
LORD  HAMPTON 
21_ Clause  12, page  9, line 20, at end insert— 
“(iv) health  care services,  including,  but not limited  to, hospitals  or GP 
surgeries,  or 
(v) schools,  and” Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 8 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that primary  health  care services  are considered  under  the provisions  of 
‘socially  necessary  routes’. 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
22★_ Clause  12, page  9, line 23, at end insert— 
“(16) A route  which  was abolished  in the 15 years  before  the day on which  the Bus 
Services  (No.2)  Act 2025  was passed  may  also be considered  a socially  necessary 
local  service  in this section  and section  138C. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  previously  existing  routes  that have been abolished  are considered  as 
potential  “socially  necessary  routes”. 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
23_ Clause  12, page  10, line 7, at end insert— 
“(5) Where  a socially  necessary  route  has been  identified  in accordance  with  section 
138A(15)  of the Transport  Act 2000,  and no alternative  operator  has implemented 
the service  within  a period  of six months,  the relevant  local  authority  must  take 
reasonable  steps  to implement  a service  on the socially  necessary  route  as far as 
is reasonably  practicable. 
(6) Where  a local  authority  has established  a socially  necessary  service  in the absence 
of alternative  operators,  the local  authority  must  publish  a report  on the 
establishment  and operability  of the service  within  six months  of establishing  that 
service,  which  should  include,  but not be limited  to— 
(a) the scope  and nature  of the service; 
(b) the estimated  operating  costs  and any identified  funding  gaps; 
(c) the impact  of the service  on local  accessibility  and transport  needs; 
(d) a timeline  for the operation  of the service; 
(e) a statement  where  the local  authority  is unable  to meet  the financial 
burdens  of operating  the service  within  six months  of establishing  that 
service,  specifying  the extent  of the financial  shortfall. 
(7) Where  a local  authority  makes  a statement  under  subsection  (6)(e),  the new burdens 
doctrine  shall  apply  to the provisions  of this section,  and the Secretary  of State 
must  consider  providing  appropriate  financial  support  to the local  authority  to 
ensure  the service  can be delivered. 
(8) Where  a local  authority  is not operating  a service  in the absence  of alternative 
operators,  the provisions  in subsection  (6) do not apply. 
(9) A local  authority  may,  in consultation  with  the relevant  local  transport  authority 
and following  the implementation  of a socially  necessary  service  under  the 
provisions  of subsection  (5), transfer  the responsibility  for the operation  of the 9 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
service  to an alternative  operator,  provided  that the local  authority  is satisfied 
that the alternative  operator  is reasonably  able to implement  an equivalent  service. 
(10) A service  established  under  these  provisions  is a local  service  operated  by a local 
government  bus company  as defined  by section  15(5). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  clarifies  that the relevant  local authority  has a duty  to implement  a socially 
necessary  service  as far as is reasonably  practical,  should  alternative  operators  fail to do so, with 
provisions  for financial  support  if needed  and the possibility  of transferring  responsibility  to an 
alternative  operator  once the service  is established. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
24★_ Clause  12, page  10, line 7, at end insert— 
“(5) When  carrying  out their  functions  under  this section,  local  transport  authorities 
must  assess  whether  demand  responsive  bus services  could  mitigate  any adverse 
effects  resulting  from  the cancellation  or variation  of a socially  necessary  local 
service. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  encourages  local transport  authorities  to explicitly  consider  demand  responsive 
bus services  as a potential  alternative  when  addressing  the impact  of changes  to socially  necessary 
services. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
25★_ Clause  12, page  10, line 7, at end insert— 
“(5) In taking  any actions  under  the provisions  of this section,  local  transport  authorities 
must  have  regard  to the purpose  of maintaining  a competitive  market  when 
prioritising  socially  necessary  services,  ensuring  that smaller  operators  are not 
unduly  excluded  from  market  opportunities. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that LTAs  consider  the impact  of their  actions  on market  competition, 
with particular  attention  to the interests  of smaller  or emerging  private  operators. 
After  Clause  12 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
26_ After  Clause  12, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Measures  specified  in schemes 
(1) The Transport  Act 2000  is amended  as follows. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 10 
(2) In section  138A(6)(b)  (contents  of schemes),  for the words  from  “routes  in” to 
“local  services”  substitute  “local  services  in the whole  or part of that area”. 
(3) In section  138D(2)(a)  (measures  specified  in scheme),  omit  “serving  the routes” 
(in both  places). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  widens  the measures  that can be taken  by a local transport  authority  under  an 
enhanced  partnership  scheme  so that they can relate  to any local services  in the area concerned. 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
27_ After  Clause  12, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Passenger  benefit  requirement 
In section  138C  of the Transport  Act 2000  (requirements  in respect  of local  services), 
for subsection  (9) substitute— 
“(9) The requirements  that may  be specified  in an enhanced  partnership  scheme 
also include  requirements— 
(a) as to operators  of local  services  establishing  and operating 
arrangements  that facilitate  the operation  of the scheme; 
(b) that persons  using  local  services  in the area to which  the scheme 
relates  benefit  from  any reduction  in the cost of operating  those 
services  that results  from  facilities  provided  or measures  taken 
by— 
(i) the Secretary  of State, 
(ii) a local  transport  authority,  or 
(iii) any other  person  exercising  functions  of a public  nature. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  allows  an enhanced  partnership  scheme  to require  bus operators  to provide  benefits 
to bus passengers  in return  for public  expenditure  on facilities  or measures  that will reduce 
operating  costs. 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
28_ After  Clause  12, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Variation  of schemes 
After  section  138K  of the Transport  Act 2000  insert— 
“138KA Variation  where  scheme  includes  provision  under  section  138E 
(1) A variation  of an enhanced  partnership  scheme  may  not be made  under 
section  138K  in a case to which  subsection  (2) of this section  applies 
unless— 
(a) the Secretary  of State  has directed  the authority  or authorities 
concerned  to make  the variation,  or 11 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
(b) the variation  is one that the authority  or authorities  are required 
to make  by section  12(4)(b) of the Bus Services  (No.  2) Act 2025. 
(2) This  subsection  applies  to any case specified  in the scheme  as one in which 
the scheme  may  be varied  in accordance  with  the scheme  (see section 
138E). 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  give  a direction  under  this section  only  if, on 
an application  made  by the authority  or authorities,  the Secretary  of State 
is satisfied  that— 
(a) the variation  cannot  be made  in accordance  with  the scheme 
because  of unreasonable  or obstructive  behaviour  by one or more 
operators  of local  services,  or 
(b) persons  using  local  services  in the area to which  the scheme  as 
varied  will relate  will benefit  from  the variation  of the scheme. 
(4) A direction  under  this section  does  not affect  the application  of the other 
requirements  that must  be met before  the scheme  can be varied  under 
section  138K. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  provides  that where  an enhanced  partnership  scheme  can be varied  in accordance 
with the scheme,  a variation  can be made  under  section  138K  only where  the Secretary  of State  is 
satisfied  that operators  have behaved  unreasonably  or obstructively  or that the variation  or 
revocation  will benefit  users  of local services. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
29★_ After  Clause  12, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Duty  to report  on funding  for socially  necessary  local  services 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  lay before  Parliament  a report  setting  out the Government’s  plan  for 
providing  additional  funding  to support  socially  necessary  local  services  identified 
under  section  138A(3)(ba)  of the Transport  Act 2000. 
(2) The report  must  include— 
(a) an assessment  of the funding  requirements  for socially  necessary  local 
services  across  England, 
(b) the criteria  by which  funding  will be allocated  to local  transport  authorities, 
(c) a timetable  for the implementation  of additional  funding  measures,  and 
(d) an evaluation  of how  proposed  funding  will ensure  the sustainability  and 
accessibility  of these  services. 
(3) In preparing  that report  the Secretary  of State  must  consult  with— 
(a) local  transport  authorities,  and 
(b) representatives  of passengers,  including  those  with  disabilities. ” Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 12 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to produce  a detailed  plan for additional  funding 
for socially  necessary  local bus services,  ensuring  transparency  and accountability  to Parliament. 
Clause  16 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
30★_ Clause  16, page  13, line 39, at end insert— 
“(3A) Before  making  a grant  under  this section,  the franchising  authority  must 
consult  with  local  passenger  groups,  community  representatives  and relevant 
stakeholders  to assess  the potential  impact  of the grant  on service  quality 
and accessibility. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  introduces  a requirement  for franchising  authorities  to consult  with stakeholders 
before  granting  direct  awards,  ensuring  decisions  reflect  the needs  of passengers  and local 
communities. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
31★_ Clause  16, page  14, line 17, at end insert— 
“(7A) The Secretary  of State  must,  as part of the guidance  issued  under  subsection 
(6), publish— 
(a) specific  information  on the total  funding  to be allocated  to local 
transport  authorities  and mayors  to carry  out the functions  under 
this section, 
(b) the criteria  to be used  from  time  to time  for determining  how  funding 
will be allocated  between  local  transport  authorities,  ensuring 
transparency  and equity  in allocation,  and 
(c) a statement  confirming  that all funding  allocated  under  this section 
will be provided  by central  government. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to publish  detailed  guidance  on funding  allocation, 
including  the total funding  available,  the criteria  for distribution  between  local transport  authorities, 
and confirmation  that the funding  will be provided  by central  government. 13 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
32★_ Clause  16, page  14, line 25, at end insert— 
“(11) When  designing  and administering  grants  under  this section,  local  transport 
authorities  must  have  regard  to the potential  benefits  of demand  responsive 
bus services  as part of their  service  offerings. 
(12) The Secretary  of State,  in issuing  guidance  under  subsection  (6), must  ensure 
that the guidance  encourages  local  transport  authorities  to consider  demand 
responsive  bus services  where  such  services  could  offer  an effective  or 
efficient  alternative  to timetabled  bus services. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that local transport  authorities  are encouraged  to consider  demand 
responsive  bus services  when  designing  services  and administering  bus grants. 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
33_ Clause  16, page  14, line 25, at end insert— 
“154B Consideration  of operator  size in grant  allocation 
(1) In exercising  their  powers  under  section  154A,  a local  transport  authority 
in England  may  have  regard  to the size of the operator  when  determining 
the amount  of grant  and the conditions  attached  to it. 
(2) In particular,  local  transport  authorities  may— 
(a) give  priority  to small  operators  to ensure  the sustainability  and 
diversity  of local  transport  services, 
(b) adopt  measures  to protect  small  operators  from  disproportionate 
financial  burdens  or competition,  and 
(c) take into account  the financial  and operational  capacity  of small 
operators  to meet  service  demands. 
(3) When  determining  what  constitutes  a small  operator,  a local  transport 
authority  may  consider— 
(a) the size of the operator’s  fleet, 
(b) the number  of employees  employed  by the operator,  and 
(c) the operator’s  annual  turnover  or other  financial  capacity. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  enables  local transport  authorities  to prioritise  small  transport  operators  when 
allocating  grants,  ensuring  their  protection  and promoting  diversity  in local transport  services. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 14 
Clause  21 
BARONESS  PINNOCK 
34_ Clause  21, page  20, line 3, at end insert— 
“(c) publish  a review  on— 
(i) the enforceability  of byelaws, 
(ii) training  provisions  for staff  on applying  byelaws,  and 
(iii) other  measures  to support  effective  enforcement  of byelaws. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  a Local  Transport  Authority  or relevant  authority  to publish  a review 
on the enforceability  of byelaws  and staff training  provisions  when  proposing  to create  byelaws 
under  Section  144A. 
Clause  22 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
35★_ Clause  22, page  23, line 26, leave  out “or” and insert— 
“(aa) ensuring  inclusive  design  principles  are fully  complied  with,  and” 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
36★_ Clause  22, page  23, line 27, after  “facilitating”  insert  “independent” 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
37★_ Clause  22, page  23, line 31, at end insert— 
“(aa) accessibility  features  in the vicinity  of stopping  places,  including  audio, 
digital  and visual  information  at the bus stop,  provision  of bus shelters, 
seating,  minimum  distance  between  stops  and accessible  wayfinding; ” 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
38★_ Clause  22, page  23, line 34, at end insert— 
“(2A) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  guidance  requiring— 
(a) buses  to stop  at the kerbside  to allow  disabled  passengers  to board  from 
and alight  directly  to the pavement,  and 
(b) stopping  places  to be designed  such  that disabled  passengers  can continue 
their  journey  without  crossing  a live cycle  lane running  through  or on any 
part of the pavement. ” 15 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
39★_ Clause  22, page  23, line 40, at end insert  “and  conduct  a consultation  open  to responses 
from  other  representative  organisations  for disabled  people  and disabled  people 
themselves” 
BARONESS  BRINTON 
40_ Clause  22, page  24, line 4, leave  out “have  regard  to”, and insert  “take  reasonable  steps 
to implement” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that authorities  listed  in subsection  (6) take reasonable  steps  to ensure 
that disability  guidance  issued  by the Secretary  of State  is implemented. 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
41_ Clause  22, page  24, line 15, at end insert— 
“(6A) Guidance  issued  by the Secretary  of State  under  subsection  (1) must  include 
provision  for the bodies  listed  in subsection  (6) to support  the development  of 
training  programmes  for relevant  staff  which  must  address  the content  of the 
guidance  issued  under  subsection  (1). 
(6B) The guidance  and training  under  subsections  (1) and (6A)  must  also be made 
available  to bus operating  companies,  who  must  ensure  their  relevant  staff 
undertake  training  programmes  aligned  with  the guidance  issued  by the Secretary 
of State. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  relevant  bodies  to support  the development  of training  programmes  for 
relevant  staff which  must  address  the content  of disability  guidance  issued  by the Secretary  of 
State. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
42★_ Clause  22, page  24, line 15, at end insert— 
“(6A) Guidance  issued  under  subsection  (1) must  include  references  to accessible 
demand-responsive  bus services  as an alternative  to upgrading  stopping  places 
in areas  where  fixed-line  bus services  are not viable  or upgrading  stopping  places 
is not cost-effective. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that statutory  guidance  includes  consideration  of accessible 
demand-responsive  bus services  as a practical  and cost-effective  alternative  in areas  where  upgrading 
stopping  places  may not be feasible  or where  passengers  struggle  to access  conventional  public 
transport. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 16 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
43★_ Clause  22, page  24, line 15, at end insert— 
“(6A) The organisations  listed  in subsection  (6) must  comply  with  the guidance  issued 
under  subsection  (2A)  when  commissioning  the design,  construction  or 
maintenance  of a stopping  place  for a local  service,  or any facilities  in the vicinity 
of a stopping  place  for a local  service. ” 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
44_ Clause  22, page  24, line 22, leave  out from  “assist”  to “at” in line 23 and insert  “with  the 
positioning  of a public  service  vehicle  being  used  to provide  a local  service” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  amends  the definition  of “facilities”  so that it captures  facilities  provided  to assist 
with the positioning  of both automated  and non-automated  public  service  vehicles. 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
45_ Clause  22, page  24, line 27, at end insert— 
““public  service  vehicle”  has the same  meaning  as in the Public  Passenger  Vehicles 
Act 1981  (see section  1 of that Act); ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  inserts  a definition  of “public  service  vehicle”  into the clause. 
Clause  24 
LORD  WOODLEY 
46★_ Clause  24, page  26, line 21, at end insert— 
“(2A) Before  preparing  training  under  subsection  (2), PSV operators  must  consult 
trades  unions  on the proposed  content  and implementation  of the training. ” 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
_ The above-named  Lords  give notice  of their  intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  24 stand 
part of the Bill. 17 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
Clause  27 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
47★_ Clause  27, page  29, line 36, at end insert— 
“(4A) Local  transport  authorities  must  ensure  that,  in the implementation  of this 
section— 
(a) the availability,  affordability,  and reliability  of local  passenger 
transport  services  are not adversely  affected, 
(b) passengers  in all areas,  including  rural  and underserved  regions, 
continue  to have  access  to essential  services,  and 
(c) sufficient  support  is provided  to bus operators  to enable  compliance 
with  zero-emission  requirements  while  maintaining  service  quality. 
(4B) Before  implementing  any changes  to local  service  provision  under  this 
section,  local  transport  authorities  must— 
(a) assess  the potential  impact  of such  changes  on passenger  services, 
and 
(b) consult  with  operators,  passenger  groups,  and other  relevant 
stakeholders  to ensure  minimal  disruption  to service  accessibility 
and affordability. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  places  a duty  on local transport  authorities  to ensure  that the transition  to 
zero-emission  vehicles  does not compromise  passenger  service  availability,  reliability,  or affordability. 
It also requires  LTAs  to consult  stakeholders  and assess  the impact  of such changes. 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
48_ Clause  27, page  29, line 38, at end insert  “including  any area under  the jurisdiction  of a 
mayoral  combined  authority. 
(6) The provisions  of this section  apply  equally  to any mayoral  combined 
authority  in England,  where  “mayoral  combined  authority”  means  an 
authority  established  under  the Cities  and Local  Government  Devolution 
Act 2016. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  explores  whether  the provisions  of section  151A  on zero-emissions 
vehicles  also apply  to mayoral  combined  authorities. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 18 
After  Clause  27 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
LORD  HAMPTON 
BARONESS  GREY-THOMPSON 
49_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Impact  on rural  areas 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  Parliament  a report  detailing  the impacts  of the provisions  of this 
Act on rural  areas. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section  “rural”  refers  to areas  so defined  by the Rural 
Urban  Classification. 
(3) The report  in subsection  (1) must  include,  but is not limited  to— 
(a) an assessment  of the level  of bus service  provision  in rural  areas  including 
frequency,  coverage,  and accessibility; 
(b) an evaluation  of how  the provisions  of this Act affect  access  to public 
transport  for residents  in rural  areas,  with  a focus  on affordability, 
reliability,  and inclusivity; 
(c) a review  of the potential  economic,  social,  and environmental  impacts  of 
any changes  in transport  services  or infrastructure  in rural  areas  as a result 
of this Act; 
(d) recommendations  for any further  actions  or policies  that may  be required 
to ensure  that rural  areas  are not disproportionately  impacted  by the 
provisions  of this Act. 
(4) The report  must  be accompanied  by a statement  from  the Secretary  of State  on 
how  the findings  of the report  will be addressed,  including  any further  steps  to 
mitigate  negative  impacts  on rural  areas,  if applicable. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to publish  a report  within  six months  on the 
impacts  of the Act on rural  areas. 
LORD  BRADSHAW 
BARONESS  PINNOCK 
50_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Provision  of grants  for bus services:  traffic  reduction  plan  requirement 
In the Transport  Act 2000,  after  section  159 insert— 
“159A Provision  of grants  for bus services:  traffic  reduction  plan  requirement 
(1) Where  the Government  has issued  financial  support  for the provision  of 
bus services,  including  in the form  of grants,  to local  highway  authorities, 
or other  authorities  deemed  relevant  by the Secretary  of State,  it must  be 19 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
subject  to the condition  that the recipient  authority  implements  a traffic 
reduction  strategy  aimed  at increasing  bus speeds. 
(2) The strategy  published  under  the provisions  of subsection  (1) must 
include— 
(a) measures  to reduce  congestion  and delays  for bus services; 
(b) provisions  to improve  bus priority  and traffic  flow; 
(c) clear  targets  for improving  bus speeds  and service  reliability. 
(3) The relevant  authority  must  take reasonable  steps  to implement  the 
strategy,  and where  it is unable  to do so, it must  provide  a statement 
outlining  the reasons  for non-implementation,  which  must  be made 
available  to the Secretary  of State. 
(4) If the authority  fails to adequately  implement  the strategy  or meet  the 
agreed  targets,  the financial  support  may  be reduced  or revoked. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  issue  guidance  to ensure  consistency  in the 
development  and implementation  of traffic  reduction  strategies. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  that financial  support,  including  grants,  issued  by the Government  to 
local highway  authorities  or other  relevant  bodies  is conditional  on the implementation  of a traffic 
reduction  strategy  aimed  at increasing  bus speeds,  with provisions  for reporting  and accountability 
if the strategy  cannot  be fully  implemented. 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
51_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of bus fare impact  on patronage 
(1) Local  transport  authorities  must  conduct  a comprehensive  review  of the impact 
of bus fares  on passenger  patronage  within  their  jurisdiction. 
(2) The review  may  assess— 
(a) how  fare levels  influence  ridership  trends, 
(b) the social,  economic,  and environmental  outcomes  of current  fare 
structures, 
(c) potential  changes  to improve  accessibility  and increase  patronage,  and 
(d) potential  benefits,  if any,  of the simplification  of ticketing  systems  for the 
purposes  of increasing  bus patronage. 
(3) The first review  must  be completed  and published  no later  than  six months  after 
the date  on which  this Act is passed. 
(4) Subsequent  reviews  must  be conducted  at least  once  every  three  years,  and made 
publicly  available. 
(5) In conducting  the review,  local  transport  authorities  must  consult  relevant 
stakeholders,  including  public  transport  users,  service  operators,  and community Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 20 
representatives,  and any other  stakeholders  deemed  relevant  by the local  transport 
authority. ” 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
52_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Duty  to promote  bus services 
(1) It is the general  duty  of any relevant  authorities  overseeing  bus operations  to 
promote  bus services  in their  jurisdiction. 
(2) In fulfilling  this duty,  authorities  may  consider— 
(a) the potential  benefits  of making  bus services  economically  competitive 
with  other  transport  options,  ensuring  affordability,  reliability,  and 
accessibility; 
(b) measures  to enhance  the environmental  sustainability  of bus services,  such 
as reducing  emissions  and supporting  greener  transport  alternatives; 
(c) the broader  social,  economic,  and environmental  benefits  of increasing 
bus patronage; 
(d) reducing  road  congestion  and improving  urban  mobility; 
(e) contributing  to lower  air pollution  and reduced  greenhouse  gas emissions; 
(f) providing  affordable,  accessible  transport  that promotes  social  inclusion; 
(g) improving  access  to employment,  education,  health,  and other  essential 
services. 
(3) The relevant  authority  must  publish  a report  every  two years  outlining  the steps 
taken  to fulfil  this duty,  including— 
(a) progress  in making  bus services  economically  competitive  and 
environmentally  sustainable, 
(b) the effectiveness  of policies  and measures  aimed  at increasing  bus 
patronage, 
(c) any challenges  faced  in promoting  bus services  and proposed  solutions, 
and 
(d) plans  for future  improvements  in bus services. 
(4) The relevant  authorities  may  consult  with  any relevant  stakeholders,  including 
transport  operators,  local  businesses,  and members  of the public,  which  they  deem 
to be expedient  for the purpose  of fulfilling  the duty  outlined  in subsection  (1).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  places  a broad  duty  on authorities  to promote  bus services  in their  jurisdiction. 21 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
BARONESS  PINNOCK 
53_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the operation  of this Act following  changes  to local  council  powers 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passage  of any primary 
legislation  in the session  in which  this Act was passed  that alters  the powers  of 
local  councils  in relation  to transport,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the 
operation  of this Act. 
(2) The review  must  assess— 
(a) the extent  to which  the changes  in local  council  powers  impact  the 
implementation  of provisions  under  this Act, 
(b) whether  any additional  measures  are necessary  to ensure  the effective 
operation  of this Act in the light  of the changes,  and 
(c) the adequacy  of current  funding  and resources  available  to local  councils 
to fulfil  their  duties  under  this Act following  the legislative  changes. 
(3) In conducting  the review,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult  relevant  stakeholders, 
including  local  councils  and transport  authorities,  in preparing  the review. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to review  and report  to Parliament  on the operation 
of the Act within  six months  of any new legislation  affecting  local councils'  transport  powers 
insofar  as those  measures  are relevant  to the provisions  of this Act. 
BARONESS  PINNOCK 
54_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Training  programmes  on provisions  in this Act and their  impact  on local 
transport  authorities 
(1) 
5Local  transport  authorities  must  establish  and maintain  training  programmes  to 
ensure  staff  and relevant  stakeholders  are informed  of the provisions  in this Act 
and their  impact  on the powers  and responsibilities  of local  transport  authorities. 
(2) Such  training  programmes  shall— 
(a) provide  a comprehensive  overview  of relevant  legislative  provisions  in 
this Act, 
10 (b) focus  on the practical  application  of these  powers  in policy  development, 
planning,  and service  delivery,  and 
(c) ensure  compliance  with  legal  obligations  and promote  effective 
decision-making. 
(3) Training  must  be made  available  to— 
15 (a) elected  representatives  overseeing  transport  functions, 
(b) officers  responsible  for the implementation  of transport  policies,  and Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 22 
(c) any other  individuals  or organisations  directly  involved  in delivering 
transport  services. 
(4) 
20Local  transport  authorities  must  review  and update  the training  programmes 
regularly  to reflect  changes  to this Act. 
(5) Authorities  must  publish  a summary  of the training  programmes  and participation 
rates  annually  to ensure  transparency  and accountability. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  local transport  authorities  to develop  training  programmes  to ensure 
staff and stakeholders  are informed  about  the provisions  in this Act and their  impact  on the powers 
and responsibilities  of local transport  authorities. 
BARONESS  GREY-THOMPSON 
As an amendment  to Amendment  54 
55_ After  subsection  (2)(c)  insert— 
“(d) include  disability  awareness  training. ” 
BARONESS  BRINTON 
BARONESS  GREY-THOMPSON 
56_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Reporting  on accessibility  of bus services 
(1) Each  relevant  authority  must  prepare  and publish  an annual  report  assessing  the 
accessibility  of bus services  within  its geographical  boundaries. 
(2) In this section,  “relevant  authority”  includes— 
(a) a county  council  in England; 
(b) a district  council  in England; 
(c) a combined  authority  established  under  section  103 of the Local  Democracy, 
Economic  Development  and Construction  Act 2009; 
(d) a combined  county  authority  established  under  section  9(1) of the 
Levelling-up  and Regeneration  Act 2023; 
(e) an integrated  transport  authority  for an integrated  transport  area in 
England. 
(3) When  publishing  the report,  the relevant  authority  must  include  a statement 
indicating  whether,  in their  view,  accessibility  standards  within  their  geographical 
boundaries  are satisfactory  or unsatisfactory. 
(4) The report  must  also include— 
(a) an assessment  of areas  with  inadequate  accessibility  provisions,  identifying 
specific  locations  and the reasons  for accessibility  shortcomings; 
(b) proposals  to improve  bus route  accessibility,  including  measures  to address 
shortcomings  and timelines  for implementation; 23 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
(c) an evaluation  of the effectiveness  of previous  accessibility  improvements, 
including  data  on their  impact  on disabled  passengers  and other  affected 
groups; 
(d) a review  of any barriers  preventing  the full implementation  of accessibility 
improvements,  with  recommendations  for addressing  these  barriers, 
including  any additional  funding  or resources  required; 
(e) evidence  of consultations  with  relevant  stakeholders,  including  disabled 
persons’  organizations,  transport  providers,  and local  communities,  to 
ensure  that accessibility  improvements  meet  the needs  of all passengers. 
(5) The first report  under  subsection  (1) must  be published  within  12 months  of the 
day on which  this Act is passed. 
(6) Relevant  authorities  must  ensure  these  reports  are publicly  accessible  and submit 
copies  to the Secretary  of State. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  relevant  authorities  to publish  a report  on the state  of accessibility 
standards  of bus services  in its geographical  boundaries,  which  include  a statement  on whether 
those  standards  are satisfactory  or unsatisfactory. 
BARONESS  BRINTON 
57_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Public  sector  equality  duty 
In Schedule  19 to the Equality  Act 2010  (authorities  subject  to public  sector  equality 
duty),  at the appropriate  place  under  the heading  “Transport”,  insert— 
“A bus company  providing  services  for the carriage  of passengers  by bus under 
a public  service  contract  awarded  under  relevant  provisions  of the Transport  Act 
1985  or subsequent  legislation. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that bus companies  are subject  to the public  sector  equality  duty. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 24 
LORD  HAMPTON 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
58_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Access  to the Confidential  Incident  Reporting  and Analysis  System  (CIRAS) 
In the Transport  Act 2000,  after  section  144E  (inserted  by section  21 of this Act) 
insert— 
“144F Access  to the Confidential  Incident  Reporting  and Analysis  System 
(CIRAS)  for drivers  of PSVs 
(1) Local  authorities  must  ensure  that service  operators  provide  drivers  of a 
PSV being  used  under  a licence  to provide  a local  bus service  with  access 
to the Confidential  Incident  Reporting  and Analysis  System  (CIRAS). 
(2) If service  operators  do not fulfil  the requirement  under  subsection  (1) to 
provide  access  to CIRAS  for drivers,  the local  authority  may  revoke  the 
service  permit. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that service  operators  provide  drivers  with access  to CIRAS 
(Confidential  Incident  Reporting  and Analysis  System). 
LORD  HAMPTON 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
59_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Bus safety  performance  data 
In the Transport  Act 2000,  after  section  144E  (inserted  by section  21 of this Act) 
insert— 
“144F Bus safety  performance  data 
(1) Local  authorities  must  publish  bus safety  performance  data  online  every 
quarter  at a minimum. 
(2) Every  calendar  year,  local  authorities  must  submit  bus safety  performance 
data  to an independent  auditor  to assess  the data’s  accuracy. 
(3) The independent  auditor  carrying  out an assessment  under  subsection  (2) 
must  publish  a report  on the data  which  must  be made  available  on the 
local  authority’s  website. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that local authorities  publish  bus safety  performance  data every 
quarter,  and that an independent  auditor  assesses  the accuracy  of the data annually. 25 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
LORD  HAMPTON 
60_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Permitted  driving  time  for drivers  of PSVs  being  used  under  the licence  to 
provide  a local  service 
In the Transport  Act 1968,  in section  96(1),  at end insert  “, subject  to subsection 
(1A). 
(1A) Drivers  of public  service  vehicles  (PSV)  being  used  under  a licence  to 
provide  a local  bus service  under  provisions  of the Bus Services  (No.2)  Act 
2025  must  not on any working  day drive  a PSV for periods  amounting  in 
the aggregate  to more  than  nine  hours. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to change  the permitted  driving  time for bus drivers  from  ten hours  (in 
aggregate)  to nine hours  (in aggregate)  to align  with permitted  driving  time for HGV  drivers. 
LORD  HAMPTON 
61_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Professional  qualifications  for officials  in franchising  authorities 
In the Transport  Act 2000,  after  section  123X  insert— 
“123Y Professional  qualifications  for officials  in franchising  authorities 
Officials  from  a franchising  authority  responsible  for designing,  negotiating 
and enforcing  any franchise  scheme  must  have— 
(a) Institution  of Occupational  Safety  and Health  (IOSH)  certification, 
and 
(b) National  Examination  Board  in Occupational  Safety  and Health 
(NEBOSH)  certification. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that officials  from franchising  authorities  responsible  for designing, 
negotiating  and enforcing  any franchise  scheme  have IOSH  and NEBOSH  certifications. 
LORD  BERKELEY 
62★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review:  impact  on other  forms  of local  transport 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of this Act on other  forms  of 
local  transport. 
(2) The review  required  by subsection  (1) must  consider  both  road-  and water-based 
forms  of transport. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 26 
(3) For the purposes  of this section,  “local  transport”  means  transport  which  carries 
passengers  no more  than  30 miles  and does  not cross  international  boundaries. ” 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
63★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Assessment  of the impact  of ending  the £2 bus fare cap 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  undertake  and publish  an assessment  of the likely 
economic  and social  impacts  of ending  the £2 bus fare cap. 
(2) The assessment  under  subsection  (1) must  include,  but is not limited  to— 
(a) the potential  impact  on passenger  numbers,  particularly  in low-income 
areas, 
(b) the financial  implications  for local  transport  authorities, 
(c) the potential  impact  on accessibility  for individuals  who  rely on bus 
services  for essential  travel,  and 
(d) the impact  on passengers’  ability  to access  socially  necessary  services,  as 
defined  in section  12 of this Act. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a report  of the assessment  before  Parliament  within 
six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to conduct  and publish  an impact  assessment  on 
the economic  and social  consequences  of removing  the £2 bus fare cap. The assessment  must  also 
explicitly  consider  the impact  on passengers’  ability  to access  socially  necessary  services,  as defined 
in Clause  12 of this Act. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
64★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Financial  inclusion  in public  transport  policies 
(1) Local  transport  authorities  (LTAs)  must  ensure  that all guidance,  regulations,  and 
policies  implemented  under  this Act take into account  the principle  of financial 
inclusion. 
(2) In particular,  LTAs  must  have  due regard  to— 
(a) the affordability  of bus services  for passengers  on low incomes, 
(b) the availability  of payment  methods,  including  cash,  that are accessible  to 
all passengers,  including  those  who  do not have  access  to digital  or 
contactless  payment  methods,  and 
(c) measures  to prevent  financial  barriers  from  excluding  any groups  of 
passengers  from  accessing  essential  bus services. 27 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
(3) LTAs  must  publish  a report  every  four  years  on steps  taken  to promote  financial 
inclusion  in bus services,  including  measures  adopted  to ensure  access  to cash 
payment  options  and affordable  services. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  places  a duty  on Local  Transport  Authorities  to prioritise  financial  inclusion  in 
their  public  transport  policies.  It requires  LTAs  to ensure  affordability  and accessibility,  including 
access  to cash payment  options,  and mandates  periodic  reporting  on progress. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
65★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“SEND  pupils  and home-to-school  buses 
(1) In discharging  their  duties  under  this Act, local  transport  authorities  must  have 
due regard  to the needs  of pupils  with  special  educational  needs  and disabilities 
(SEND)  when  planning,  commissioning,  or providing  services  for home-to-school 
buses. 
(2) In particular,  local  transport  authorities  must  take into account  the following  when 
providing  home-to-school  bus services  for SEND  pupils— 
(a) the specific  travel  requirements  of SEND  pupils,  including  but not limited 
to the provision  of accessible  vehicles,  safe travel  arrangements,  and 
appropriate  support  during  transit; 
(b) the need  for flexibility  in travel  arrangements  to accommodate  the varied 
needs  of SEND  pupils,  including  those  with  physical,  sensory,  or cognitive 
disabilities; 
(c) the availability  of transport  options  that support  the inclusion  of SEND 
pupils  in mainstream  education,  ensuring  they  can access  education  on 
an equal  basis  with  other  pupils; 
(d) the potential  for tailored  travel  arrangements,  such  as assistance  with 
transfers,  escort  services,  or adaptations  to vehicles,  to ensure  the safety 
and comfort  of SEND  pupils  during  their  journey  to and from  school. 
(3) Local  transport  authorities  must  also ensure  that— 
(a) there  is clear  communication  with  parents,  carers,  and guardians  of SEND 
pupils  regarding  bus transport  arrangements  and options  available  to 
meet  their  child’s  specific  needs; 
(b) where  applicable,  there  is collaborative  working  between  the local  transport 
authority  and educational  institutions  to ensure  that home-to-school  bus 
travel  arrangements  align  with  the pupil’s  education  plan  or needs 
assessment. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must,  by guidance,  specify  further  details  on the best 
practices  and requirements  for local  transport  authorities  to meet  the needs  of 
SEND  pupils  in the provision  of home-to-school  bus travel,  with  regard  to 
accessibility,  safety  and effectiveness. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 28 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must,  every  three  years,  publish  a report  on the adequacy 
of home-to-school  bus travel  provisions  for SEND  pupils,  including  any identified 
gaps  in provision  and the steps  being  taken  to address  them. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that Local  Transport  Authorities  (LTAs)  must  consider  the needs  of 
SEND  pupils  when  arranging  or overseeing  home-to-school  bus travel  services. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
66★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Ensuring  travel  for pupils  attending  schools  outside  local  transport  authority 
boundaries 
(1) Local  transport  authorities  (LTAs)  must  have  regard  to the transport  needs  of 
pupils  attending  schools  outside  their  authority’s  area. 
(2) LTAs  must  have  discussions  with  neighbouring  LTAs  to coordinate  travel 
arrangements  for pupils  attending  schools  outside  their  geographical  area,  ensuring 
these  arrangements  are reasonable  and meet  the needs  of the pupils,  particularly 
those  with  special  educational  needs  and disabilities. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  provide  guidance  to LTAs  on coordinating 
cross-authority  travel  for school  pupils. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  also ensure  that,  at least  once  every  four years,  a report 
is published  evaluating  the effectiveness  of cross-authority  travel  arrangements 
for school  pupils,  including  an assessment  of any identified  barriers  or issues 
preventing  access  to education  for pupils  travelling  across  authority  boundaries. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  places  a duty  on Local  Transport  Authorities  (LTAs)  to ensure  convenient  and 
accessible  travel  arrangements  for pupils  who need to travel  to schools  outside  their  authority’s 
area.  It emphasizes  collaboration  between  LTAs  to coordinate  travel  routes  and ensure  efficiency, 
particularly  for pupils  with additional  needs. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
67★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“VAT  exemption  for private  school  SEND  bus services 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  review  the application  of Value  Added  Tax (VAT)  on 
bus services  provided  for special  educational  needs  and disabilities  (SEND)  pupils 
attending  private  schools. 
(2) In conducting  this review,  the Secretary  of State  must  consider  whether  bus services 
provided  by private  schools  for SEND  pupils  should  be exempt  from  VAT  to 
ensure  that these  services  are accessible  and affordable  for SEND  families. 29 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
(3) The review  must  specifically  assess  the impact  of VAT  on the financial  feasibility 
of providing  SEND  transport  by private  schools,  including  how  it may  affect 
access  to educational  opportunities  for SEND  pupils. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  a report  on the findings  of the review  and any 
subsequent  recommendations  regarding  the VAT  exemption  for such  services 
within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  the Secretary  of State  reviews  whether  SEND  bus services  provided  by 
private  schools  should  be exempt  from  VAT.  The review  will focus  on alleviating  financial  burdens 
on private  schools  and SEND  families  and enhancing  accessibility  to appropriate  transport  services 
for SEND  pupils. 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
68★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of National  Insurance  impact  on SEND  bus services 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  undertake  an assessment  of the impact  of the level  of 
employers’  National  Insurance  contributions  on special  educational  needs  and 
disabilities  (SEND)  bus services,  both  for state  and private  schools. 
(2) The assessment  must  include— 
(a) an evaluation  of how  any increase  in National  Insurance  contributions 
implemented  in the preceding  year  affects  the financial  viability  of 
providing  SEND  school  transport  services,  especially  for private  providers; 
(b) an assessment  of how  any increased  costs  have  impacted  the affordability 
of SEND  school  transport  for families,  including  whether  additional 
funding  or subsidies  are required  to maintain  access  to services. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  a report  detailing  the findings  of this 
assessment,  with  recommendations  for mitigating  any negative  impact  on SEND 
school  bus services  resulting  from  any National  Insurance  increase. 
(4) The report  must  be laid before  Parliament  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  calls for a review  of how the recent  increase  in National  Insurance  contributions 
affects  the financial  sustainability  of SEND  school  transport  services,  particularly  in terms  of 
affordability  and accessibility  for families. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 30 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
69★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Customer-facing  technology  standards 
(1) Local  transport  authorities  must  take steps  to promote  the adoption  of 
customer-facing  technology  to enhance  passenger  experience  on bus services. 
(2) Such  steps  must  include  encouraging  operators  to provide— 
(a) free WiFi  on buses, 
(b) free device  charging  facilities  for passengers,  and 
(c) technology  to improve  accessibility  and real-time  service  information  for 
passengers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  Local  Transport  Authorities  to promote  the use of customer-facing 
technology,  including  free WiFi,  charging  facilities,  and accessibility  enhancements,  to improve 
the passenger  experience. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
70★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Transfer  of functions  of Traffic  Commissioners  to the Department  for Transport 
(1) The functions  of the Traffic  Commissioners  established  under  the Public  Passenger 
Vehicles  Act 1981,  in so far as they  relate  to buses,  are transferred  to the Secretary 
of State  for Transport. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  establish  a dedicated  division  within  the Department 
for Transport  to carry  out functions  previously  exercised  by the Traffic 
Commissioners  and transferred  by subsection  (1). 
(3) All references  to the Traffic  Commissioners  in any relevant  legislation,  regulations, 
or guidance,  in so far as they  relate  to buses,  are to be construed  as references  to 
the Secretary  of State  or the dedicated  division  established  under  subsection  (2). 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  12 months  of the commencement  of this 
provision,  publish  a report  outlining  the structure,  roles,  and responsibilities  of 
any division  established  under  subsection  (2).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  abolishes  the role of Traffic  Commissioners  in so far as they relate  to buses  and 
transfers  their functions  to the Department  for Transport.  The Secretary  of State  will be responsible 
for implementing  these  functions  through  a dedicated  division,  ensuring  streamlined  and consistent 
governance. 31 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
71★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Ensuring  interoperability  of contactless  payment  systems 
The Secretary  of State  must  ensure  that all contactless  payment  systems  which 
may  be used  by those  entitled  to concessionary  fares  on buses,  whether  those 
buses  are operated  by different  providers  or local  transport  authorities,  are fully 
interoperable  across  the transport  network. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that passengers  entitled  to concessionary  fares  on buses  can use a single 
contactless  payment  method,  regardless  of which  transport  network  or provider  is responsible, 
promoting  ease of travel  across  different  regions. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
72★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Requirement  for contactless  payment  option 
A local  transport  authority  may  not commence  a franchising  contract,  implement 
an enhanced  partnership,  or establish  a municipal  bus operator  under  the 
provisions  of this Act unless  it can guarantee  the availability  of contactless  payment 
options  on all services  operated  under  those  arrangements. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that LTAs  can only proceed  with franchising  contracts,  enhanced 
partnerships,  or municipal  bus operations  if contactless  payment  options  are guaranteed  for all 
services. 
LORD  MOYLAN 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
73★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Passenger  complaint  handling  guidance 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  guidance  to local  transport  authorities  on 
establishing  effective  systems  for handling  and responding  to passenger  complaints 
in relation  to bus services. 
(2) The guidance  must  include  measures  to ensure  complaints  inform  service 
improvements. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to provide  guidance  to LTAs  on handling  passenger 
complaints  effectively  and using  the feedback  to improve  services. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 32 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
74★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Bus fare cap 
(1) Bus operators  in England,  including  private  companies,  franchisees,  and local 
authorities,  must  not charge  more  than  £2 for a single  journey. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  review  this limit  every  three  years,  and consequentially 
adjust  it by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument. 
(3) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be made 
unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a resolution 
of each  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  combined  with another  in the name  of Baroness  Pidgeon,  places  a £2 limit  on 
single  journey  bus fares,  which  may be reviewed  periodically  by the Secretary  of State. 
LORD  WOODLEY 
75★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“National  Bus Forum 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  establish  a National  Bus Forum. 
(2) The purpose  of the National  Bus Forum  is to address  issues  affecting  the provision 
of local  bus services  at industry-wide  and strategic  level. 
(3) The membership  of the National  Bus Forum  must  include— 
(a) HM Government, 
(b) trades  unions, 
(c) bus service  operators, 
(d) local  authorities  in England,  and 
(e) any other  body  or persons  as the Secretary  of State  deems  necessary. ” 
LORD  WOODLEY 
76★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Report:  local  bus services  and national  sectoral  collective  bargaining 
With  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State  must 
lay before  Parliament  a report  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this Act 
on the ability  of HM Government  to introduce  national  sectoral  collective 
bargaining  to the local  bus service  sector. ” 33 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
77★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the operation  of the English  national  concessionary  travel  scheme 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  conduct  a review  of the English  national  concessionary  travel  scheme 
(ENCTS). 
(2) The review  must  assess— 
(a) the overall  effectiveness  and impact  of the ENCTS  for eligible  persons, 
(b) the impact  of the timing  restrictions  of the ENCTS  for eligible  persons, 
and 
(c) the approximate  cost of removing  timing  restrictions  of the ENCTS  to 
allow  eligible  persons  to use the scheme  on travel  24 hours  a day and seven 
days  a week. 
(3) In conducting  the review,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult  relevant  stakeholders, 
including  local  councils,  transport  authorities  and relevant  user  groups. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to review  the current  English  national  concessionary 
travel  scheme. 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
78★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the provision  of bus services  to villages  in England 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  two years  of the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  conduct  a review  of the level  of bus services  being  provided  to villages 
in England. 
(2) The review  under  subsection  (1) must  assess— 
(a) the change  in the level  of services  to villages  since  the passing  of this Act, 
(b) the number  of villages  in England  not served  by bus services, 
(c) demographic  characteristics  of villages  in relation  to the level  of bus 
services  available,  and 
(d) the impact  of this Act on the provision  of bus services  to villages  in 
England. 
(3) In conducting  the review  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
relevant  stakeholders,  including  local  councils  and transport  authorities. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to review  provision  of bus services  to villages  in 
England. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 34 
BARONESS  JONES  OF MOULSECOOMB 
79★_ After  Clause  27, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the use and costs  of bus travel  for children 
(1) Within  two years  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  conduct  a review  of the use of bus services  by children  and the possible 
impact  of making  bus travel  free for children. 
(2) The review  must  assess— 
(a) the level  of use of bus services  by children, 
(b) the degree  to which  cost is a limiting  factor  in children’s  use of bus services, 
and 
(c) the potential  health,  social  and environmental  impacts  of children  being 
unable  to use bus services  as a result  of the cost of those  services. 
(3) For the purposes  of the review  under  subsection  (1), “child”  means  any person 
under  the age of 18. 
(4) In conducting  the review,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult  relevant  stakeholders, 
including  local  councils,  transport  authorities  and youth  organisations. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to review  the impact  of making  bus travel  free for 
children. 
Clause  30 
BARONESS  PIDGEON 
80★_ Clause  30, page  30, line 35, after  “Sections”  insert  “(Bus fare cap),” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  combined  with another  in the name  of Baroness  Pidgeon,  places  a £2 limit  on 
single  journey  bus fares,  which  may be reviewed  periodically  by the Secretary  of State. 
LORD  HENDY  OF RICHMOND  HILL 
81_ Clause  30, page  31, line 1, leave  out subsection  (2) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  provides  for Clause  21 of the Bill to be brought  into force  by regulations  instead 
of coming  into force  two months  after Royal  Assent.  This is to allow  sufficient  time for guidance 
under  new section  144D  of the Transport  Act 2000  (inserted  by Clause  21 of the Bill) to be prepared. 35 Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 
THE  EARL  OF EFFINGHAM 
LORD  MOYLAN 
82★_ Clause  30, page  31, line 9, at end insert  “, subject  to subsection  (4A). 
(4A) Sections  1 to 15 may  not come  into force  until  the Secretary  of State  has published 
and laid before  Parliament  the report  required  by section  (Impact  assessment  on 
rural  areas ).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  combined  with another  ensures  that the Secretary  of State  must  publish  and lay 
before  Parliament  a report  on the impact  of sections  1 to 15 on rural  areas  before  they come  into 
force. Bus Services  (No. 2) Bill [HL] 36 
Bus Services  (No.  2) Bill [HL] 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
24 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 54—I



Caravan  Site Licensing  (Exemption  of Motor  Homes) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Exemption  of motor  homes  from  caravan  site licensing  requirements 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 122 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  motor  homes  from  caravan  site licensing  requirements;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Exemption  of motor  homes  from  caravan  site licensing  requirements 
(1) The Caravan  Sites  and Control  of Development  Act 1960  is amended  as 
follows. 
(2) In section  29(1),  in the definition  of “caravan”— 
5 (a) after  “trailer)”,  omit  “and  any motor  vehicle  so designed  or adapted,”; 
and 
(b) after  “include—”,  insert— 
“(za) any motor  vehicle  designed  or adapted  for human 
habitation.” 
10 2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
15This  Act may  be cited  as the Caravan  Site Licensing  (Exemption  of Motor 
Homes)  Act 2024. 
58/4 Bill 122 1 Caravan  Site Licensing  (Exemption  of Motor  Homes)  Bill 
Caravan  Site Licensing  (Exemption  of Motor  Homes) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  motor  homes  from  caravan  site licensing  requirements;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Edward  Leigh . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 122



Carers  and Care  Workers  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Publication  and implementation  of Care  Workers  Employment  Strategy 
2 Establishment  of National  Care  Workers  Council 
3 Assessment  of support  available  to unpaid  carers 
4 Expenditure 
5 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
59/1 Bill 76 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to publish  and implement  a Care  Workers 
Employment  Strategy,  with  the aim of improving  the recruitment  and retention 
of care workers;  to establish  an independent  National  Care  Workers  Council 
with  responsibility  for setting  professional  standards  for care workers,  for 
establishing  a system  of professional  qualifications  and accreditation  for care 
workers,  and for advising  the Government  on those  matters;  to require  the 
Secretary  of State  to commission  an independent  assessment  of the support 
available  to unpaid  carers,  including  financial  support  and employment  rights; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Publication  and implementation  of Care  Workers  Employment  Strategy 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  12 months  of the passing  of this Act, 
publish  and lay before  Parliament  a strategy  (“the  strategy”)  for improving 
the recruitment  and retention  of care workers  in England. 
5 (2) The strategy  must  include— 
(a) an assessment  of the locations  and sectors  experiencing  shortages  of 
care workers,  and the reasons  for those  shortages, 
(b) an assessment  of the causes  of poor  rates  of retention  and delays  in 
the recruitment  of care workers, 
10 (c) an assessment  of the adequacy  of rates  of pay for care workers,  and 
(d) measures  intended  to improve  rates  of recruitment  and retention  of 
care workers. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) implement  the strategy,  and 
15 (b) report  annually  to Parliament  on the implementation. 
2 Establishment  of National  Care  Workers  Council 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  establish  an independent  National 
Care  Workers  Council  (“the  Council”)  with  responsibility  in England  for— 
59/1 Bill 76 1 Carers  and Care  Workers  Bill 
(a) setting  professional  standards  for care workers, 
(b) establishing  a system  of professional  qualifications  and accreditation 
for care workers,  and 
(c) advising  His Majesty’s  Government  on the matters  in (a) and (b). 
5 (2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) may— 
(a) make  provision  about  the membership,  powers  and duties  of the 
Council, 
(b) make  transitional  or saving  provision, 
(c) make  provision  that is consequential  on this Act. 
10 (3) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a draft  statutory  instrument  containing 
regulations  under  this section  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act. 
15 3 Assessment  of support  available  to unpaid  carers 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  prepare  an assessment  of the support  available 
to unpaid  carers. 
(2) The assessment  under  subsection  (1) must  include— 
(a) 
20an assessment  of the adequacy  of the financial  support  available  to 
unpaid  carers, 
(b) an assessment  of the appropriateness  of the employment  rights  of 
unpaid  carers,  and 
(c) an assessment  of the merits  of increasing  or extending  the support 
available  to unpaid  carers. 
25 (3) In preparing  the assessment  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult— 
(a) unpaid  carers, 
(b) people  receiving  care from  unpaid  carers,  and 
(c) charities  and civil  society  organisations. 
30 (4) The Secretary  of State  must  lay their  assessment  before  Parliament  before  the 
end of the period  of 12 months  beginning  with  the day on which  this Act is 
passed. 
4 Expenditure 
There  is to be paid out of money  provided  by Parliament— 
35 (a) any expenditure  incurred  under  or by virtue  of this Act; and 
(b) any increase  attributable  to this Act in the sums  payable  under  any other 
Act out of money  so provided. 
5 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. Carers  and Care  Workers  Bill 2 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Carers  and Care  Workers  Act 2024. 3 Carers  and Care  Workers  Bill 
Carers  and Care  Workers  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to publish  and implement  a Care  Workers  Employment 
Strategy,  with  the aim of improving  the recruitment  and retention  of care workers;  to 
establish  an independent  National  Care  Workers  Council  with  responsibility  for setting 
professional  standards  for care workers,  for establishing  a system  of professional 
qualifications  and accreditation  for care workers,  and for advising  the Government  on 
those  matters;  to require  the Secretary  of State  to commission  an independent  assessment 
of the support  available  to unpaid  carers,  including  financial  support  and employment 
rights;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Helen  Morgan 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 76



Chalk  Streams  (Protection)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Creation  of a category  of protection  for chalk  streams 
2 Regulations  and reporting 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 65 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  for a category  of protection  for chalk  streams  for the purpose  of 
providing  additional  protections  from  pollution,  abstraction  and other  forms 
of environmental  damage;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Creation  of a category  of protection  for chalk  streams 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulations,  provide  for a category  of protection 
for chalk  streams  in England  for the purpose  of providing  additional 
5protections  from  pollution,  abstraction  and other  forms  of environmental 
damage. 
(2) Regulations  under  this section— 
(a) may  set priorities  for public  authorities  in relation  to the protection 
and enhancement  of chalk  stream  habitats; 
(b) may  confer  responsibilities  and powers  on public  authorities;  and 
10 (c) may  create  criminal  offences  punishable  with  a fine in respect  of 
failures  to comply  with  the regulations. 
2 Regulations  and reporting 
(1) Regulations  under  section  1— 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
15 (b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
(c) may  make  transitional  and saving  provision; 
(d) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before 
and approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(2) 
20Before  laying  draft  regulations  under  section  1 before  Parliament  the Secretary 
of State  must  consult— 
(a) the Environment  Agency, 
(b) Natural  England, 
(c) water  companies,  and 
(d) the Chalk  Stream  Restoration  Group. 
59/1 Bill 65 1 Chalk  Streams  (Protection)  Bill 
(3) The first regulations  under  section  1 must  be laid before  Parliament  before 
the end of the period  of six months  beginning  on the day on which  this Act 
is passed. 
(4) 
5The Secretary  of State  must  report  to Parliament  annually  thereafter  on the 
implementation  of this Act, including  an assessment  of its effectiveness. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Chalk  Streams  (Protection)  Act 2025. Chalk  Streams  (Protection)  Bill 2 
Chalk  Streams  (Protection)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  for a category  of protection  for chalk  streams  for the purpose  of providing 
additional  protections  from  pollution,  abstraction  and other  forms  of environmental 
damage;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sarah  Green 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 65



Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Child  criminal  exploitation:  offence 
2 Interpretation 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 41 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of child  criminal  exploitation;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Child  criminal  exploitation:  offence 
(1) A person  (A) commits  an offence  if they— 
(a) recruit  or attempt  to recruit,  or 
(b) use another  person  (B) to recruit  or attempt  to recruit 
5 a child  (C) for the purpose  of C’s involvement  in criminal  activity. 
(2) For the purpose  of determining  whether  A is guilty  of an offence  under 
subsection  (1), it is not a defence  that A did not know  that C was a child. 
(3) A person  may  be found  guilty  of the offence  in subsection  (1) whether  or not 
C— 
10 (a) engages  in criminal  activity,  or 
(b) is prosecuted  for, or is found  guilty  of, any offence. 
(4) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  this section  is liable— 
(a) on summary  conviction,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
15twenty  years  or to a fine not exceeding  the statutory  maximum  or 
both, 
(b) on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
ten years. 
2 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
20 “child” means  a person  under  the age of 18, 
“criminal  activity”  means  conduct  that constitutes  an offence, 
“recruit”  includes  direct,  induce,  incite,  coerce  or compel. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
58/4 Bill 41 1 Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Bill 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Act 2024. Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Bill 2 
Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of child  criminal  exploitation;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Paul  Beresford 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 41



Child  Criminal  Exploitation  (No.  2) Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Child  criminal  exploitation:  offence 
2 Penalties 
3 Interpretation 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 75 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of child  criminal  exploitation;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Child  criminal  exploitation:  offence 
(1) A person  (A) commits  an offence  if they— 
(a) recruit  or attempt  to recruit,  or 
(b) use another  person  (B) to recruit  or attempt  to recruit 
5 a child  (C) for the purpose  of C’s involvement  in the commission  of one or 
more  offences. 
(2) For the purpose  of determining  whether  A is guilty  of an offence  under 
subsection  (1), it is not a defence  that A did not know  that C was a child. 
(3) 
10A person  may  be found  guilty  of the offence  in subsection  (1) whether  or not 
C— 
(a) is involved  in the commission  of an offence,  or 
(b) is prosecuted  for, or is found  guilty  of, any offence. 
2 Penalties 
(1) 
15Subsections  (2) and (3) apply  if a person  is convicted  of an offence  under 
section  1 in respect  of the involvement  of C in the commission  of one offence 
(“the  anticipated  offence”). 
(2) If the anticipated  offence  is murder,  the person  is liable  to imprisonment  for 
life. 
(3) 
20In any other  case the person  is liable  to any penalty  for which  they  would 
be liable  on conviction  of the anticipated  offence. 
(4) Subsections  (5) to (7) apply  if a person  is convicted  of an offence  under  section 
1 in respect  of the involvement  of C in the commission  of more  than  one 
offence  (“the  anticipated  offences”). 
(5) 
25If one of the anticipated  offences  is murder,  the person  is liable  to 
imprisonment  for life. 
59/1 Bill 75 1 Child  Criminal  Exploitation  (No. 2) Bill 
(6) If none  of the anticipated  offences  is murder  but one or more  of them  is 
punishable  with  imprisonment,  the person  is liable— 
(a) to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  the maximum  term  provided 
5for any one of those  offences  (taking  the longer  or the longest  term 
as the limit  for the purposes  of this paragraph  where  the terms 
provided  differ);  or 
(b) to a fine. 
(7) In any other  case the person  is liable  to a fine. 
(8) 
10Subsections  (3), (6) and (7) are subject  to any contrary  provision  made  by or 
under  an Act. 
(9) In the case of an offence  triable  either  way,  the reference  in subsection  (6) to 
the maximum  term  provided  for that offence  is a reference  to the maximum 
term  so provided  on conviction  on indictment. 
3 Interpretation 
15 In this Act— 
“child”  means  a person  under  the age of 18, 
“recruit”  includes  direct,  induce,  incite,  coerce  or compel. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
20 (2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Child  Criminal  Exploitation  Act 2025. Child  Criminal  Exploitation  (No. 2) Bill 2 
Child  Criminal  Exploitation  (No.  2) Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of child  criminal  exploitation;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Victoria  Atkins 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   6th November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 75



Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and 
Orders)  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Department  for Education  with the consent  of 
Mrs Flick  Drummond,  the Member  in charge of the Bill, are published  separately  as Bill 50—EN. 
58/4 Bill 50 
Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and 
Orders)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Registration 
2 School  attendance  orders 
3 Guidance  on children  not in school  and school  attendance  orders 
4 School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments Schedule  —  
58/4 Bill 50 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the maintenance  of registers  by local  authorities  of 
children  in their  area who  are not full-time  pupils  at any school;  to make 
provision  about  support  by local  authorities  to promote  the education  of such 
children;  to make  provision  about  school  attendance  orders;  and for connected 
purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Registration 
(1) The Education  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  436A  insert— 
“Children  not in school:  England 
5 436B Duty  to register  children  not in school 
(1) A local authority  in England  must  maintain  a register  of children  who are 
eligible  to be registered  by the authority  under  this section. 
(2) A child  is eligible  to be registered  by a local  authority  under  this 
section  if Conditions  A to C are met. 
10 (3) Condition  A is that the child  is in the authority’s  area. 
(4) Condition  B is that the child  is of compulsory  school  age. 
(5) Condition  C is that— 
(a) the child  is not a registered  pupil  at a relevant  school,  or 
(b) 
15the child  is a registered  pupil  at a relevant  school  but the 
proprietor  of the school  has arranged  or agreed  that— 
(i) the child  will receive  education  otherwise  than  at that 
or any other  relevant  school,  and 
(ii) the child  will be absent  for some  or all of the time  when 
20the child  would  normally  be expected  to attend  the 
relevant  school. 
58/4 Bill 50 1 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(6) Regulations  may  make  provision— 
(a) for cases  where  a child  is to be regarded  as falling  or not falling 
within  subsection  (5)(b); 
(b) 
5for cases  where  a child  falling  within  subsection  (5)(b) is not 
to be regarded  as eligible  for registration. 
(7) In this section  “relevant  school”  means— 
(a) a school  maintained  by a local  authority, 
(b) a non-maintained  special  school  (within  the meaning  given  by 
section  337A), 
10 (c) an Academy  school  or alternative  provision  Academy,  or 
(d) a school  not falling  within  paragraph  (c) that is registered  under 
section  95 of the Education  and Skills  Act 2008  (register  of 
independent  educational  institutions). 
436C Content  and maintenance  of registers 
15 (1) A register  under  section  436B  must  contain  the following  information 
in respect  of a child  registered  in it— 
(a) the child’s  name,  date  of birth  and home  address, 
(b) the name  and home  address  of each  parent  of the child,  and 
(c) 
20such  details  of the means  by which  the child  is being  educated 
as may  be prescribed. 
(2) To the extent  that the local  authority  have  the information  or can 
reasonably  obtain  it, a register  under  section  436B  must  also contain 
such  information  about,  or in connection  with,  the following  matters 
in respect  of a child  registered  in it as may  be prescribed— 
25 (a) the child’s  protected  characteristics  (within  the meaning  of the 
Equality  Act 2010); 
(b) whether  the child  has any special  educational  needs,  including 
whether  the local  authority  maintain  an EHC  plan  for the child; 
(c) 
30any actions  that have  been  taken  by a local  authority  following, 
or in connection  with,  enquiries  made  by a local  authority 
under  section  47 of the Children  Act 1989  (local  authority’s 
duty  to investigate); 
(d) whether  the child  is a child  in need  for the purposes  of Part 3 
35of the Children  Act 1989  (see section  17(10)  of that Act)  and, 
if so, any actions  that a local  authority  have  taken  in relation 
to the child  under  that Part and any services  that a local 
authority  have  provided  to the child  in the exercise  of functions 
conferred  on them  by section  17 of that Act; 
(e) 
40whether  the child  is looked  after  by a local  authority  (within 
the meaning  of section  22 of the Children  Act 1989); 
(f) the reasons  why  the child  meets  Condition  C in section  436B , 
including  any information  provided  by a parent  of the child 
as to those  reasons  or, in a case where  a parent  has not 
provided  that information,  the fact that they  have  not done  so; Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 2 
(g) whether,  under  arrangements  made  under  section  436A,  the 
child  has been  identified  as a child  who  is of compulsory  school 
age but who  is not a registered  pupil  at a school  and is not 
receiving  suitable  education  otherwise  than  at a school; 
5 (h) the school  or type  of school  (if any)  that the child  attends  or 
has attended  in the past; 
(i) whether  support  is being  provided  in relation  to the child 
under  section  436G  and,  if so, the nature  of the support  being 
provided; 
10 (j) any actions  that have  been  taken  by a local  authority  in relation 
to the child  under  sections  436H  to 436O  (school  attendance 
orders); 
(k) any other  information  about  the child’s  characteristics, 
15circumstances,  needs  or interactions  with  a local  authority  or 
educational  institutions  that the Secretary  of State  thinks  should 
be included  in the register  for the purposes  of promoting  or 
safeguarding  the education,  safety  or welfare  of children. 
(3) A register  under  section  436B  may  also contain  any other  information 
the local  authority  consider  appropriate. 
20 (4) Regulations  may,  in relation  to a register  under  section  436B , make 
provision  about— 
(a) how  a local  authority  must  maintain  the register,  including 
provision  relating  to— 
(i) how  the register  is to be kept  up-to-date; 
25 (ii) the making  of changes  to the register; 
(b) the form  of the register; 
(c) access  to and publication  of the register; 
(d) registration  forms; 
(e) 
30publicising  the register  and duties  of persons  in relation  to the 
register. 
(5) No information  from  a register  under  section  436B  may  be published, 
or made  accessible  to the public,  in a form— 
(a) which  includes  the name  or address  of a child  who  is eligible 
35to be registered  under  that section  or of a parent  of such  a 
child,  or 
(b) from  which  the identity  of such  a child  or parent  can be 
deduced,  whether  from  the information  itself  or from  that 
information  taken  together  with  any other  published 
information. 
40 436D Provision  of information  to local  authorities:  parents 
(1) A parent  of a child  who  becomes  eligible  to be registered  by a local 
authority  in England  under  section  436B  must— 
(a) inform  the local  authority  that the child  is eligible  for 
registration,  and 3 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(b) provide  the authority  with  any of the information  referred  to 
in section  436C (1)(a) and (b) that the parent  has. 
(2) A parent  of a child  who  is registered  by a local  authority  in England 
under  section  436B  must— 
5 (a) provide  the authority,  on request,  with  any of the information 
referred  to in section  436C (1)(a) to (c) that the parent  has, 
(b) inform  the authority  of a change  to any of the information 
required  to be included  in the register  under  section  436C (1)(a) 
to (c) of which  the parent  is aware,  and 
10 (c) inform  the authority  if the child  ceases  to be eligible  to be 
registered  by that authority  under  section  436B . 
(3) A person  must  comply  with  a duty  under  subsection  (1) or (2) within 
the relevant  period. 
(4) In subsection  (3) “relevant  period”  means— 
15 (a) in the case of the duty  in subsection  (1)(a) or (b), the period  of 
15 days  beginning  with  the date  on which  the child  becomes 
eligible  for registration  by the local  authority; 
(b) in the case of the duty  in subsection  (2)(a), such  period  of not 
less than  15 days  as the local  authority  specify  in the request; 
20 (c) in the case of the duty  in subsection  (2)(b), the period  of 15 
days  beginning  with  the date  on which  the parent  becomes 
aware  of the change; 
(d) in the case of the duty  in subsection  (2)(c), the period  of 15 
25days  beginning  with  the date  on which  the child  ceases  to be 
eligible  to be registered  by the local  authority  under  section 
436B . 
(5) The duties  in subsections  (1) and (2) do not apply  where  the child  is 
receiving  full-time  education  by any one or more  of the following 
means— 
30 (a) arrangements  made  by the local  authority  under  section  19; 
(b) arrangements  made  by the proprietor  of a relevant  school  at 
which  the child  is a registered  pupil; 
(c) attendance  at a relevant  school. 
(6) 
35In this section  “relevant  school”  has the same  meaning  as in section 
436B . 
436E Provision  of information  to local  authorities:  education  providers 
(1) This  section  applies  where  a local  authority  in England  reasonably 
believe  that— 
(a) 
40a person  is providing  out-of-school  education  to a child  for 
more  than  the prescribed  amount  of time  without  any parent 
of the child  being  present,  and 
(b) the child  is, or is eligible  to be, registered  by the authority 
under  section  436B . Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 4 
(2) In subsection  (1)(a)— 
(a) “out-of-school  education”  means  any programme  or course  of 
education,  or any other  kind  of structured  education,  that is 
5provided  otherwise  than  as part of the education  provided  by 
a relevant  school  (within  the meaning  of section  436B ); 
(b) “prescribed  amount  of time”  means  an amount  of time 
prescribed— 
(i) by reference  to a number  of hours  in, or a proportion 
of, a week  or other  period; 
10 (ii) by reference  to a proportion  of the time  a child  spends 
receiving  education; 
(iii) in any other  way. 
(3) The authority  may  by notice  require  the person— 
(a) 
15to confirm  whether  or not the person  is providing  out-of-school 
education  as mentioned  in subsection  (1)(a), and 
(b) if the person  is doing  so, to provide  the authority  with  any of 
the information  referred  to in section  436C (1)(a) or (b) that the 
person  has in relation  to any child  (whether  or not in the 
authority’s  area)  to whom  they  are providing  such  education. 
20 (4) A notice  under  subsection  (3) is served  if it is sent to or left at the 
place  where  the out-of-school  education  is provided  (as well  as in the 
circumstances  referred  to in section  572(1)). 
(5) The person  on whom  a notice  under  subsection  (3) is served  must 
25comply  with  the requirement  in the notice  within  the period  of 15 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  it is served. 
(6) Regulations  may  provide  for exceptions  to the duty  in subsection  (5). 
(7) Where  a local  authority  in England  are satisfied  that a person  on whom 
a notice  under  subsection  (3) is served  has— 
(a) failed  to comply  with  their  duty  under  subsection  (5), or 
30 (b) provided  incorrect  information  in response  to the notice, 
the authority  may  require  the person  to pay a monetary  penalty  to 
the authority  in accordance  with  Schedule  31A. 
(8) The amount  of the monetary  penalty  is to be the prescribed  amount. 
436F Use of information  in the register 
35 (1) A local  authority  in England  must,  if the Secretary  of State  so directs, 
provide  the Secretary  of State  with  information  of a prescribed 
description  from  their  register  under  section  436B  (whether  that is 
information  relating  to an individual  child  or aggregated  information). 
(2) 
40A local  authority  in England  may  provide  information  from  their 
register  under  section  436B  which  relates  to a child  to a prescribed 
person  if the authority  consider  it appropriate  to do so for the purposes 
of promoting  or safeguarding  the education,  safety  or welfare  of— 5 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(a) the child,  or 
(b) any other  person  under  the age of 18. 
(3) Where  a local  authority  in England  become  aware  that a child 
5registered  in their  register  under  section  436B  will move,  or has moved, 
to the area of another  local  authority  in England,  the local  authority— 
(a) must  provide  the other  local  authority  with  the information 
referred  to in section  436C (1)(a) to (c), 
(b) must  provide  the other  local  authority  with  any information 
10relating  to the child  that is prescribed  under  section  436C (2) 
that they  have,  and 
(c) may  provide  the other  local  authority  with  any other 
information  contained  in the register  under  section  436C (3). 
436G Support 
(1) 
15If a parent  of a child  registered  by a local authority  in England  under  section 
436B  so requests,  the local authority  must  provide,  or secure  the provision 
of, support  to promote  the education  of the child. 
(2) The support  to be provided  is whatever  the local  authority  think  fit 
having  regard  to— 
(a) the parent’s  request,  and 
20 (b) the child’s  age, ability  and aptitude  and to any special 
educational  needs  the child  may  have. 
(3) The support  may  for example  include— 
(a) advice  about  education  of the child, 
(b) 
25information  about  sources  of assistance  for the education  of 
the child, 
(c) provision  of facilities,  services  or assistance  (including  financial 
assistance),  and 
(d) access  to non-educational  services  or benefits. 
(4) The duty  in subsection  (1) does  not apply  where— 
30 (a) the child  is a registered  pupil  at a relevant  school  (within  the 
meaning  of section  436B ), or 
(b) the local  authority  are required  to make  arrangements  for the 
education  of the child  under  section  19 of this Act or section 
42 of the Children  and Families  Act 2014.” 
35 (3) In section  569(2A)  (regulations  subject  to affirmative  procedure),  for 
“regulations  under  section  550ZA(3)(f)  or 550ZC(7)  may”  substitute  “— 
(a) the first regulations  under  section  436B (6), 
(b) regulations  under  section  436C (1)(c) or (2), 
(c) the first regulations  under  section  436C (4), 
40 (d) regulations  under  section  436E (1)(a), 
(e) regulations  under  section  436E (6), 
(f) the first regulations  under  section  436E (8), Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 6 
(g) the first regulations  under  section  436F (1), 
(h) regulations  under  section  436F (2), 
(i) regulations  under  section  550ZA(3)(f), 
(j) regulations  under  section  550ZC(7),  or 
5 (k) the first regulations  under  paragraph  5 of Schedule  31A, 
may”. 
(4) After  Schedule  31 insert— 
Section 436E “SCHEDULE  31A 
10FAILURE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION UNDER SECTION 436E: 
MONETARY PENALTIES 
Warning  notice 
1 Where  a local  authority  in England  propose  to require  a person  to 
pay a monetary  penalty  under  section  436E (7), the authority  must 
give  the person  a notice  of what  is proposed  (a “warning  notice”). (1) 
15 (2) The warning  notice  must  include  information  as to— 
(a) the grounds  for the proposal  to require  payment  of the 
monetary  penalty, 
(b) the amount  of the penalty,  and 
(c) the person’s  right  to make  representations. 
20 Representations 
2 The person  to whom  the warning  notice  is given  may  make  written 
representations  to the local  authority  in relation  to the proposed 
requirement  to pay a monetary  penalty— 
(a) 
25within  the period  of 14 days  beginning  with  the day on 
which  the notice  is given,  or 
(b) if within  that period  the person  gives  written  notice  of their 
intention  to make  representations,  within  the period  of 28 
days  beginning  with  that day. 
Imposition  of penalty 
30 3 Where  a person  has made  representations  in response  to a warning 
notice,  or the time  for doing  so has elapsed,  the local  authority  must 
decide  whether  to require  the person  to pay the monetary  penalty. (1) 
(2) The local  authority  may  not require  the person  to pay a monetary 
35penalty  if they  are no longer  satisfied  as mentioned  in section 
436E (7). 
(3) If the local  authority  decide  not to require  the person  to pay the 
penalty,  they  must  inform  the person  of that fact. 7 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
Penalty  notice 
4 A requirement  to pay a monetary  penalty  is imposed  by a notice 
given  to the person  by the local  authority  (a “penalty  notice”). (1) 
(2) A penalty  notice  must  include  information  as to— 
5 (a) the grounds  for requiring  payment  of the monetary  penalty, 
(b) the amount  of the penalty, 
(c) how  payment  may  be made, 
(d) the period  within  which  payment  is to be made  (which  must 
10be at least  28 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
notice  is given), 
(e) the consequences  of late payment  (see paragraph  5), and 
(f) rights  of appeal. 
(3) A penalty  notice  may  be withdrawn  at any time  by the local 
authority  that gave  it. 
15 Consequences  of late payment 
5 If the person  to whom  a penalty  notice  is given  fails to pay the 
monetary  penalty  within  the period  specified  in the notice,  the 
amount  of the penalty  is increased  by the prescribed  percentage. 
Appeals 
20 6 A person  to whom  a penalty  notice  is given  may  appeal  to the 
First-tier  Tribunal  on any of the grounds  mentioned  in 
sub-paragraph  (2). (1) 
(2) The grounds  are that— 
(a) 
25the decision  to require  payment  of the penalty  was based 
on an error  of fact; 
(b) the decision  was wrong  in law; 
(c) the decision  was unreasonable. 
(3) On an appeal  under  this paragraph  the First-tier  Tribunal  may— 
(a) quash  the penalty  notice, 
30 (b) confirm  the penalty  notice,  or 
(c) vary  the penalty  notice  by reducing  the amount  of the 
monetary  penalty. 
(4) Where  an appeal  under  this paragraph  is made,  the requirement  to 
35pay the monetary  penalty  is suspended  pending  the final 
determination  or withdrawal  of the appeal. 
Enforcement 
7 If a person  does  not pay the whole  or any part of a monetary 
penalty  which  the person  is required  to pay under  this Schedule 1 
within  the time  specified  in the penalty  notice,  the penalty  or part Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 8 
of the penalty  is recoverable  as if it were  payable  under  an order 
of the county  court.” 
2 School  attendance  orders 
(1) The Education  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. 
5 (2) After  section  436G  (as inserted  by section  1) insert— 
“School  attendance  orders:  England 
436H Preliminary  notice  for school  attendance  order 
(1) In this section,  a “preliminary  notice”  means  a notice,  served  by a local 
10authority,  requiring  the person  on whom  it is served  to satisfy  the 
local  authority  that the child  to whom  the notice  relates  is receiving 
suitable  education. 
(2) A preliminary  notice  must  specify  the period  within  which  the person 
must  respond  to the notice,  which  must  be not less than  15 days 
beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is served. 
15 (3) A local authority  in England  must  serve  a preliminary  notice  on a person 
in relation  to a child  if it appears  to them  that— 
(a) the person  is a parent  of the child, 
(b) the child  is a child  in the local authority’s  area, 
(c) the child  is of compulsory  school  age, and 
20 (d) the child  is not receiving  suitable  education,  either  by regular 
attendance  at school  or otherwise. 
(4) A preliminary  notice  under  subsection  (3) must  be served  without 
delay,  and in any event  within  the period  of five days  beginning  with 
25the day on which  it appears  to the local  authority  that the requirements 
of subsection  (3) are met. 
(5) A local authority  in England  may serve  a preliminary  notice  on a person  in 
relation  to a child  if it appears  to them  that— 
(a) the person  is a parent  of the child,  and 
(b) either  Condition  A or Condition  B is met. 
30 (6) Condition  A is that— 
(a) the child  is, or may  be, eligible  to be registered  by the local 
authority  under  section  436B , 
(b) the authority  have  asked  the person  for information  for the 
purpose  of ascertaining— 
35 (i) whether  the child  is or should  be registered  by the 
authority,  or 
(ii) whether  the person  is in fact a parent  of the child,  and 
(c) the person  has not provided  that information  within  the period 
40of 15 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the request  was 
made,  or has provided  incorrect  information. 9 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(7) Condition  B is that the person  is under  a duty  to provide  information 
to the local  authority  under  section  436D (1)(b) or (2)(a) in relation  to 
the child  and— 
(a) 
5has not provided  the information  within  the relevant  period 
(as defined  in section  436D (4)), or 
(b) has provided  incorrect  information. 
436I School  attendance  orders 
(1) A local authority  in England  must  serve  an order  under  this section  on a 
person  if— 
10 (a) the authority  have served  a preliminary  notice  on the person  under 
section  436H , 
(b) the person  fails to satisfy  the local authority,  within  the period 
specified  in the notice,  that— 
(i) the child  is receiving  suitable  education,  or 
15 (ii) the person  is not a parent  of the child,  and 
(c) in the opinion  of the authority  it is expedient  that the child  should 
attend  school. 
(2) An order  under  this section  (a “school  attendance  order”)  is an order 
20requiring  the person  to cause  the child  to become  a registered  pupil 
at a school  named  in the order. 
(3) A school  attendance  order  under  this section— 
(a) must  be served  without  delay,  and in any event  within  the 
period  of five days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
25authority  determine  which  school  is to be named  in the order, 
and 
(b) must  be in the prescribed  form. 
(4) A school  attendance  order  under  this section  continues  in force  (subject 
to any amendment  made  by the local  authority)  for so long  as the 
child  is of compulsory  school  age, unless— 
30 (a) it is revoked  by the authority,  or 
(b) a direction  is made  in respect  of it under  section  section  436P (6) 
or 447(5). 
(5) Where  a maintained  school  is named  in a school  attendance  order 
under  this section— 
35 (a) the local  authority  must  without  delay,  and in any event  within 
the period  of five days  referred  to in subsection  (3)(a) inform 
the governing  body  and the head  teacher,  and 
(b) the governing  body  and the local  authority  must  admit  the 
child  to the school. 
40 (6) Where  an Academy  school  or alternative  provision  Academy  is named 
in a school  attendance  order  under  this section— Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 10 
(a) the local  authority  must  without  delay,  and in any event  within 
the period  of five days  referred  to in subsection  (3)(a) inform 
the proprietor  and the principal,  and 
(b) the proprietor  must  admit  the child  to the school. 
5 (7) Subsections  (5) and (6) do not affect  any power  to exclude  from  a 
school  a pupil  who  is already  a registered  pupil  there. 
436J School  attendance  order  for child  with  EHC  plan 
(1) Subsections  (2) and (3) apply  where  a local  authority  are required  to 
10serve  a school  attendance  order  under  section  436I in respect  of a child 
for whom  they  maintain  an EHC  plan. 
(2) Where  the EHC  plan  specifies  the name  of a school,  that school  must 
be named  in the order. 
(3) Where  the EHC  plan  does  not specify  the name  of a school— 
(a) 
15the authority  must  amend  the plan  so that it specifies  the name 
of a school,  and 
(b) that school  must  then  be named  in the order. 
(4) An amendment  to an EHC  plan  required  to be made  under  subsection 
(3)(a) shall  be treated  as if it were  an amendment  made  following  a 
20review  under  section  44 of the Children  and Families  Act 2014,  and 
that section  and regulations  made  under  it apply  accordingly. 
(5) Where— 
(a) a school  attendance  order  is in force  in respect  of a child  for 
whom  the local  authority  maintain  an EHC  plan,  and 
(b) the name  of the school  specified  in the plan  is changed, 
25 the local  authority  must  amend  the order  accordingly. 
436K School  nomination  notice  for school  attendance  order 
(1) Before  a local  authority  serve  a school  attendance  order  under  section 
436I on a person  in respect  of a child,  other  than  a child  for whom 
30they  maintain  an EHC  plan,  the authority  must  serve  a notice  on the 
person  under  this section  (a “school  nomination  notice”). 
(2) A school  nomination  notice  is a notice  in writing— 
(a) informing  the person  of the local  authority’s  intention  to serve 
the order, 
(b) 
35specifying  the school  which  the authority  intend  to name  in 
the order  and,  if they  think  fit, one or more  other  schools  which 
they  regard  as suitable  alternatives,  and 
(c) stating  the effect  of subsections  (3) to (6). 
For periods  within  which  the school  nomination  notice  must  be served, 
see section  436M (6) and (7). 11 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(3) If the school  nomination  notice  specifies  one or more  alternative  schools 
and the person  selects  one of them  within  the period  of 15 days 
beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is served,  the school 
selected  by the person  must  be named  in the order. 
5 (4) If— 
(a) within  the period  mentioned  in subsection  (3) the person— 
(i) applies  for the child  to be admitted  to a school  which 
is an Academy  school  or alternative  provision  Academy 
10and notifies  the local  authority  which  served  the notice 
of the application,  or 
(ii) applies  for the child  to be admitted  to a school 
maintained  by a local  authority  and,  where  that 
authority  are not the local  authority  which  served  the 
15notice,  notifies  the latter  authority  of the application, 
and 
(b) the child  is offered  a place  at the school  as a result  of the 
application, 
that school  must  be named  in the school  attendance  order. 
(5) If— 
20 (a) within  the period  mentioned  in subsection  (3) the person 
applies  to the local  authority  by whom  the notice  was served 
for education  to be provided  at a school  which  is not a school 
maintained  by a local  authority,  an Academy  school  or 
alternative  provision  Academy,  and 
25 (b) the child  is offered  a place  at the school  under  arrangements 
made  by the authority  under  which  the fees payable  in respect 
of the education  provided  at the school  are to be paid  by them 
under  section  517, 
that school  must  be named  in the school  attendance  order. 
30 (6) If, within  the period  mentioned  in subsection  (3)— 
(a) the person— 
(i) applies  for the child  to be admitted  to a school  which 
is not maintained  by a local  authority,  an Academy 
35school  or an alternative  provision  Academy  and in 
respect  of which  no application  is made  under 
subsection  (5), and 
(ii) notifies  the local  authority  by whom  the notice  was 
served  of the application, 
(b) 
40the child  is offered  a place  at the school  as a result  of the 
application,  and 
(c) the school  is suitable  to the child’s  age, ability  and aptitude 
and to any special  educational  needs  the child  may  have, 
that school  must  be named  in the school  attendance  order. Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 12 
436L School  nomination  notice:  restrictions 
(1) A local  authority  may  not specify  a school  in a school  nomination 
notice  if the child  is permanently  excluded  from  it. 
(2) 
5A local  authority  may  not specify  a maintained  school  or Academy 
school  in a school  nomination  notice  if the admission  of the child 
would,  because  of the need  to take measures  to avoid  failing  to comply 
with  any duty  applicable  to the school  in relation  to class  sizes, 
prejudice  the provision  of efficient  education  or the efficient  use of 
resources. 
10 (3) A local  authority  may  not specify  a maintained  school  or Academy 
school  in a school  nomination  notice  if, were  the child  concerned 
admitted  to the school  in accordance  with  a school  attendance  order 
resulting  from  the notice,  the number  of pupils  at the school  in the 
child’s  age group  would  exceed  the relevant  number. 
15 (4) The relevant  number  is— 
(a) in the case of a maintained  school,  the number  determined  in 
accordance  with  section  88C or 89 of the School  Standards  and 
Framework  Act 1998  as the number  of pupils  in the child’s  age 
20group  which  it is intended  to admit  to the school  in the school 
year  in which  the child  would  be admitted,  or 
(b) in the case of an Academy  school,  the number  determined  in 
accordance  with  any Academy  arrangements  or enactment  as 
the number  of such  pupils. 
(5) 
25Subsection  (3) does  not prevent  a local  authority  from  specifying  a 
maintained  school  where  they  are responsible  for determining  the 
arrangements  for the admission  of pupils  to the school. 
(6) Subsection  (3) also does  not prevent  a local  authority  from  specifying 
a maintained  school  or Academy  school  if— 
(a) 
30in the opinion  of the authority  the school  is a reasonable 
distance  from  the home  of the child,  and 
(b) there  is no maintained  school  or Academy  school  in their  area 
which— 
(i) the authority  could  specify  (apart  from  subsection  (3)), 
and 
35 (ii) is in the opinion  of the authority  a reasonable  distance 
from  the home  of the child. 
436M School  nomination  notice:  procedure 
(1) Before  deciding  to specify  a maintained  school,  Academy  school  or 
40alternative  provision  Academy  in a school  nomination  notice  a local 
authority  must  consult— 
(a) in the case of a maintained  school— 
(i) the governing  body,  and 13 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(ii) if another  local  authority  are responsible  for determining 
the arrangements  for the admission  of pupils  to the 
school,  that authority,  or 
(b) 
5in the case of an Academy  school  or alternative  provision 
Academy,  the proprietor. 
(2) Where  a local  authority  decide  to specify  a maintained  school, 
Academy  school  or alternative  provision  Academy  in a school 
nomination  notice  they  must,  before  serving  the notice,  serve  notice 
in writing  of their  decision  on— 
10 (a) in the case of a maintained  school— 
(i) the governing  body, 
(ii) the head  teacher,  and 
(iii) if another  local  authority  are responsible  for determining 
15the arrangements  for the admission  of pupils  to the 
school,  that authority,  or 
(b) in the case of an Academy  school  or alternative  provision 
Academy— 
(i) the proprietor,  and 
(ii) the principal. 
20 (3) A notice  under  subsection  (2) must  be served  without  delay,  and in 
any event  before  the end of the period  of 15 days  beginning  with  the 
expiry  of the period  specified  in the notice  under  section  436H . 
(4) A person  on whom  a notice  is served  under  subsection  (2)(a)(i) or (iii) 
25or (b)(i) may  apply  to the Secretary  of State  for a direction  under  this 
section  and,  if they  do so, must  inform  the local  authority  which  served 
the notice. 
(5) An application  under  subsection  (4) must  be made— 
(a) if the notice  is served  on a school  day,  before  the end of the 
30period  of 10 school  days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
notice  is served,  or 
(b) if the notice  is served  on a day that is not a school  day,  before 
the end of the period  of 10 school  days  beginning  with  the first 
school  day following  the day on which  the notice  is served. 
(6) 
35If the local  authority  which  served  a notice  under  subsection  (2) are 
not informed  of an application  under  subsection  (4) within  the period 
referred  to in that subsection,  they  must  serve  the school  nomination 
notice  without  delay,  and in any event  within  the next  period  of five 
days. 
(7) Where  the Secretary  of State  gives  a direction  under  this section— 
40 (a) the school  or schools  to be specified  in the school  nomination 
notice  are to be determined  in accordance  with  the direction, 
and 
(b) the school  nomination  notice  must  be served  without  delay, 1 
and in any event  before  the end of the period  of five days Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 14 
beginning  with  the day after  that on which  the direction  is 
given. 
436N Amendment  of school  attendance  order 
(1) 
5This  section  applies  where  a school  attendance  order  under  section 
436I is in force  in respect  of a child,  other  than  a child  for whom  the 
local  authority  maintain  an EHC  plan. 
(2) If at any time— 
(a) the person  on whom  the order  is served  applies  for the child 
to be admitted  to a school— 
10 (i) which  is maintained  by a local  authority,  an Academy 
school  or an alternative  provision  Academy,  and 
(ii) which  is different  from  the school  named  in the order, 
(b) the child  is offered  a place  at the school  as a result  of the 
application,  and 
15 (c) the person  requests  the local  authority  by which  the order  was 
served  to amend  it by substituting  that school  for the one 
currently  named, 
the authority  must  comply  with  the request. 
(3) If at any time— 
20 (a) the person  on whom  the order  is served  applies  to the authority 
for education  to be provided  for the child  at a school— 
(i) which  is not a school  maintained  by a local  authority, 
an Academy  school  or an alternative  provision 
Academy,  and 
25 (ii) which  is different  from  the school  named  in the order, 
(b) the child  is offered  a place  at the school  under  arrangements 
made  by the authority  under  which  the fees payable  in respect 
of the education  provided  at the school  are to be paid  by them 
under  section  517, and 
30 (c) the person  requests  the authority  to amend  the order  by 
substituting  that school  for the one currently  named, 
the authority  must  comply  with  the request. 
(4) If at any time— 
(a) 
35the person  on whom  the order  is served  applies  for the child 
to be admitted  to a school— 
(i) which  is not maintained  by a local  authority,  an 
Academy  school  or an alternative  provision  Academy, 
(ii) which  is different  from  the school  named  in the order, 
and 
40 (iii) in respect  of which  no application  is made  under 
subsection  (3), 
(b) as a result  of the application,  the child  is offered  a place  at the 1 
school,  being  a school  which  is suitable  to the child’s  age, 15 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
ability  and aptitude  and to any special  educational  needs  the 
child  may  have,  and 
(c) the person  requests  the authority  to amend  the order  by 
substituting  that school  for the one currently  named, 
5 the authority  must  comply  with  the request. 
436O Revocation  of school  attendance  order  on request 
(1) This  section  applies  where  a school  attendance  order  made  by a local 
authority  under  section  436I is in force  in respect  of a child. 
(2) 
10The person  on whom  the order  is served  may  at any time  apply  to 
the local  authority  requesting  that it be revoked  on the grounds  that— 
(a) arrangements  have  been  made  for the child  to receive  suitable 
education  otherwise  than  at a school,  or 
(b) the person  is not a parent  of the child. 
(3) 
15The authority  must  comply  with  a request  under  subsection  (2)(a) or 
(b) unless  they  are of the opinion  that (as the case may  be)— 
(a) arrangements  have  not been  made  for the child  to receive 
suitable  education  otherwise  than  at a school,  or 
(b) the person  is a parent  of the child. 
(4) 
20If a person  is aggrieved  by a refusal  of the local  authority  to comply 
with  a request  under  subsection  (2)(a)— 
(a) the person  may  refer  the question  to the Secretary  of State,  and 
(b) the Secretary  of State  is to give  such  direction  determining  the 
question  as the Secretary  of State  thinks  appropriate. 
(5) 
25Where  the child  is one for whom  the local  authority  maintain  an EHC 
plan— 
(a) if the name  of a school  or other  institution  is specified  in the 
EHC  plan,  subsection  (2)(a) does  not apply; 
(b) if the name  of a school  or other  institution  is not specified  in 
30the EHC  plan,  a direction  under  subsection  (4)(b) may  require 
the authority  to make  such  amendments  in the plan  as the 
Secretary  of State  considers  necessary  or expedient  in 
consequence  of the determination. 
436P Offence  of failure  to comply  with  school  attendance  order 
(1) 
35If a person  on whom  a school  attendance  order  under  section  436I is 
served  fails to comply  with  the requirements  of the order,  the person 
is guilty  of an offence. 
(2) Subsection  (1) does  not apply  if the person  proves— 
(a) that they  are causing  the child  to receive  suitable  education 
otherwise  than  at a school,  or 
40 (b) that they  are not a parent  of the child. Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 16 
(3) The reference  in subsection  (1) to failure  to comply  with  the 
requirements  of a school  attendance  order  includes  causing  a child  to 
cease  to be registered  at the school  named  in the school  attendance 
order. 
5 (4) Subsection  (3) does  not apply  in circumstances  where— 
(a) the school  has, pursuant  to section  436J or 436N , ceased  to be 
the school  named  in the school  attendance  order,  or 
(b) the school  attendance  order  has been  revoked  pursuant  to 
section  436O . 
10 (5) A person  who— 
(a) fails to comply  with  the requirements  of a school  attendance 
order  under  section  436I by not causing  a child  to become  a 
registered  pupil  at the school  named  in the order,  and 
(b) 
15is convicted  of an offence  under  this section  in respect  of the 
failure, 
may  be found  guilty  of an offence  under  this section  again  if the failure 
continues. 
(6) If, in proceedings  for an offence  under  this section,  the person  is 
20acquitted,  the court  may  direct  that the school  attendance  order  cease 
to be in force. 
(7) A direction  under  subsection  (6) does  not affect  the duty  of the local 
authority  to take further  action  under  section  436I if at any time  the 
authority  are of the opinion  that,  having  regard  to any change  of 
circumstances,  it is expedient  to do so. 
25 (8) A person  who  commits  an offence  under  this section,  in a case where 
the school  attendance  order  to which  the offence  relates  was served 
on the person  before  subsection  (9) has come  into force,  is liable  on 
summary  conviction  to a fine not exceeding  level  3 on the standard 
scale. 
30 (9) A person  who  commits  an offence  under  this section,  in a case where 
the school  attendance  order  to which  the offence  relates  was served 
on the person  after  this subsection  has come  into force,  is liable  on 
summary  conviction  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  the 
35maximum  term  for summary  offences  or a fine not exceeding  level  3 
on the standard  scale  (or both). 
(10) In subsection  (9), “the maximum  term  for summary  offences”  means— 
(a) if the offence  is committed  before  the time  when  section  281(5) 
of the Criminal  Justice  Act 2003  comes  into force,  six months; 
(b) if the offence  is committed  after  that time,  51 weeks.” 
40 (3) In section  572 (service  of notices  and other  documents),  at the end insert— 
“(4) This  section  does  not preclude  any notice  or order  under  sections  436H 
to 436O  (which  relate  to school  attendance  orders  in England)  from 
being  served  by any other  effective  method.” 17 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
(4) In Schedule  1 (pupil  referral  units),  before  paragraph  14 (but after  the heading 
“School  attendance  orders”)  insert— 
“13A (1) Where  a pupil  referral  unit is named  in a school  attendance  order 
made  by a local  authority  in England  under  section  436I— 
5 (a) the local  authority  must  without  delay,  and in any event 
within  the period  of five days  referred  to in section  436I(3)(a) 
inform  the teacher  in charge  of the unit,  and 
(b) if another  local  authority  are responsible  for determining  the 
10arrangements  for the admission  of pupils  in the unit,  that 
authority  must  admit  the child  to the unit, 
but paragraph  (b) above  does  not affect  any power  to exclude  from 
a unit a pupil  who  is already  a registered  pupil  there. 
(2) Section  436K (4) does  not apply  in relation  to a pupil  referral  unit. 
(3) A local  authority  in England— 
15 (a) must,  before  deciding  to specify  a particular  pupil  referral 
unit in a school  nomination  notice  under  section  436K  where 
another  local  authority  are responsible  for the admission  of 
pupils  to the unit,  consult  that authority,  and 
(b) 
20if they  decide  to specify  the unit in the notice,  must  serve 
notice  in writing  of their  decision  on that authority. 
(4) Section  436M (3) to (7) apply  where  notice  is served  on a local 
authority  under  sub-paragraph  (3) above  as they  apply  where  notice 
is served  under  section  436M (2). 
(5) 
25The parent  of a child  in respect  of whom  a school  attendance  order 
under  section  436I is in force  may  not under  section  436N  request 
the local  authority  to amend  the order  by substituting  a pupil 
referral  unit for the school  named  in the order. 
(6) Where  a child  is a registered  pupil  at both  a pupil  referral  unit in 
30England  and at a school  other  than  such  a unit,  the references  in 
section  444 to the school  at which  the child  is a registered  pupil  are 
to be read  as references  to the unit.” 
3 Guidance  on children  not in school  and school  attendance  orders 
After  section  436P  of the Education  Act 1996  (as inserted  by section  2) insert— 
“Guidance  on children  not in school  and school  attendance  orders:  England 
35 436Q Guidance 
In exercising  their  functions  under  sections  436B  to 436O , a local 
authority  must  have  regard  to any guidance  given  by the Secretary 
of State.” 
4 School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments 
40 The Schedule  contains  consequential  amendments  relating  to section  2. Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 18 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  section  comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(3) The rest of this Act comes  into force— 
5 (a) for the purposes  of making  regulations,  on the day on which  this Act 
is passed; 
(b) for remaining  purposes,  on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may  by 
regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
(4) 
10The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory instrument  make 
transitional  or saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of 
any provision  of this Act. 
(5) Regulations  under  this section  may  make  different  provision  for different 
purposes. 
(6) 
15This  Act may  be cited  as the Children  Not in School  (Registers,  Support  and 
Orders)  Act 2024. 19 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
Section  4 SCHEDULE 
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE ORDERS: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS 
Children  Act 1989 
1 The Children  Act 1989  is amended  as follows. (1) 
5 (2) In section  36 (education  supervision  orders),  in subsection  (5)(a),  after 
“section”  insert  “436I or”. 
(3) In section  91 (effect  and duration  of care orders  etc), in subsection  (5), after 
“section”  insert  “436I or”. 
(4) 
10In Schedule  3 (supervision  orders),  in paragraph  13(2)(a)(i)  and (b)(i),  after 
“section”  insert  “436I or”. 
Education  Act 1996 
2 The Education  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. (1) 
(2) In the italic  heading  before  section  437, at the end insert  “: Wales”. 
(3) In section  437 (school  attendance  orders)— 
15 (a) in subsection  (1), after  “local  authority”  insert  “in Wales”; 
(b) in subsection  (3), omit  “referred  to in this Act as”; 
(c) in subsection  (4), (5) and (6) after  “school  attendance  order”  insert 
“under  this section”; 
(d) omit  subsection  (8); 
20 (e) in the heading,  at the end insert  “: Wales”. 
(4) In section  438 (choice  of school:  child  without  EHC  plan)— 
(a) in subsection  (1)— 
(i) omit  “a child  for whom  they  maintain  an EHC  plan  (in the 
case of a local  authority  in England)  or”; 
25 (ii) omit  “(in the case of a local  authority  in Wales)”; 
(b) in subsection  (6)(c)  (as substituted  by the Additional  Learning  Needs 
and Education  Tribunal  (Wales)  Act 2018  (anaw  2))— 
(i) omit  sub-paragraph  (i); 
(ii) 
30in sub-paragraph  (ii), omit  “(in the case of a local  authority 
in Wales)”. 
(5) In section  440 (amendment  of order)— 
(a) in subsection  (1)— 
(i) after  “order”  insert  “under  section  437”; 
(ii) 
35omit  “a child  for whom  the local  authority  maintain  an EHC 
plan  (in the case of a local  authority  in England)  or”; 
(iii) omit  “(in the case of a local  authority  in Wales)”; 
(b) in subsection  (4)(b)  (as substituted  by the Additional  Learning  Needs 
and Education  Tribunal  (Wales)  Act 2018)— Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 20 
Schedule—School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments 
(i) omit  sub-paragraph  (i); 
(ii) in sub-paragraph  (ii), omit  “(in the case of a local  authority 
in Wales)”. 
(6) Omit  section  441 (choice  of school:  child  with  EHC  plan). 
5 (7) In section  442 (revocation  of order  on request  of parent)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), after  “order”  insert  “under  section  437”; 
(b) omit  subsection  (5); 
(c) in subsection  (6), omit  “, in the case of a local  authority  in Wales,”. 
(8) Omit  the italic  heading  before  section  443. 
10 (9) In section  443 (offence  of failure  to comply  with  attendance  order)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), after  the first “order”  insert  “under  section  437”; 
(b) in the heading,  at the end insert  “(Wales)”. 
(10) Before  section  444 insert— 
“Offence  of failure  to secure  regular  attendance  at school  of registered  pupil” 
15 (11) Before  section  445 insert— 
“Offences:  general”. 
(12) In sections  445(1),  446 and 447(1)  and (2)(a),  after  “under  section”  insert 
“436P ,”. 
(13) After  section  447 insert— 
20 “Interpretation  of Chapter 
447A Interpretation  of Chapter  2 
In this Chapter— 
“maintained  school”  means  any community,  foundation  or 
25voluntary  school  or any community  or foundation  special 
school  not established  in a hospital; 
“school  nomination  notice”  means  a notice  under  section  436K .” 
(14) In section  580 (index),  in the second  column  of the entry  relating  to “school 
attendance  order”,  for “section  437(3)”  substitute  “sections  436I (in relation 
to England)  and 437(3)  (in relation  to Wales)”. 
30 (15) In Schedule  1 (pupil  referral  units),  in paragraph  14— 
(a) in sub-paragraph  (1), in the opening  words  after  “order”  insert 
“made  by a local  authority  in Wales  under  section  437”; 
(b) in sub-paragraph  (3), in the opening  words,  after  “local  authority” 
insert  “in Wales”; 
35 (c) in sub-paragraph  (5), after  “school  attendance  order”  insert  “under 
section  437”; 
(d) in sub-paragraph  (6)— 
(i) after  “pupil  referral  unit”  insert  “in Wales”; 21 Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 
Schedule—School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments 
(ii) for “a unit”  substitute  “such  a unit”. 
School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998 
3 In section  86 of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998  (parental 
preferences),  in subsection  (8)(b),  after  “section”  insert  “436K (4), 436N (2),”. 
5 Sentencing  Act 2020 
4 In section  369 of the Sentencing  Act 2020  (parenting  orders  in respect  of 
certain  offences  under  the Education  Act 1996)— 
(a) in subsection  (1)(a),  for “443”  substitute  “436P  or 443”; 
(b) in subsections  (2), (4) and (5)(a),  for “443”  substitute  “436P , 443”. Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and Orders)  Bill 22 
Schedule—School  attendance  orders:  consequential  amendments 
Children  Not In School  (Registers,  Support  and 
Orders)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the maintenance  of registers  by local  authorities  of children  in 
their  area who  are not full-time  pupils  at any school;  to make  provision  about  support 
by local  authorities  to promote  the education  of such  children;  to make  provision  about 
school  attendance  orders;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Mrs Flick  Drummond 
supported  by Mr Robin  Walker , Ian Mearns , 
Sir Gavin  Williamson  and Dr Caroline  Johnson . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 50



Children’s  Clothing  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Definition  of children’s  clothing 
2 Zero-rating  of articles  designed  as school  uniform 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 99 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Extend  the definition  of children’s  clothing  for the purposes  of exemption 
from  VAT;  to extend  the VAT  exemption  to further  categories  of school 
uniform;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Definition  of children’s  clothing 
(1) The Value  Added  Tax Act 1994  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In Schedule  8 in Part 2 (the Groups)— 
(a) 
5in Item  1 of Group  16, delete  “young  children”  and insert  “children 
under  the age of 18”; 
(b) in the Notes  to Group  16, after  paragraph  (1) insert— 
“(1A) The Treasury  must  by order  provide  for a definition  of clothing 
and footwear  designed  for children  under  the age of 18. 
(1B) 
10In making  an order  under  paragraph  (1A),  the Treasury  must 
have  regard  to the average  measurements  of children. 
(1C) The Treasury  may  make  further  orders  under  paragraph  (1A) 
if it appears  that there  has been  a material  change  in the 
average  measurements  of children. ” 
2 Zero-rating  of articles  designed  as school  uniform 
15 (1) The Value  Added  Tax Act 1994  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In Schedule  8 in Part 2 (the Groups)— 
(a) after  Item  1 of Group  16 insert— 
“1A Articles  designed  as school  uniform. ” 
(b) In the Notes  to Group  16, after  paragraph  (3) insert— 
20 “(3A) Item  1A applies  only  where  the goods  to which  it refers— 
(a) bear  the logo  or other  insignia  of a school, 
(b) are sold by or through  a school,  or 
59/1 Bill 99 1 Children’s  Clothing  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
(c) are sold in such  a manner  as the Treasury  may  by order 
prescribe. 
(3B) For the purposes  of paragraph  (3A),  “school”  means— 
(a) 
5a relevant  school  as defined  by section  551A(5)  of the 
Education  (Guidance  about  Costs  of School  Uniforms) 
Act 2021; 
(b) such  other  establishment  as the Treasury  may  by order 
prescribe. ” 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
10 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on 1 April  2026. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Children’s  Clothing  (Value  Added  Tax)  Act 
2025. Children’s  Clothing  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 2 
Children’s  Clothing  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Extend  the definition  of children’s  clothing  for the purposes  of exemption  from  VAT; 
to extend  the VAT  exemption  to further  categories  of school  uniform;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 99



Children’s  Hospices  (Funding)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Review  of hospice  funding 
2 Publication  of proposals 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 115 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to conduct  a review  of the funding  of hospices 
specialising  in the care of children  and to publish  proposals  for measures  to 
guarantee  access  to hospices  for all children  who  require  palliative  care;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Review  of hospice  funding 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  conduct  a review  of the funding  of hospices 
specialising  in the care of children  (“children’s  hospices”)  in England. 
(2) The review  under  subsection  (1) must  assess— 
5 (a) the adequacy  of funding  for hospices  in England  specialising  in the 
care of children;  and 
(b) whether  existing  arrangements  for funding  provide  equitable  access 
to high-quality  palliative  care for all seriously  ill children  in England 
and their  families. 
10 (3) Any  review  under  subsection  (1) must  consider— 
(a) the current  funding  model  for children’s  hospices; 
(b) the adequacy  of the level  of Government  funding  for children’s 
hospices; 
(c) the merits  of centrally  distributed  funding  for children’s  hospices; 
15 (d) the use of the integrated  care board  model  and its impact  on funding 
for children’s  hospices; 
(e) the long-term  security  of children’s  hospice  funding. 
(4) In carrying  out the review  in subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult— 
20 (a) relevant  healthcare  providers; 
(b) hospice  care workers; 
(c) parent  and patient  groups. 
59/1 Bill 115 1 Children’s  Hospices  (Funding)  Bill 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a report  of the review  before  Parliament  before 
the end of the period  of one year  beginning  on the day on which  this Act is 
passed. 
2 Publication  of proposals 
5 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  proposals  for measures  to guarantee 
access  to hospices  for all children  who  require  palliative  care in England. 
(2) Proposals  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) have  regard  to the outcome  of the review  under  section  1 of this Act; 
(b) 
10contain  measures  to secure  the long  term  funding  of children’s  hospices 
in England; 
(c) contain  measures  to ensure  high-quality  palliative  care for all seriously 
ill children  in England,  regardless  of their  location. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  lay proposals  under  this section  before  Parliament 
15before  the end of the period  of three  months  beginning  on the day on which 
the review  is laid in Parliament  under  section  1(5). 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Children’s  Hospices  (Funding)  Act 2024. Children’s  Hospices  (Funding)  Bill 2 
Children’s  Hospices  (Funding)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to conduct  a review  of the funding  of hospices  specialising 
in the care of children  and to publish  proposals  for measures  to guarantee  access  to 
hospices  for all children  who  require  palliative  care;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Ian Byrne 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  29th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 115



Committee  Stage:  Monday  3 February  2025 
Children's  Wellbeing  and Schools  Bill 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Children's  Wellbeing  and Schools  Bill. Any withdrawn 
amendments  are listed  at the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which 
it is expected  they will be decided. 
 Amendments  which  will comply  with  the required  notice  period  at their  next appearance. 
_70 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  31, page  72, line 31, at end insert— 
“(1A) Powers  under  subsection  (1) may not be exercised  in relation  to an academy. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  specifies  that the Secretary  of State  should  rely on the provisions  in Funding 
Agreements  as regards  to academies. 
_71 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  33, page  86, line 12, leave  out lines  12 and 13 
_72 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  33, page  86, line 38, at end insert— 
“(2D) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  guidance  for relevant  institutions  on how 
subsection  (2)(g)  is to be understood. ” 

Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  to allow  independent  schools  not to have  to notify  the Secretary  of State  about 
change  of use for buildings. 
_73 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  40, page  99, line 23, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  133 (requirement  to be qualified),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) The requirement  in subsection  (1)(a)  only applies  after  a person  has 
been  carrying  out such work  in a school  for five years. ”” 
_74 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  40, page  99, line 23, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  133 (requirement  to be qualified),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Where  a person  was carrying  out such work  at the time  of the passing 
of the Children’s  Wellbeing  and Schools  Act 2025,  the requirement  in 
subsection  (1)(a)  does  not apply. ”” 
_75 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  40, page  99, line 23, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  133 (requirement  to be qualified),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Where  a person  is carrying  out such work  for the purposes  of teaching 
a shortage  subject,  the requirement  in subsection  (1)(a)  does  not apply. 
(1B) For the purposes  of this section,  “shortage  subject”  means  any subject 
in relation  to which  the Department  for Education’s  recruitment  targets 
for initial  teacher  training  have  been  missed  in the most  recent  year 
for which  such statistics  exist. ”” 
_76 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 2 
. Clause  40, page  99, line 23, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  133 (requirement  to be qualified),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Where  a person  is carrying  out such work  in an academy  school,  the 
requirement  in subsection  (1)(a)  does  not apply  where  the condition  in 
subsection  (1B) is met. 
(1B) The condition  is that— 
(a) the individual  is employed  by the proprietor  of an academy; 
(b) the proprietor  of the academy  is satisfied  that the individual  has 
sufficient  expertise  to enable  them  to undertake  such work 
appropriately;  and 
(c) the proprietor  will provide  the individual  with  appropriate 
training,  support  and guidance  to ensure  that they are able to 
undertake  such work  appropriately. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  allows  academies  to maintain  discretion  about  whether  to employ  teachers  without 
QTS if they are subject  matter  experts  and have  received  training  from  the academy. 
_94 Munira  Wilson 
. Clause  40, page  99, line 23, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  133 (requirement  to be qualified),  after  subsection  (5) insert— 
“(5A) Regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State  under  this section  must  have 
regard  to— 
(a) the availability  of qualified  teachers  in each  school  subject,  and 
(b) the necessity  or desirability  of specific  sectoral  expertise  for 
teachers  in each  school  subject” ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to take account  of the availability  of qualified 
teachers  in each  subject,  and the desirability  of specific  sectoral  expertise  when  making  regulations 
under  Clause  40. 
_78 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  43, page  102, leave  out lines  35 and 36 
_88 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 3 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. Clause  43, page  102, line 37, leave  out from  “directions”  to the end of line 39 and insert  “as 
are necessary  to secure  compliance  with  statutory  duties,  the requirements  of the Funding 
Agreement,  or charity  law.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  limit  the Secretary  of State’s  power  of direction  should  an Academy  breach, 
or act unreasonably  in respect  of, the performance  of a relevant  duty. 
_79 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  43, page  102, line 37, leave  out from  “may”  to the end of line 3 on page  103 and 
insert  “exercise  their  powers  under  the funding  agreement  to terminate  or require 
performance  of the funding  agreement  in accordance  with  its terms.” 
_89 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  43, page  103, line 2, leave  out from  “directions”  to the end of line 3 and insert  “as 
are necessary  to secure  compliance  with  statutory  duties,  the requirements  of the Funding 
Agreement,  or charity  law.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  limit  the Secretary  of State’s  power  of direction  should  an Academy  act 
unreasonably  in respect  of the exercise  of a relevant  power. 
_77 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  43, page  103, line 3, at end insert— 
“(2A) Where  the Secretary  of State  exercises  functions  under  this section,  the Secretary 
of State  must  make  a statement  in the House  of Commons  which  explains  the 
actions  taken  and the reasons  for taking  such actions. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to make  a statement  to Parliament  each  time 
the Secretary  of State  uses the powers  in this clause. 
_80 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 4 
. Clause  44, page  103, leave  out from  line 25 to line 8 on page  104 and insert— 
“(a) in subsection  (A1),  after  “measures)”  insert  “unless  the Secretary  of 
State  determines  that no suitable  sponsor  is available”; 
(b) after  subsection  (A1) insert— 
“(A2) Where  the Secretary  of State  determines  that no suitable  sponsor 
is available,  the Secretary  of State  must,  within  14 days,  publish 
a plan to secure  appropriate  governance  and leadership  of the 
school  and to secure  its rapid  improvement. 
(A3) A plan published  under  subsection  (A2) must  include— 
(a) the parties  with  responsibility  for the school  and its 
improvement; 
(b) the parties  who will take action  to improve  provision  in 
the school; 
(c) the resources  that will be provided  to the relevant  parties, 
including  who will provide  the resources  and when  the 
resources  will be provided;  and 
(d) the intended  outcomes  of the plan,  with  the relevant 
timetables  for the outcomes. 
(A4) The Secretary  of State  must  report  annually  to Parliament  on— 
(a) the number  of times  the Secretary  of State  has published 
a plan under  subsection  (A2); 
(b) the resources  which  have  been  provided  as part of any 
plans;  and 
(c) the outcomes  of any plans. ”” 
_81 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  44, page  103, line 28, at end insert— 
“(c) after  subsection  (1), insert— 
“(1ZA) The Secretary  of State  must  make  an Academy  order  in respect 
of a maintained  school  in England  if— 
(a) Ofsted  has judged  the school  to require  significant 
improvement;  or 
(b) a Regional  Improvement  for Standards  and Excellence 
team  has judged  the school  to be significantly 
underperforming  when  compared  with  neighbouring 
schools  with  similar  demographics. ”” 
_82 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 5 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. Clause  44, page  103, line 28, at end insert— 
“(c) after  subsection  (7), insert— 
“(7A) No application  or petition  for judicial  review  may be made  or 
brought  in relation  to a decision  taken  by the Secretary  of State 
to make  an Academy  order. ”” 
_95 Munira  Wilson 
. Clause  44, page  103, line 28, at end insert— 
“(c) after  subsection  (1A) insert— 
“(1B) Before  deciding  whether  to issue  an Academy  order  in respect 
of a maintained  school,  the Secretary  of State  must  issue  an 
invitation  for expressions  of interest  for suitable  sponsors. 
(1C) The Secretary  of State  must  make  an assessment  of whether  or 
not to issue  an Academy  order  based  on the established  track 
record  of parties  who responded  to the invitation  issued  under 
subsection  (1B) with  an expression  of interest  in raising  school 
standards.” ” 
_96 Munira  Wilson 
. Clause  44, page  104, line 8, at end insert— 
“(10) Before  the amendments  made  by this section  come  into force,  the Secretary 
of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a report  detailing— 
(a) the mechanisms,  including  Academy  Orders,  by which  improvement  of 
school  standards  can be achieved,  and 
(b) guidance  on the appropriate  usage  of these  mechanisms. ” 
_47 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Liz Jarvis 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. Clause  45, page  104, line 17, at end insert— 
“(za) in subsection  (1)(a),  after  “the”  insert  “minimum” ” 
_Gov_92 Catherine  McKinnell 
. Page  104, line 10, leave  out Clause  45 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This clause  is replaced  by NC57  and NS1. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 6 
_90 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  48, page  108, line 24, at end insert— 
“(3) Within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  issue 
statutory  guidance  on the decision-making  process  that must  be followed 
when  directions  are given  under  section  96 of the School  Standards  and 
Framework  Act 1998. 
(4) Guidance  issued  under  subsection  (3) must  include  details  of— 
(a) how actual  or potential  conflicts  of interest  arising  from  the role of 
local  authorities  in directing  admissions  to schools  they maintain  and 
those  they do not are to be identified  and managed;  and 
(b) how the best interests  of children  and young  people  are to be prioritised 
in all decision-making. ” 
_84 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  50, page  110, line 4, at end insert— 
“(4A) Where  making  a decision  the adjudicator  must  take into account— 
(a) the performance  of the school;  and 
(b) whether  the school  is oversubscribed. ” 
_83 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  50, page  110, leave  out lines  8 to 13 
_85 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. Clause  51, page  111, line 7, after  “authorities”  insert  “, including  academy  trusts,” 
_48 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Vikki  Slade 
Liz Jarvis 
Jess Brown-Fuller 7 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. Clause  51, page  112, line 4, at end insert— 
“(5) After  section  7A (withdrawal  of notices  under  section  7), insert— 
“7B New  schools  to allocate  no more  than  half of pupil  places  on basis  of 
faith 
A new school  for which  proposals  are sought  by a local  authority  under 
section  7 must,  where  the school  is oversubscribed,  provide  that no 
more  than  half of all places  are allocated  on the basis  of or with 
reference  to— 
(a) the pupil’s  religious  faith,  or presumed  religious  faith; 
(b) the religious  faith,  or presumed  religious  faith,  of the pupil’s 
parents. ”” 
_Gov_93 Catherine  McKinnell 
. Clause  59, page  115, line 17, leave  out paragraph  (h) and insert— 
“(h) section  (Pay and conditions  of Academy  teachers ) and Schedule  (Pay 
and conditions  of Academy  teachers:  amendments  to the Education  Act 
2002 ) other  than  paragraph  6 of that Schedule; 
(ha) section  46;” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  92 and NC57 . 
_11 Jess Asato 
Ellie Chowns 
Manuela  Perteghella 
Marie  Goldman 
Maya  Ellis 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
David  Simmonds 
Ruth  Cadbury 
Josh Fenton-Glynn 
Emily  Darlington 
Steve  Witherden Caroline  Voaden 
Pam Cox 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Helen  Hayes Ms Stella  Creasy 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Tonia  Antoniazzi 
Rachael  Maskell 
Siân Berry 
Alison  Hume 
. Clause  59, page  115, line 18, at end insert— 
“(2A) Section  (Abolition  of common  law defence  of reasonable  punishment)  comes 
into force  at the end of the period  of twelve  months  beginning  with  the day 
on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC10. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 8 
_Gov_NC6 Catherine  McKinnell 
Tonia  Antoniazzi 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Josh Fenton-Glynn 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Rachael  Maskell 
Emily  Darlington Dr Simon  Opher 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Care  leavers  not to be regarded  as becoming  homeless  intentionally 
(1) In section  191 of the Housing  Act 1996  (becoming  homeless  intentionally)— 
(a) after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1ZA) But a person  does  not become  homeless  intentionally  in a case 
described  in any of subsections  (1A) to (1C). ”; 
(b) in subsection  (1A), for the words  before  paragraph  (a) substitute  “The 
first case is where—”; 
(c) after  subsection  (1A) insert— 
“(1B) The second  case is where  the person  is a relevant  child  within 
the meaning  given  by section  23A(2) of the Children  Act 1989 . 
(1C) The third  case is where  the person  is a former  relevant  child 
within  the meaning  given  by section  23C(1) of that Act and aged 
under  25.”; 
(d) in subsection  (3), in the words  before  paragraph  (a), after  “person” 
insert  “, other  than  a person  described  in subsection  (1B) or (1C),”. 
(2) The amendments  made  by this section  do not apply  in relation  to an application 
of a kind mentioned  in section  183(1) of the Housing  Act 1996  made  before 
the date  on which  this section  comes  into force,  except  where  the local  housing 
authority  deciding  the application  has not yet decided  the matters  set out in 
section  184(1)(a) and (b) of that Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The Housing  Act 1996  requires  local  housing  authorities  to assist  persons  with securing  accommodation 
in certain  circumstances  and limits  the requirement  in relation  to persons  who have  become  homeless 
intentionally.  This amendment  would  prevent  the limitation  applying  in relation  to certain  young 
persons  formerly  looked  after  by local  authorities. 
_Gov_NC57 Catherine  McKinnell 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Pay and conditions  of Academy  teachers 
Schedule  (Pay and conditions  of Academy  teachers:  amendments  to the 
Education  Act 2002 ) amends  Part 8 of the Education  Act 2002  (teachers’  pay 
and conditions  etc) in relation  to the pay and conditions  of teachers  at 
Academies  (other  than  16 to 19 Academies). ” 9 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This clause  replaces  Clause  45 and introduces  the schedule  to be inserted  by NS1. 
_NC1 Munira  Wilson 
Lisa Smart 
Caroline  Voaden 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Manuela  Perteghella 
Steff  Aquarone 
Mr Paul Kohler 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Jess Brown-Fuller Luke  Taylor 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Liz Jarvis James  MacCleary 
Ian Sollom 
Vikki  Slade 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Implementation  of the recommendations  of the Independent  Inquiry  into 
Child  Sexual  Abuse 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  6 months  of the passing  of this Act, take 
steps  to implement  each  of the recommendations  made  in the final  report  of 
the Independent  Inquiry  into Child  Sexual  Abuse. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must,  after  a period  of six months  has elapsed  from  the 
passing  of this Act and at 12 monthly  intervals  thereafter,  publish  a report 
detailing  the steps  taken  by the Government  to implement  each  of the 
recommendations. 
(3) A report  published  under  subsection  (2) must  include— 
(a) actions  taken  to meet,  action  or implement  each  of the 
recommendations  made  in the final  report  of the Independent  Inquiry 
into Child  Sexual  Abuse; 
(b) details  of any further  action  required  to implement  each  of the 
recommendations  or planned  to supplement  the recommendations; 
(c) consideration  of any challenges  to full or successful  implementation  of 
the recommendations,  with  proposals  for addressing  these  challenges 
so as to facilitate  implementation  of the recommendations;  and 
(d) where  it has not been  practicable  to fully implement  a 
recommendation— 
(i) explanation  of why implementation  has not been  possible; 
(ii) a statement  of the Government’s  intention  to implement  the 
recommendation;  and 
(iii) a timetable  for implementation. 
(4) A report  published  under  subsection  (2) must  be subject  to debate  in both 
Houses  of Parliament  within  one month  of its publication. 
(5) In meeting  its obligations  under  subsections  (1) and (2), the Secretary  of State 
may consult  with  such individuals  or organisations  as they deem  appropriate. ” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 10 
_NC2 Dr Simon  Opher 
Ian Byrne 
Iqbal  Mohamed 
Kim Johnson 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Kate  Osborne 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Ellie Chowns 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
Dr Beccy  Cooper 
Sarah  Hall 
Paula  Barker 
Grahame  Morris 
Shockat  Adam 
Lorraine  Beavers 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Chris  Hinchliff 
Ayoub  Khan Jeremy  Corbyn 
Steve  Witherden 
Zarah  Sultana 
Jon Trickett 
Julia  Buckley 
Siân Berry 
Rachael  Maskell 
John  McDonnell 
Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck 
Brian  Leishman 
Connor  Naismith 
Mike  Amesbury Cat Eccles 
Chris  Webb 
Richard  Burgon 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Peter  Prinsley 
Sarah  Champion 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy 
Apsana  Begum 
Kate  Osamor 
Andy  McDonald 
Adrian  Ramsay 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Provision  of free school  lunches  to all primary  school  children 
(1) Section  512ZB  of the Education  Act 1996  (provision  of free school  lunches  and 
milk)  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In paragraph  (4A)(b),  after  "year  2," insert  "year  3, year 4, year 5, year 6". 
(3) In subsection  (4C),  after  “age  of 7;" insert— 
“Year  3” means  a year group  in which  the majority  of children  will, in the 
school  year,  attain  the age of 8; 
“Year  4” means  a year group  in which  the majority  of children  will, in the 
school  year,  attain  the age of 9; 
“Year  5” means  a year group  in which  the majority  of children  will, in the 
school  year,  attain  the age of 10; 
“Year  6” means  a year group  in which  the majority  of children  will, in the 
school  year,  attain  the age of 11;”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  extend  free school  lunches  to all primary  school  age children  in state  funded 
schools. 
_NC3 Marie  Goldman 
Pippa  Heylings 
Mr Joshua  Reynolds 
Charlotte  Cane 
Tom Gordon 
Mike  Martin 
Liz Jarvis 
Monica  Harding 
Freddie  van Mierlo Helen  Maguire 
Mr Lee Dillon 
Munira  Wilson Alex Brewer 
Caroline  Voaden 
Ian Sollom 
Jess Brown-Fuller 11 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Reporting  of local  authority  performance  regarding  EHC plans 
In the Children  and Families  Act 2014,  after  section  40 insert— 
“40A Reporting  of local  authority  performance 
(1) Local  authorities  must  publish  regular  information  relating  to their 
fulfilment  of duties  relating  to EHC needs  assessments  and EHC plans 
under  this part. 
(2) Such  information  must  include— 
(a) the authority’s  performance  against  the requirements  of this 
Act and the Special  Educational  Needs  and Disability  Regulations 
2014  relating  to the timeliness  with  which  action  needs  to be 
taken  by the authority  in relation  to EHC needs  assessments  and 
EHC plans; 
(b) explanations  for any failures  to meet  relevant  deadlines  or 
timeframes; 
(c) proposals  for improving  the authority’s  performance. 
(3) Information  published  under  this section  must  be published— 
(a) on a monthly  basis; 
(b) on the local  authority’s  website;  and 
(c) in a form  which  is easily  accessible  and understandable. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  local  authorities  to publish  their  performance  against  the statutory 
deadlines  in the EHCP  process. 
_NC5 Dr Simon  Opher 
Zarah  Sultana 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Jon Trickett 
Ellie Chowns 
Kim Johnson 
John  McDonnell 
Cat Eccles 
Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck 
Rachael  Maskell 
Siân Berry Iqbal  Mohamed 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Shockat  Adam 
Chris  Webb 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Julia  Buckley 
Sorcha  Eastwood Sarah  Hall 
Sarah  Champion 
Dr Beccy  Cooper 
Richard  Burgon 
Jeremy  Corbyn 
Ian Byrne 
Helen  Hayes 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Provision  of free meals  and activities  during  school  holidays 
(1) A local  authority  must— 
(a) provide;  or 
(b) coordinate  the provision  of programmes  which  provide, COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 12 
free meals  and activities  to relevant  children  during  school  holidays. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “relevant  children”  means  children  in receipt 
of free school  meals. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may,  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument— 
(a) specify  minimum  standards  for meals  and activities  during  school 
holidays; 
(b) specify  criteria  that organisations  involved  in the delivery  of meals  and 
activities  during  school  holidays  must  meet. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  place  a duty  on local  authorities  to provide  or coordinate  free meals  and 
activities  for children  eligible  for free school  meals  during  school  holidays. 
_NC7 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Power  to prescribe  pay and conditions  for teachers 
The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the passing  of this Act— 
(a) make  provision  for the power  of the governing  bodies  of maintained 
schools  to set the pay and working  conditions  of school  teachers  to be 
made  equivalent  with  the relevant  powers  of academies; 
(b) provide  guidance  to all applicable  schools  that— 
(i) pay levels  given  in the School  Teachers’  Pay and Conditions 
Document  are to be treated  as the minimum  pay of relevant 
teachers; 
(ii) teachers  may be paid above  the pay levels  given  in the School 
Teachers’  Pay and Conditions  Document. 
(iii) they must  have  regard  to the School  Teachers’  Pay and Conditions 
Document  but may vary from  it in the best interests  of their 
pupils  and staff. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  make  the pay set out in the School  Teachers’  Pay and Conditions  Document 
a floor,  and extend  freedoms  over pay and conditions  to local  authority  maintained  schools. 13 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC8 Dr Simon  Opher 
Zarah  Sultana 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Jon Trickett 
Ellie Chowns 
Kim Johnson 
John  McDonnell 
Cat Eccles 
Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Julia  Buckley 
Helen  Hayes Iqbal  Mohamed 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Shockat  Adam 
Chris  Webb 
Jeremy  Corbyn 
Ian Byrne 
Siân Berry 
Sorcha  Eastwood Sarah  Hall 
Sarah  Champion 
Dr Beccy  Cooper 
Richard  Burgon 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Rachael  Maskell 
Peter  Lamb 
Chris  Hinchliff 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Identification  of children  eligible  for free school  meals 
After  section  512ZA  of the Education  Act 1996  (power  to charge  for meals  etc.) 
insert— 
“512ZAA Identification  of children  eligible  for free school  meals 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  identify  all children  eligible  for free school 
meals  in England. 
(2) A child’s  eligibility  for free school  meals  is not dependent  on any 
application  having  been  made  for free school  meals  on their  behalf. 
(3) Where  a child  has been  identified  as eligible  for free school  meals,  the 
Secretary  of State  must  provide  for this information  to be shared  with— 
(a) the school  at which  the child  is registered;  and 
(b) the relevant  local  education  authority. 
(4) Where  a school  has been  informed  that a child  on its pupil  roll is eligible 
for free school  meals,  the school  must  provide  that child  with  a free 
school  meal. 
(5) A local  education  authority  must  provide  the means  for a parent  or 
guardian  of a child  who has been  identified  as eligible  for free school 
meals  to opt out of the provision  of a free school  meal  under  subsection 
(4).”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to proactively  identify  all children 
eligible  for free school  meals  in England,  making  the application  process  for free school  meals  opt-out 
rather  than  opt-in. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 14 
_NC9 Christine  Jardine 
Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Requirement  to provide  information  about  bereavement  services 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  establish  a protocol  for the collection 
and dissemination  of information  relating  to bereavement  support  services 
for children  and young  people. 
(2) A protocol  made  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) define  the bereavement  support  services  to which  the protocol  applies, 
which  must  include  services  provided  by— 
(i) local  authorities; 
(ii) NHS bodies;  and 
(iii) charities  and other  third  sector  organisations; 
(b) place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to publish  information,  including 
online,  about  services  to which  the protocol  applies; 
(c) place  a duty  on specified  public  bodies  and other  persons  to provide 
information  to children  and young  people  about  services  to which  the 
protocol  applies,  including— 
(i) specialist  services  for children  and young  people; 
(ii) services  provided  online;  and 
(iii) accessible  services  for deaf  and disabled  children  and young 
people; 
(d) where  a duty  under  paragraph  (c) applies,  require  the identification  of 
children  or young  people  who may require  a service  to which  the 
protocol  applies. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  make  regulations  under  this section  by statutory 
instrument. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a draft  statutory  instrument 
containing  regulations  under  this section  within  12 months  of the passing  of 
this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to establish  a protocol  for the collection 
and dissemination  of information  about  bereavement  support  services  to children  and young  people. 15 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC10 Jess Asato 
Ellie Chowns 
Manuela  Perteghella 
Marie  Goldman 
Maya  Ellis 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
David  Simmonds 
Kim Johnson 
Josh Fenton-Glynn 
Emily  Darlington 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Steve  Witherden Caroline  Voaden 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Ruth  Cadbury 
Helen  Hayes Ms Stella  Creasy 
Vikki  Slade 
Tonia  Antoniazzi 
Rachael  Maskell 
Pam Cox 
Siân Berry 
Alison  Hume 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Abolition  of common  law defence  of reasonable  punishment 
(1) The Children  Act 2004  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  58 (Reasonable  Punishment:  England),  omit  subsections  (1) to (4). 
(3) After  section  58, insert— 
“58A Abolition  of common  law defence  of reasonable  punishment 
(1) The common  law defence  of reasonable  punishment  is abolished  in 
relation  to corporal  punishment  of a child  taking  place  in England. 
(2) Corporal  punishment  of a child  taking  place  in England  cannot  be 
justified  in any civil or criminal  proceedings  on the ground  that it 
constituted  reasonable  punishment. 
(3) Corporal  punishment  of a child  taking  place  in England  cannot  be 
justified  in any civil or criminal  proceedings  on the ground  that it 
constituted  acceptable  conduct  for the purposes  of any other  rule of 
the common  law. 
(4) For the purposes  of subsections  (1) to (3) “corporal  punishment”  means 
any battery  carried  out as a punishment. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may make  regulations  for transitory,  transitional 
or saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of this 
section. 
(6) The power  to make  regulations  under  subsection  (5) is exercisable  by 
statutory  instrument. 
58B Promotion  of public  awareness  and reporting 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  take steps  before  the coming  into force  of 
section  58A to promote  public  awareness  of the changes  to the law to 
be made  by that section. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must,  five years  after  its commencement,  prepare 
a report  on the effect  of the changes  to the law made  by section  58A. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 16 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must,  as soon  as practicable  after  preparing  a 
report  under  this section— 
(a) lay the report  before  Parliament,  and 
(b) publish  the report. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may make  regulations  for transitory,  transitional 
or saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of this 
section. 
(5) The power  to make  regulations  under  subsection  (4) is exercisable  by 
statutory  instrument. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  abolish  the common  law defence  of reasonable  punishment  in relation  to 
corporal  (physical)  punishment  of a child  taking  place  in England,  amend  certain  provisions  of the 
Children  Act 2004  relating  to corporal  punishment  children  and place  a duty  on the Secretary  of 
State  to report  this change. 
_NC11 Tim Farron 
Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Siân Berry 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Benefits  of outdoor  education  to children's  wellbeing 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, 
conduct  a review  on the benefits  of outdoor  education  to children's  wellbeing. 
(2) A report  on the review  must  be published  within  six months  of the conclusion 
of the review. ” 
_NC12 Tim Farron 
Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Mike  Martin 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Provision  of residential  outdoor  education  for children  in kinship  care 
(1) A local  authority  must  take such steps  as are reasonably  practicable  to ensure 
that children  living  in kinship  care receive  at least  one residential  outdoor 
education  experience. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  children  living  in kinship  care has the meaning 
provided  for by section  22I of the Children  Act 1989  (as amended  by this Act). ” 17 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC13 Ellie Chowns 
Mike  Martin 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Foster  carers’  delegated  authority  for children  in their  care 
(1) Where  a child  (“C”)  who is looked  after  by the local  authority  is placed  with 
a foster  parent  (“F”)  by a local  authority,  F may make  decisions  on C’s behalf 
in relation  to the matters  set out in subsection  (2) where  C’s placement  plan 
does  not specify  an alternative  decision  maker. 
(2) The matters  referred  to in subsection  (1) are— 
(a) medical  and dental  treatment, 
(b) education, 
(c) leisure  and home  life, 
(d) faith  and religious  observance, 
(e) use of social  media, 
(f) personal  care,  and 
(g) any other  matters  which  F considers  appropriate. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  enable  foster  carers  to make  day-to-day  decisions  on behalf  of the children 
and young  people  they foster. 
_NC14 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
Mike  Martin 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Funding  for the National  Wraparound  Childcare  Programme 
The Secretary  of State  must,  within  3 months  of the passing  of this Act, make 
provision  for the extension  of funding  for the National  Wraparound  Childcare 
Programme  beyond  the 2025-26  financial  year. ” 
_NC15 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“National  statutory  inquiry  into grooming  gangs 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  3 months  of the passing  of this Act, set up 
a statutory  inquiry  into grooming  gangs. 
(2) An inquiry  established  under  subsection  (1) must  seek to— COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 18 
identify  common  patterns  of behaviour  and offending  between 
grooming  gangs; (a) 
(b) identify  the type,  extent  and volume  of crimes  committed  by grooming 
gangs; 
(c) identify  the number  of victims  of crimes  committed  by grooming  gangs; 
(d) identify  the ethnicity  of members  of grooming  gangs; 
(e) identify  any failings,  by action,  omission  or deliberate  suppression,  by— 
(i) police, 
(ii) local  authorities, 
(iii) prosecutors, 
(iv) charities, 
(v) political  parties, 
(vi) local  and national  government, 
(vii) healthcare  providers  and health  services,  or 
(viii) other  agencies  or bodies, 
in the committal  of crimes  by grooming  gangs,  including  by considering 
whether  the ethnicity  of the perpetrators  of such crimes  affected  the 
response  by such agencies  or bodies; 
(f) identify  such national  safeguarding  actions  as may be required  to 
minimise  the risk of further  such offending  occurring  in future; 
(g) identify  good  practice  in protecting  children. 
(3) The inquiry  may do anything  it considers  is calculated  to facilitate,  or is 
incidental  or conducive  to, the carrying  out of its functions  and the achievement 
of the requirements  of subsection  (2). 
(4) An inquiry  established  under  this section  must  publish  a report  within  two 
years  of the launch  of the inquiry. 
(5) For the purposes  of this section— 
“gang”  means  a group  of at least  three  adult  males  whose  purpose  or 
intention  is to commit  a sexual  offence  against  the same  victim  or group 
of victims; 
“grooming”  means— 
(a) activity  carried  out with  the primary  intention  of committing 
sexual  offences  against  the victim; 
(b) activity  that is carried  out, or predominantly  carried  out, in 
person; 
(c) activity  that includes  the provision  of illicit  substances  and/or 
alcohol  either  as part of the grooming  or concurrent  with  the 
commission  of the sexual  offence. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  set up a national  statutory  inquiry  into grooming  gangs. 19 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC17 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Academy  Conversion  Support  Grant 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the passing  of this Act, 
make  provision  for a scheme  to provide  specified  funds  (‘an academy  conversion 
support  grant’)  to eligible  schools  for the purposes  of supporting  the process 
of converting  to an academy. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section— 
(a) “eligible  schools”  include— 
(i) schools  which  are part of a group  of three  or more  schools 
which— 
(A) have  been  approved  to convert  to an academy;  and 
(B) intend  to join the same  academy  trust;  and 
(ii) special  or alternative  provision  schools  which  have  been  approved 
to convert  to an academy— 
(A) as a single  school;  or 
(B) with  one or more  other  school; 
(b) “specified  funds”  may be up to a maximum  level  specified  by the 
Secretary  of State  in regulations. 
(3) A school  which  receives  an academy  conversion  support  grant  may only use 
such funds  for the purposes  of supporting  the process  of converting  to an 
academy,  which  may include  but may not be limited  to— 
(a) obtaining  legal  advice; 
(b) transferring  software  licenses; 
(c) advice  relating  to human  resources  and compliance  with  the Transfer 
of Undertakings  (Protection  of Employment)  Regulations; 
(d) costs  associated  with  re-branding;  and 
(e) expenses  incurred  in setting  up an Academy  Trust. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may,  by regulations,  amend  the level  of funds  which 
can form  an academy  conversion  support  grant. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to provide  an academy  conversion  support 
grant  to support  schools  with  the process  of converting  to an academy. 
_NC18 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 20 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“School  Trust  CEO Programme 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the passing  of this Act, 
make  provision  for the delivery  of a programme  of development  for Chief 
Executive  Officers  of large  multi-academy  trusts  (“the  School  Trust  CEO 
Programme”). 
(2) The School  Trust  CEO Programme  shall  be provided  by— 
(a) the National  Institute  of Teaching;  or 
(b) a different  provider  nominated  by the Secretary  of State. 
(3) The purposes  of the School  Trust  CEO Programme  shall  include,  but not be 
limited  to— 
(a) building  the next generation  of CEOs  and system  architects; 
(b) providing  the knowledge,  insight  and practice  to ensure  CEOs  can run 
successful,  sustainable,  thriving  trusts  that develop  as anchor  institutions 
in their  communities; 
(c) building  a network  of CEOs  to improve  practice  in academy  trusts  and 
shape  the system;  and 
(d) nurturing  the talents  of CEOs  to lead and grow  large  multi-academy 
trusts,  especially  in areas  where  such trusts  are most  needed. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  provide  the School  Trust  CEO Programme  with 
such funding  and resources  as are required  for the carrying  out of its duties. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to provide  a School  Trust  CEO Programme. 
_NC19 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Trust  Capacity  Fund 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the passing  of this Act, 
establish  a Trust  Capacity  Fund. 
(2) The purpose  of the Trust  Capacity  Fund  will be to support  the growth  of 
multi-academy  trusts. 
(3) The Trust  Capacity  Fund  may provide  funding  to maintained  schools  and 
academy  trusts  which— 
(a) are considered  by the Education  and Skills  Funding  Agency  to be of 
sound  financial  health;  and 
(b) have  an eligible  growth  project  that has been  approved  by the Secretary 
of State. 21 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may,  by regulations,  specify  applications  for funding  to 
which  the Trust  Capacity  Fund  will give particular  regard,  which  may include 
applications  from  trusts— 
(a) taking  on or formed  from  schools  which  have  received  specified 
judgements  in their  most  recent  inspections;  or 
(b) taking  on or comprising  schools  in Education  Investment  Areas. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  provide  the Trust  Capacity  Fund  with  such funding 
and resources  as are required  for the carrying  out of its duties. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to establish  a Trust  Capacity  Fund  to support 
the growth  of multi-academy  trusts. 
_NC20 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Approved  free schools  and university  training  colleges  in pre-opening 
The Secretary  of State  must  make  provision  for the opening  of all free schools 
and university  training  colleges  whose  applications  were  approved  prior  to 
October  2024. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to proceed  with  the opening  of free schools 
whose  opening  was paused  in October  2024. 
_NC21 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“School  attendance:  general  duties  on local  authorities 
In Chapter  2 of Part 6 of the Education  Act 1996  (school  attendance),  after 
section  443 insert— 
“School  attendance:  registered  pupils,  offences  etc 
443A School  attendance:  general  duties  on local  authorities  in England 
(1) A local  authority  in England  must  exercise  their  functions  with  a view 
to— 
(a) promoting  regular  attendance  by registered  pupils  at schools  in 
the local  authority’s  area,  and COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 22 
(b) reducing  the number  and duration  of absences  of registered 
pupils  from  schools  in that area. 
(2) In exercising  their  functions,  a local  authority  in England  must  have 
regard  to any guidance  issued  from  time  to time  by the Secretary  of 
State  in relation  to school  attendance. ”” 
_NC22 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“School  attendance  policies 
In Chapter  2 of Part 6 of the Education  Act 1996  (school  attendance),  after 
section  443 insert— 
“443A School  attendance  policies 
(1) The proprietor  of a school  in England  must  ensure— 
(a) that policies  designed  to promote  regular  attendance  by 
registered  pupils  are pursued  at the school,  and 
(b) that those  policies  are set out in a written  document  (an 
“attendance  policy”). 
(2) An attendance  policy  must  in particular  include  details  of— 
(a) the practical  procedures  to be followed  at the school  in relation 
to attendance, 
(b) the measures  in place  at the school  to promote  regular 
attendance  by its registered  pupils, 
(c) the responsibilities  of particular  members  of staff  in relation  to 
attendance, 
(d) the action  to be taken  by staff if a registered  pupil  fails to attend 
the school  regularly,  and 
(e) if relevant,  the school’s  strategy  for addressing  any specific 
concerns  identified  in relation  to attendance. 
(3) The proprietor  must  ensure— 
(a) that the attendance  policy  and its contents  are generally  made 
known  within  the school  and to parents  of registered  pupils  at 
the school,  and 
(b) that steps  are taken  at least  once  in every  school  year to bring 
the attendance  policy  to the attention  of all those  parents  and 
pupils  and all persons  who work  at the school  (whether  or not 
for payment). 
(4) In complying  with  the duties  under  this section,  the proprietor  must 
have  regard  to any guidance  issued  from  time  to time  by the Secretary 
of State  in relation  to school  attendance. ”” 23 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC23 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Penalty  notices:  regulations 
In section  444B  of the Education  Act 1996  (penalty  notices:  attendance),  after 
subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Without  prejudice  to the generality  of subsection  (1), regulations  under 
subsection  (1) may make  provision  in relation  to England— 
(a) as to the circumstances  in which  authorised  officers  must  consider 
giving  a penalty  notice; 
(b) for or in connection  with  co-ordination  arrangements  between 
local  authorities  and neighbouring  local  authorities  (where 
appropriate),  the police  and authorised  officers. ”” 
_NC24 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Academies:  regulations  as to granting  a leave  of absence 
(1) Section  551 of the Education  Act 1996  (regulations  as to duration  of school 
day etc) is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (1), for “to which  this section  applies”  substitute  “mentioned  in 
subsection  (2)”. 
(3) In subsection  (2), omit  “to which  this section  applies”. 
(4) After  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(3) Regulations  may also make  provision  with  respect  to the granting  of 
leave  of absence  from  any schools  which  are Academies  not already 
falling  within  subsection  (2)(c). ”” 
_NC25 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Report  on the impact  of charging  VAT on private  school  fees 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  two years  of the passing  of this Act, publish 
a report  on the impact  of charging  VAT on private  school  fees. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 24 
(2) A report  published  under  subsection  (1) must  include  the following 
information— 
(a) how many  private  schools  have  closed  as a result  of the decision  to 
charge  VAT on private  school  fees; 
(b) how many  pupils  have  moved  school  because  of the decision  to charge 
VAT on private  school  fees; 
(c) an analysis,  considering  paragraphs  (a) and (b), of the impact  of the 
decision  to charge  VAT on private  school  fees on maintained  and 
academy  schools,  including  on— 
(i) the availability  of school  places  nationally  and in areas  where 
private  schools  have  closed; 
(ii) the percentage  of children  which  are placed  at their  first-choice 
school;  and 
(iii) the number  of schools  which  have  had to increase  their  Publish 
Admissions  Number. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to publish  a report  on the impact  of charging 
VAT on private  school  fees. 
_NC30 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Publication  of details  of preventative  care and family  support 
(1) Every  local  authority,  must  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, publish 
details  of all preventative  care and family  support  available  to people  in their 
area. 
(2) Information  published  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  available— 
(a) on the authority’s  website,  and 
(b) in all public  libraries  in the authority’s  area. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  all local  authorities  to publish  information  about  preventative  care 
and family  support  and to ensure  it is freely  available  to people  living  in the area. 25 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC31 Munira  Wilson 
Manuela  Perteghella 
Caroline  Voaden 
Ian Sollom 
Victoria  Collins 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
John  Milne Olly Glover 
Liz Jarvis Mr Lee Dillon 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Eligibility  for free school  lunches 
In section  512ZB  of the Education  Act 1996  (provision  of free school  lunches 
and milk),  before  paragraph  (a) insert— 
“(za) C’s household  income  is less than  £20,000  per year; ”” 
_NC32 Munira  Wilson 
Manuela  Perteghella 
Caroline  Voaden 
Ian Sollom 
Victoria  Collins 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
John  Milne Olly Glover 
Liz Jarvis Mr Lee Dillon 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Local  authority  registration  of children  eligible  for free school  meals 
After  section  512ZA  of the Education  Act 1996  (power  to charge  for meals  etc.) 
insert— 
“512ZAA Registration  of children  eligible  for free school  meals 
(1) A local  authority  must  register  for free school  meals  all children  in its 
area who are eligible  to receive  free school  meals. 
(2) A local  authority  may make  provision  for children  to be registered  for 
free school  meals  upon  their  parents  demonstrating  the child’s  eligibility 
through  an application  for relevant  benefits. ”” 
_NC33 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 26 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Duty  of school  governing  bodies  regarding  mental  health  provision 
(1) Subject  to subsection  (3), the governing  body  of a maintained  or academy 
school  in England  has a duty  to make  arrangements  for provision  in the school 
of a dedicated  mental  health  practitioner. 
(2) In subsection  (1)— 
“education  mental  health  practitioner”  means  a person  with  a 
graduate-level  or postgraduate-level  qualification  of that name  earned 
through  a course  commissioned  by NHS England. 
(3) Where  a school  has 100 or fewer  pupils,  the duty  under  subsection  (1) may be 
satisfied  through  collaborative  provision  between  several  schools. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  provide,  or make  arrangements  for the provision 
of, appropriate  financial  and other  support  to school  governing  bodies  for 
their  purposes  of facilitating  the fulfilling  of the duty  in subsection  (1).” 
_NC34 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“National  Tutoring  Guarantee 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, publish 
a report  outlining  the steps  necessary  to introduce  a National  Tutoring 
Guarantee. 
(2) A “National  Tutoring  Guarantee”  means  a statutory  requirement  on the 
Secretary  of State  to ensure  access  to small  group  academic  tutoring  for all 
disadvantaged  children  who require  academic  support. 
(3) A report  published  under  this section  must  include  an assessment  of how best 
to deliver  targeted  academic  support  from  qualified  tutors  to children— 
(a) from  low-income  backgrounds, 
(b) with  low prior  attainment, 
(c) with  additional  needs,  or 
(d) who are young  carers. 
(4) In preparing  a report  under  this section,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
with— 
(a) headteachers, 
(b) teachers, 
(c) school  leaders, 
(d) parents  of children  from  low-income  backgrounds, 27 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(e) children  from  low-income  backgrounds,  and 
(f) other  individuals  or organisations  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
appropriate. 
(5) A report  under  this section  must  be laid before  Parliament. 
(6) Within  three  months  of a report  under  this section  being  laid before  Parliament, 
the Secretary  of State  must  take steps  to implement  the recommendations 
contained  in the report. ” 
_NC35 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Mike  Martin 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“VAT zero-rating  for certain  items  of school  uniform 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  6 months  of the passing  of this Act, make 
provision  for certain  items  of school  uniform  to be zero-rated  for the purposes 
of VAT. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “certain  items  of school  uniform”  means  items 
of school  uniform  for pupils  up to the age of 16.” 
_NC36 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Establishment  of a National  Body  for SEND 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  12 months  of the passing  of this Act, 
establish  a National  Body  for SEND. 
(2) The functions  of the National  Body  for SEND  will include,  but not be limited 
to— 
(a) national  coordination  of SEND  provision; 
(b) supporting  the delivery  of SEND  support  for children  with  very high 
needs; 
(c) advising  on funding  needed  by local  authorities  for SEND  provision. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 28 
(3) Any mechanism  used  by the National  Body  for SEND  in advising  on funding 
under  subsection  (2)(c)  should  be based  on current  need  and may disregard 
historic  spend. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  establish  a National  Body  for SEND  to support  the delivery  of SEND  provision. 
_NC37 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Vikki  Slade 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Arrangements  for national  examinations  for children  not in school 
After  section  436G  of the Education  Act 1996,  as inserted  by section  25 of this 
Act, insert— 
“436GA Arrangements  for national  examinations  for children  not in school 
Where  a child  is eligible  to be registered  by the authority  under  section 
436B,  the authority  must— 
(a) provide  for the child  to be able to sit any relevant  national 
examination;  and 
(b) provide  financial  assistance  to enable  the child  to sit any relevant 
national  examination; 
where  requested  by the parent  or carer  of the child. ”” 
_NC38 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Liz Jarvis 
James  MacCleary 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Consultation  on the structures  of governance  for local  authority  and academy 
schools 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  conduct  a public  consultation  on the current 
structures  of governance  within  both  local  authority  and academy  schools. 
(2) The consultation  conducted  under  subsection  (1) must  consider— 
(a) the role of school  governors; 
(b) the statutory  duties  of school  governors; 
(c) ways  to encourage  people  to become  school  governors;  and 29 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(d) any other  matters  that the Secretary  of State  may see fit. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  the consultation  conducted  under  subsection 
(1) within  one year of the commencement  of this Act. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the consultation  closing, 
publish  and lay before  Parliament  his response  to the consultation. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  instigates  a review  of school  governance  in light  of the severe  shortage  of school 
governors  and the increasing  responsibilities  that volunteer  governors  are taking  on. 
_NC39 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Liz Jarvis 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Establishment  of Child  Protection  Authority 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, 
establish  a Child  Protection  Authority  for England. 
(2) The purpose  of such an Authority  will be to— 
(a) improve  practice  in child  protection; 
(b) provide  advice  and make  recommendations  to the Government  on child 
protection  policy  and reforms  to improve  child  protection; 
(c) inspect  institutions  and settings  at some  times  and in such ways  as it 
considers  necessary  and appropriate  to ensure  compliance  with  child 
protection  standards;  and 
(d) monitor  the implementation  of the recommendations  of the 
Independent  Inquiry  into Child  Sexual  Abuse  and other  inquiries  relating 
to the protection  of children. 
(3) The Authority  must  act with  a view  to— 
(a) safeguarding  and promoting  the welfare  of children; 
(b) ensuring  that institutions  and settings  fulfil  their  responsibilities  in 
relation  to child  protection. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  seek to fulfil  the second  recommendation  of the Independent  Inquiry  into 
Child  Sexual  Abuse  in establishing  a Child  Protection  Authority  for England. 
_NC40 Ellie Chowns 
Kim Johnson COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 30 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“National  offer  for care leavers 
In the Children  and Social  Work  Act 2017,  after  section  2 insert— 
“2A National  offer  for care leavers 
(1) The Secretary  of State  for Education  must  publish  information  about 
services  which  care leavers  in all areas  of England  should  be able to 
access  to assist  them  in adulthood  and independent  living  or in 
preparing  for adulthood  and independent  living. 
(2) For the purposes  of subsection  (1), services  which  may assist  care leavers 
in adulthood  and independent  living  or in preparing  for adulthood  and 
independent  living  include  services  relating  to— 
(a) health  and well-being; 
(b) relationships; 
(c) education  and training; 
(d) employment; 
(e) accommodation; 
(f) participation  in society. 
(3) Information  published  by the Secretary  of State  under  this section  is to 
be known  as the “National  Offer  for Care  Leavers”. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  update  the National  Offer  for Care  Leavers 
from  time  to time. 
(5) Before  publishing  or updating  the National  Offer  for Care  Leavers  the 
Secretary  of State  must  consult  with  relevant  persons  about  which 
services  may assist  care leavers  in adulthood  and independent  living  or 
in preparing  for adulthood  and independent  living. 
(6) In this section— 
“care  leavers”  means— 
(a) eligible  children  within  the meaning  given  by paragraph 
19B of Schedule  2 to the Children  Act 1989; 
(b) relevant  children  within  the meaning  given  by section 
23A(2)  of that Act; 
(c) persons  aged  under  25 who are former  relevant  children 
within  the meaning  given  by section  23C(1)  of that Act; 
(d) persons  qualifying  for advice  and assistance  within  the 
meaning  given  by section  24 of that Act; 
“relevant  persons”  means— 
(a) such care leavers  as appear  to the Secretary  of State  to 
be representative  of care leavers  in England;  and 
(b) other  Ministers  of State  who have  a role in arranging 
services  that may assist  care leavers  in or preparing  for 
independent  living. ”” 31 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  introduce  a new requirement  on the Secretary  of State  for Education  to 
publish  a national  offer  detailing  what  support  care leavers  are entitled  to claim  by expanding  the 
provisions  in the Children  and Social  Work  Act 2017  which  require  local  authorities  to produce  a 
“Local  offer”. 
_NC42 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Dr Danny  Chambers 
Liz Jarvis 
Ellie Chowns 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Establishment  of National  Wellbeing  Measurement  Programme 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  establish  a national  children  and young  people’s 
wellbeing  measurement  programme. 
(2) A programme  established  under  this section  must— 
(a) conduct  a national  survey  of the mental  health  and wellbeing  of children 
and young  people  in relevant  schools  in England; 
(b) support  schools  in the administration  of the survey; 
(c) make  provision  for parental  and student  consent  to participation  in the 
survey,  ensuring  that participation  is voluntary  and that results  are 
handled  confidentially;  and 
(d) regularly  publish  the results  of the survey  and provide  relevant  data  to 
participating  schools,  local  authorities  and other  public  bodies  for the 
purposes  of improving  children  and young  people’s  wellbeing. 
(3) A programme  established  under  this section  must— 
(a) be developed  and piloted  within  two years  of the passing  of this Act; 
(b) be fully implemented  in England  no later  than  the start  of the academic 
year three  years  after  the passing  of this Act; 
(c) be reviewed  as to its effectiveness  by the Secretary  of State  every  three 
years. 
(4) Any review  of the programme  under  subsection  (3)(c)  must  be published  and 
laid before  Parliament. 
(5) For the purposes  of this section  “relevant  school”  means  – 
(a) an academy  school, 
(b) an alternative  provision  Academy, 
(c) a maintained  school, 
(d) a non-maintained  special  school, 
(e) an independent  school,  or 
(f) a pupil  referral  unit, COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 32 
other  than  where  established  in a hospital. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to introduce  a national  programme  to 
regularly  measure  and report  on the mental  health  and wellbeing  of children  and young  people  in 
schools. 
_NC44 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Flexibility  to not follow  the National  Curriculum 
(1) The Education  Act 2002  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  79(4),  omit  from  “include”  to the end of paragraph  (a). 
(3) In section  80— 
(a) in subsection  (1)(b),  omit  “known  as” and insert  “which  may be, or 
include,”; 
(b) after  subsection  (1), insert— 
“(1A) Any curriculum  taught  under  subsection  (1)(b)  which  is not the 
National  Curriculum  for England  must  not be of a lower  standard 
than  the National  Curriculum  for England. 
(1B) All curriculums  must  be assessed  by the Chief  Inspector  to be of 
high  quality. ”. 
(4) In section  88— 
(a) in subsection  (1), omit  from  “that  the”  to “is implemented”  and insert 
“a balanced  and broadly  based  curriculum”; 
(b) in subsection  (1A),  omit  from  “that  the”  to “are implemented”  and 
insert  “appropriate  assessment  arrangements”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  allow  local  authority  maintained  schools  to offer  a curriculum  that is different 
from  the national  curriculum  but that is broad  and balanced.  It extends  academy  freedoms  over the 
curriculum  to maintained  schools. 
_NC45 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 33 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Power  to direct  admission  not to have  regard  to maintained  or academy  status 
In section  96 of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998  (direction  to 
admit  child  to specified  school),  after  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(2A) A direction  under  this section  may not take into account  whether  a 
school  is a maintained  school  or an academy. ”” 
_NC46 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“High  performing  schools  to be allowed  to expand  PAN 
In section  88D of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998  (determination 
of admission  numbers),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Where  a school— 
(a) being  a primary  school,  has over 60%  of its pupils  meeting  the 
expected  standard  in reading,  writing  and maths  combined  in 
the Key Stage  2 national  curriculum  assessments, 
(b) being  a secondary  school,  is performing  above  +0.5 on Progress 
8, 
wishes  to increase  its published  admissions  number,  the admission 
authority  must  reflect  that wish  in its determination. ”” 
_NC47 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Limits  on objections  to changes  to PAN 
In section  88H of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998  (reference  of 
objections  to adjudicator),  after  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(2A) No objection  may be referred  to the adjudicator  which— 
(a) objects  to an increase  in a school’s  published  admissions  number; 
or 
(b) objects  to a school’s  published  admissions  number  remaining  at 
the same  level. ”” 
_NC48 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 34 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Ban on mobile  telephones  and other  devices  in schools 
(1) All schools  in England,  subject  to subsection  (4), must  have  a policy  that 
prohibits  the use and carrying  of certain  devices  during  the school  day. 
(2) A policy  implemented  under  subsection  (1)— 
(a) may provide  for exemptions  from  the policy,  or for an alternative  policy, 
for sixth  form  students,  in so far as such exemptions  or alternative 
policies  do not negatively  impact  upon  the wider  policy; 
(b) is to be implemented  as the relevant  school  leader  considers  appropriate. 
(3) For the purposes  of this section— 
“certain  devices”  means  mobile  phones  and other  devices  which  provide 
similar  functionality  and whose  main  purpose  is not the support  of 
learning  or study; 
“the  school  day”  includes  all time  between  the start  of the first lesson 
period  and the end of the final  lesson  period. 
(4) A policy  under  this section  implemented  by a boarding  school  or residential 
school  may include  appropriate  guidance  for the use of certain  devices  during 
other  periods  which  their  pupils  are on school  premises,  subject  to such policies 
safeguarding  and promoting  the welfare  of children  in accordance  with relevant 
national  standards. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  all schools  in England  to ban the use of mobile  telephones,  and other 
devices  with  similar  functionality,  during  the school  day. 
_NC49 Neil O'Brien 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Report  on behaviour  in schools 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  an annual  report  on the behaviour  of 
pupils  in mainstream  primary  and secondary  state  funded  schools. 
(2) This report  must— 
(a) consider  evidence  gathered  and published  by the National  Behaviour 
Survey; 
(b) include  information  about  action  taken  by the Government  to support 
schools  to create  a culture  of high  expectations  of behaviour. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to report  annually  on behaviour  in schools  and 
to use the National  Behaviour  Survey  to create  the evidence  base  for this report. 35 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC50 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Report  on Alternative  Provision 
(1) Within  one year of the passing  of this Act, and annually  thereafter,  the 
Secretary  of State  must  publish  a report  on alternative  provision  commissioned 
by schools  or local  authorities  in England. 
(2) “Alternative  provision”  means  that commissioned  for— 
(a) permanently  excluded  pupils; 
(b) pupils  educated  out of school  for reasons  of illness  or disability;  and 
(c) other  pupils  who would  not receive  suitable  education  without  such 
provision; 
and includes  education  provided  in alternative  provision  academies  and pupil 
referral  units. 
(3) A report  published  under  this section  must  include  the action  the Government 
has taken  in the previous  year to improve  achievement,  attendance  and 
behaviour  in alternative  provision  settings. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Government  to report  on the action  it has taken  each  year to 
improve  alternative  provision. 
_NC51 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Duty  for schools  to report  acts of violence  against  staff  to the police 
(1) Where  an act listed  in subsection  (2) takes  place  which  involves  the use or 
threat  of force  against  a member  of a school’s  staff,  the school  must  report 
the incident  to the police. 
(2) An act must  be reported  to the police  where— 
(a) it is directed  towards  a member  of school  staff  or their  property;  and 
(b) it takes  place— 
(i) on school  property;  or 
(ii) because  of the victim’s  status  as a member  of a school’s  staff. 
(3) The provisions  of this section  do not require  or imply  a duty  on the police  to 
take specific  actions  in response  to such reports. ” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 36 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  create  a duty  for all schools  to report  acts or threats  of violence  against  their 
staff  to the police.  It would  not create  a requirement  for the police  to charge  the perpetrator. 
_NC52 Ellie Chowns 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Bereavement  policy  in schools 
(1) The governing  body  of a relevant  school  in England  has a duty  to develop  and 
publish  a bereavement  policy. 
(2) A policy  developed  under  this section  must  include— 
(a) a process  for supporting  a pupil  or staff  member  facing  or following 
bereavement; 
(b) details  of how the school  will incorporate  opportunities  to learn  about 
death  and bereavement  as part of life in its taught  curriculum; 
(c) details  of partnership  arrangements  with  child  bereavement  services; 
and 
(d) arrangements  for staff  training. 
(3) In developing  a policy  under  this section,  the governing  body  of the school 
must  consult  with  bereaved  pupils  and their  parents  or carers. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  provide,  or make  arrangements  for the provision 
of, appropriate  financial  and other  support  to school  governing  bodies  for 
their  purposes  of facilitating  the fulfilling  of the duty  in this section. 
(5) For the purposes  of this section,  “relevant  school”  means— 
(a) an academy  school, 
(b) an alternative  provision  Academy, 
(c) a maintained  school, 
(d) a non-maintained  special  school, 
(e) an independent  school,  or 
(f) a pupil  referral  unit. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  schools  to develop  and publish  a bereavement  policy. 
_NC53 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 37 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Exemption  from  requirement  to follow  National  Curriculum  in the interests 
of improving  standards 
In the Education  Act 2002,  after  section  95 (Appeals  against  directions  under 
section  93 etc) insert— 
“95A Exception  in the interests  of improving  standards 
Where  the proprietor  of an Academy  school  or a local  authority 
maintained  school  believes  that the raising  of standards  in the school 
would  be better  served  by the school’s  curriculum  not including  the 
National  Curriculum,  any provisions  of this Act or any other  Act do not 
apply  so far as they require  the school’s  curriculum  to include  or follow 
the National  Curriculum. ”” 
_NC54 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Exemption  from  requirement  to follow  National  Curriculum  where  Ofsted 
approves  curriculum 
In the Education  Act 2002,  after  section  95 (Appeals  against  directions  under 
section  93 etc) insert— 
“95A Exemption  where  Ofsted  certifies  curriculum  as broad  and balanced 
Where— 
(a) the proprietor  of an Academy  school  or a local  authority 
maintained  school  believes  that the raising  of standards  in the 
school  would  be better  served  by the school’s  curriculum  not 
including  the National  Curriculum,  and 
(b) His Majesty’s  Chief  Inspector  has, within  the previous  ten years, 
certified  that the school  provides  its pupils  with  a broad  and 
balanced  curriculum, 
any provisions  of this Act or any other  Act do not apply  so far as they 
require  the school’s  curriculum  to include  or follow  the National 
Curriculum. ”” 
_NC55 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 38 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Independent  review  in relation  to orders  under  section  87(3)(b)  of the 
Education  Act 2002 
In the Education  Act 2002,  after  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) Where  the Secretary  of State  proposes  to make,  revise  or replace  an 
order  under  subsection  (3)(b)  for any subject  included  in the National 
Curriculum,  the Secretary  of State  shall  appoint  an independent  review 
body  (“the  National  Curriculum  Review  Body”)  to develop 
recommendations  for any such proposed  order. 
(3B) The Secretary  of State  shall  set the scope  of the National  Curriculum 
Review  Body’s  review,  which  may include  specifying  the subjects  or 
programmes  of study  to be considered  and the timescale  for producing 
recommendations. 
(3C) In preparing  its recommendations,  the National  Curriculum  Review  Body 
shall  consult  such persons  as it considers  appropriate,  including  (but 
not limited  to) teachers,  school  leaders,  parents,  professional  bodies, 
and subject  experts. 
(3D) Where  the National  Curriculum  Review  Body  submits  recommendations 
in accordance  with  subsection  (3A),  the Secretary  of State  must  lay any 
proposed  order  with  a statement  of any modifications  the Secretary  of 
State  proposes  to make  to the recommendations  before  Parliament. 
(3E) A statutory  instrument  laid under  subsection  (3D) shall  be subject  to 
approval  by resolution  of each  House  of Parliament  before  it may come 
into force. 
(3F) Any modifications  made  by the Secretary  of State  under  subsection  (3D) 
to the recommendations  of the National  Curriculum  Review  Body  shall 
be subject  to the same  procedure  for approval  as set out in subsection 
(3E).”” 
_NC56 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“School  uniforms:  availability  of second-hand  items 
(1) The appropriate  authority  of a relevant  school  must  ensure  that second-hand 
items  of school  uniform  are made  available  for sale to the parents  of pupils 
or prospective  pupils. 
(2) Second-hand  items  of school  uniform  may be made  available  for sale so long 
as the items— 
(a) comply  with  the school’s  current  uniform  requirements; 
(b) are in an acceptable  condition;  and 39 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(c) can be purchased  for significantly  less than  the cost of buying  the same 
item  new. 
(3) The appropriate  authority  must  make  information  on the purchase  of 
second-hand  items  of school  uniform  easily  available  on the school’s  website. 
(4) In this section— 
”the  appropriate  authority”  means— 
(a) in relation  to an Academy  school,  an alternative  provision  Academy  or 
a non-maintained  special  school,  the proprietor; 
(b) in relation  to a maintained  school,  the governing  body; 
(c) in relation  to a pupil  referral  unit,  the local  authority; 
“relevant  school”  means  a school  in England  which  is— 
(a) an Academy  school; 
(b) an alternative  provision  Academy; 
(c) a maintained  school  within  the meaning  of section  437(8)  of the 
Education  Act 1996; 
(d) a non-maintained  special  school  within  the meaning  of section  337(A) 
of the Education  Act 1996; 
(e) a pupil  referral  unit not established  in a hospital. 
    “school  uniform”  means  any bag or clothing  required  for school  or for any 
lesson,  club,  activity  or event  facilitated  by the school. 
”second-hand  items”  means  items  of school  uniform  which  have  previously 
been  owned  by another  pupil,  subject  to subsection  (2).” 
_NC58 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Right  to review  school  curriculum  material 
Where  requested  by the parent  or carer  of a child  on the school’s  pupil  roll, a 
school  must  allow  such persons  to view  all materials  used  in the teaching  of 
the school  curriculum,  including  those  provided  by external,  third-party, 
charitable  or commercial  providers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  ensure  that parents  can view  materials  used  in the teaching  of the school 
curriculum. 
_NC59 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 40 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Kinship  care leave 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulations,  entitle  an individual  to be absent 
from  work  on care leave  under  this section  where— 
(a) the individual  is a kinship  carer,  and 
(b) the individual  satisfies  conditions  specified  in the regulations. 
(2) Regulations  made  under  subsection  (1) must  include  provision  for determining— 
(a) the extent  of an individual’s  entitlement  to leave  under  this section; 
and 
(b) when  leave  under  this section  may be taken. 
(3) Provision  under  subsection  (2)(a)  must  secure  that— 
(a) where  one individual  is entitled  to leave  under  this section,  they are 
entitled  to at least  52 weeks  of leave;  or 
(b) where  more  than  one individual  is entitled  to leave  under  this section 
in respect  of the same  child,  those  individuals  are entitled  to share  at 
least  52 weeks  of leave  between  them. 
(4) An employee  is entitled  to leave  under  this section  only if the eligible  kinship 
care arrangement  is intended  to last— 
(a) at least  one year,  and 
(b) until  the child  being  cared  for attains  the age of 18. 
(5) For the purposes  of this section,  a “kinship  carer”  has the meaning  given  in 
section  22I of the Children  Act 1989,  as inserted  by section  5 of this Act. 
(6) Regulations  made  under  this section  may make  provision  about  how leave 
under  this section  is to be taken. ” 
_NC60 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Kinship  care allowance 
(1) A person  is entitled  to a kinship  care allowance  for any week  in which  that 
person  is engaged  as a kinship  carer  in England. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  a “kinship  carer”  has the meaning  given  in 
section  22I of the Children  Act 1989,  as inserted  by section  5 of this Act. 
(3) A person  is not entitled  to an allowance  under  this section  unless  that person 
satisfies  conditions  prescribed  in regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State. 
(4) A person  may claim  an allowance  under  this section  in respect  of more  than 
one child. 41 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(5) Where  two or more  persons  would  be entitled  for the same  week  to such an 
allowance  in respect  of the same  child,  only one allowance  may be claimed  on 
the behalf  of— 
(a) the person  jointly  elected  by those  two for that purpose,  or 
(b) in default  of such an election,  the person  determined  by, and at the 
discretion  of, the Secretary  of State. 
(6) Regulations  may prescribe  the circumstances  in which  a person  is or is not to 
be treated  for the purposes  of this section  as engaged,  or regularly  and 
substantially  engaged,  in caring  for a child  under  an eligible  kinship  care 
arrangement. 
(7) An allowance  under  this section  is payable  at the weekly  rate specified  by the 
Secretary  of State  in regulations. 
(8) Regulations  under  subsection  (7) may specify— 
(a) different  weekly  rates  for different  ages  of children  being  cared  for, or 
(b) different  weekly  rates  for different  regions  of England. 
(9) Regulations  under  subsection  (7) must  specify  a weekly  rate that is no lower 
than  the minimum  weekly  allowance  for foster  carers  published  by the Secretary 
of State  pursuant  to section  23 of the Care  Standards  Act 2000. ” 
_NC61 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Extension  of pupil  premium  to children  subject  to a kinship  care arrangement 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  for the financial  year beginning  1 April  2026  and 
for each  year thereafter,  provide  that an amount  is payable  from  the pupil 
premium  grant  to schools  and local  authorities  in respect  of each  registered 
pupil  in England  who is who is a child  living  in kinship  care. 
(2) The amount  payable  under  subsection  (1) must  be equal  to the amount  that 
is payable  for a pupil  who is a looked  after  child. 
(3) In this section— 
“a child  living  in kinship  care”  is to be interpreted  in the same  manner  as 
given  in section  22I of the Children  Act 1989,  as inserted  by section  5 
of this Act. 
“looked  after  child”  has the same  meaning  as in the Children  Act 1989; 
“pupil  premium  grant”  means  the grant  of that name  paid to a school  or 
a local  authority  by the Secretary  of State  under  section  14 of the 
Education  Act 2002  (power  of Secretary  of State  and Senedd  Cymru  to 
give financial  assistance  for purposes  related  to education  or children 
etc).” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 42 
_NC62 Munira  Wilson 
Ian Sollom 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Admissions  arrangements  relating  to looked  after  children  and children  in 
kinship  care 
(1) For section  88B of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998  (admission 
arrangements  relating  to children  looked  after  by local  authority)  substitute— 
“88B Admissions  arrangements  relating  to looked  after  children  and children 
in kinship  care 
(1) Regulations  may require  the admission  authorities  for maintained 
schools  in England  to include  in their  admission  arrangements  provision 
relating  to the admission  of children  who are— 
(a) looked  after  by a local  authority  in England,  or 
(b) living  in kinship  care as may be prescribed. 
(2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) may in particular  include  provision  for 
securing  that,  subject  to sections  86(3),  86B(2)  and (4) and 87, such 
children  are to be offered  admission  in preference  to other  children. 
(3) In this section,  “children  who are living  in kinship  care”  is to be 
interpreted  in the same  manner  as given  in section  22I of the Children 
Act 1989,  as inserted  by section  5 of this Act.”” 
_NC63 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Exemption  from  education  legislation  for the purpose  of raising  educational 
standards 
(1) On the application  of one or more  qualifying  bodies  (“the  applicant”),  the 
Secretary  of State  may by order  make  provision— 
(a) conferring  on the applicant  exemption  from  any requirement  imposed 
by education  legislation; 
(b) relaxing  any such requirement  in its application  to the applicant; 
(c) enabling  the applicant  to exercise  any function  conferred  by education 
legislation  on any other  qualifying  body  (either  concurrently  with  or in 
place  of that other  body);  or 
(d) making  such modifications  of any provision  of education  legislation,  in 
its application  to the applicant  or any other  qualifying  body,  as are in 
the opinion  of the Secretary  of State  consequential  on any provision 
made  by virtue  of any of paragraphs  (a) to (c), 43 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
for the purposes  of facilitating  the implementation  of innovative  projects  that 
may,  in the opinion  of the Secretary  of State,  contribute  to the raising  of 
educational  standards  in England. 
(2) In forming  an opinion  as to whether  a project  may contribute  to the raising 
of educational  standards  in England,  the Secretary  of State  shall— 
(a) have  regard  to the need  for the curriculum  for any school  in England 
affected  by the project  to be a balanced  and broadly  based  curriculum 
which  promotes  the spiritual,  moral,  cultural,  mental  and physical 
development  of children, 
(b) consider  the likely  effect  of the project  on all the pupils  who may be 
affected  by it. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  shall refuse  an application  for an order  under  this section 
if it appears  to the Secretary  of State  that the proposed  order  would  be likely 
to have  a detrimental  effect  on the education  of children  with  special 
educational  needs. 
(4) An order  under  this section  shall  have  effect  during  a period  specified  in the 
order  which  must  not exceed  three  years. 
(5) Before  making  an order  under  this section,  the Secretary  of State  shall,  if they 
consider  it appropriate  to do so, consult  the Chief  Inspector. 
(6) Where  the applicant  is or includes  a qualifying  foundation,  references  in 
paragraphs  (a) to (d) of subsection  (1) to the applicant  (so far as they would 
otherwise  be read  as references  to the qualifying  foundation)  are to be read 
as references  to the governing  bodies  of all or any of the foundation  or 
foundation  special  schools  in respect  of which  the applicant  is the foundation. 
(7) For the purposes  of this section— 
“the  Chief  Inspector”  means  His Majesty's  Chief  Inspector  of Education, 
Children's  Services  and Skills; 
”children”    means  persons  under  the age of nineteen; 
“education  legislation”  means— 
(a) the Education  Acts (as defined  by section  578 of the Education  Act 
1996), 
(b) the Learning  and Skills  Act 2000,  and 
(c) any subordinate  legislation  made  under  any of those  Acts; 
“maintained  school”  means— 
(a) a community,  foundation  or voluntary  school, 
(b) a community  or foundation  special  school,  or 
(c) a maintained  nursery  school; 
“qualifying  body”  means— 
(a) a local  authority, 
(b) an Education  Action  Forum, 
(c) a qualifying  foundation, 
(d) the governing  body  of a maintained  school, COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 44 
(e) the head  teacher  of a maintained  school, 
(f) the proprietor  of an Academy,  a city technology  college  or a city college 
for the technology  of the arts, 
(g) the proprietor  of any special  school  that is not maintained  by a local 
authority  but is for the time  being  approved  by the Secretary  of State 
under  section  342 of the Education  Act 1996,  or 
(h) the governing  body  of an institution  within  the further  education  sector; 
“qualifying  foundation”  means  the foundation,  as defined  by subsection  (3)(a) 
of section  21 of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998,  of any 
foundation  or foundation  special  school  that for the purposes  of that section 
has a foundation  established  otherwise  than  under  that Act; 
“subordinate  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the Interpretation  Act 
1978. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  enable  the Secretary  of State  to exempt  certain  bodies  from  certain 
requirements  of existing  education  legislation  for the purpose  of implementing  projects  which  may 
raise  educational  standards  in England 
_NC64 Neil O'Brien 
Patrick  Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Pay and conditions  of school  support  staff  in England 
(1) A School  Support  Staff  Negotiating  Body  shall  be created  to make 
recommendations  to the Secretary  of State  about  the pay and conditions  of 
school  support  staff  in England. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may by order  set out the recommended  pay and 
conditions  for school  support  staff  in England  based  on the recommendations 
of the School  Support  Staff  Negotiating  Body. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may by order  make  provision  requiring  the remuneration 
of support  staff  at an Academy  school  to be at least  equal  to the amount 
specified  in, or determined  in accordance  with,  the order. 
(4) Subsection  (5) applies  where— 
(a) an order  under  this section  applies  to a member  of school  support  staff 
at an Academy,  and 
(b) the contract  of employment  or for services  between  the member  of 
school  support  staff at the Academy  and the relevant  proprietor  provides 
for the member  of school  support  staff  to be paid remuneration  that 
is less than  the amount  specified  in, or determined  in accordance  with, 
the order. 
(5) Where  this subsection  applies— 45 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
the member  of school  support  staff’s  remuneration  is to be determined 
and paid in accordance  with  any provision  of the order  that applies  to 
them;  and (a) 
(b) any provision  of the contract  mentioned  in subsection  (4)(b)  or of the 
Academy  arrangements  entered  into with  the Secretary  of State  by the 
relevant  proprietor  has no effect  to the extent  that it makes  provision 
that is prohibited  by, or is otherwise  inconsistent  with,  the order. 
(c) In determining  the conditions  of employment  or service  of a member 
of school  support  staff  at an Academy,  the relevant  proprietor  must 
have  regard  to any provision  of an order  under  this section  that relates 
to conditions  of employment  or service. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  mean  that Academies  could  treat  orders  made  by the Secretary  of State  in 
relation  to pay and conditions  for school  support  staff  as a floor,  not a ceiling,  on pay, and would 
allow  Academies  to have  regard  to the conditions  of employment  for school  support  staff  set out 
by the Secretary  of State  while  not requiring  Academies  to follow  them. 
_NC65 Munira  Wilson 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Flexibility  to take into account  local  circumstances  when  following  the National 
Curriculum 
In section  87 of the Education  Act 2002  (establishment  of the National 
Curriculum  for England  by order),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) In any revision  to the National  Curriculum  for England,  the Secretary 
of State  must  ensure  that the National  Curriculum  shall  consist  of— 
(a) a core framework;  and 
(b) subjects  or areas  of learning  outside  the core framework  that 
allow  flexibility  for each  school  to take account  of their  specific 
circumstances.” ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  clarify  that,  when  revised,  the National  Curriculum  for England  will provide 
a core framework  as well as flexibility  for schools  to take account  of their  own specific  circumstances. 
_NC66 Munira  Wilson 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Parliamentary  approval  of revisions  of the National  Curriculum 
In section  87 of the Education  Act 2002  (establishment  of the National 
Curriculum  for England  by order),  after  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) An order  made  under  this section  revising  the National  Curriculum  for 
England  shall  be subject  to the affirmative  procedure.” ” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 46 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  make  revisions  to the National  Curriculum  subject  to parliamentary  approval 
by the affirmative  procedure. 
_Gov_NS1 Catherine  McKinnell 
. To move  the following  Schedule— 
Section  (Pay and conditions  of Academy 
teachers ) “SCHEDULE 
PAY AND CONDITIONS OF ACADEMY TEACHERS: AMENDMENTS TO THE EDUCATION ACT 2002 
1 Part 8 of the Education  Act 2002  (teachers’  pay and conditions  etc) is 
amended  as follows. 
2 In section  120(2) (School  Teachers’  Review  Body  function:  meaning  of school 
teacher),  for the words  from  “the  Secretary  of State’s”  to the end substitute 
“section  122 or an Academy  teacher  for the purposes  of section  122A .” 
3 In section  121(2) (bodies  to be consulted  by School  Teachers’  Review  Body), 
after  paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(ba) bodies  representing  the interests  of proprietors  of 
Academies, ”. 
4 In the heading  of section  122, after  “conditions”  insert  “of school  teachers 
other  than  Academy  teachers”. 
5 After  section  122 insert— 
“122A Power  to set minimum  remuneration  of Academy  teachers  etc 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may by order  make  provision  requiring  the 
remuneration  of an Academy  teacher  to be at least  equal  to the 
amount  specified  in, or determined  in accordance  with,  the order. 
(2) Subsection  (3) applies  where— 
(a) an order  under  this section  applies  to an Academy  teacher, 
and 
(b) the contract  of employment  or for services  between  the 
Academy  teacher  and the relevant  proprietor  provides  for the 
teacher  to be paid remuneration  that is less than  the amount 
specified  in, or determined  in accordance  with,  the order. 
(3) Where  this subsection  applies— 
(a) the Academy  teacher’s  remuneration  is to be determined  and 
paid in accordance  with any provision  of the order  that applies 
to the teacher; 
(b) any provision  of the contract  mentioned  in subsection  (2)(b) 
or of the Academy  arrangements  entered  into with  the 
Secretary  of State  by the relevant  proprietor  has no effect  to 47 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
the extent  that it makes  provision  that is prohibited  by, or is 
otherwise  inconsistent  with,  the order. 
(4) A person  is an Academy  teacher  for the purposes  of this section  in 
any of the following  cases. 
(5) The first case is where— 
(a) the person  provides  primary  or secondary  education  under  a 
contract  of employment  or for services, 
(b) the other  party  to the contract  is the proprietor  of an 
Academy, 
(c) the contract  requires  the person  to carry  out work  of a kind 
which  is specified  by regulations  under  section  133(1),  and 
(d) the person— 
(i) is not prevented  by regulations  under  section  133(1) 
from  carrying  out that work,  and 
(ii) is not of a description  specified  in regulations  made  by 
the Secretary  of State  for the purposes  of this 
paragraph. 
(6) The second  case is where  the person— 
(a) serves  as the principal  of an Academy,  and 
(b) is not appointed  by the proprietor  of the Academy  as an 
executive  leader  of the proprietor. 
(7) The third  case is where  the person  would  fall within  section  122(5) 
but for the fact that the other  party  to the contract  of employment 
or for services  under  which  the person  provides  primary  or secondary 
education  is the proprietor  of an Academy  (and not a party  mentioned 
in section  122(3)(c)). 
(8) Regulations  under  subsection  (5)(d) may,  in particular,  specify  a 
description  by reference  to a person’s  duties  or to any provision  for 
a person’s  remuneration  to be determined  otherwise  than  under  this 
section. 
(9) Where  the proprietor  of an Academy  is also the proprietor  of a 16 
to 19 Academy,  a person  (“P”)  is not an Academy  teacher  for the 
purposes  of this section  to the extent  that a contract  of employment 
or for services  between  P and the proprietor  requires  P to provide 
secondary  education  at the 16 to 19 Academy. 
(10) In the application  of subsections  (2) and (3)— 
(a) it is immaterial  whether  someone  other  than  the relevant 
proprietor  provides  or is responsible  for providing  all or part 
of a teacher’s  remuneration; 
(b) it is immaterial  whether  someone  other  than  the relevant 
proprietor  is treated  wholly  or partly  as a teacher’s  employer 
for some  or all purposes  by virtue  of an enactment. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 48 
(11) In this section  “the  relevant  proprietor”,  in relation  to an Academy 
teacher,  means  the proprietor  mentioned  in subsection  (5)(b), (6)(b) 
or (7) (as the case may be).” 
6 In section  122A  (inserted  by paragraph  5), after  subsection  (10) insert— 
“(10A) In determining  the conditions  of employment  or service  of an 
Academy  teacher,  the relevant  proprietor  must  have  regard  to any 
provision  of an order  under  section  122 that relates  to conditions  of 
employment  or service  (and  must  also have  regard  to guidance  under 
section  127(1)  that relates  to such conditions). ” 
7 In section  123 (scope  of section  122 orders)— 
(a) in the heading,  after  “122”  insert  “or 122A ”; 
(b) after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) Subsection  (1) applies  in relation  to an order  under  section 
122A  as it does  in relation  to an order  under  section  122 but 
as if— 
(a) the reference  in paragraph  (a) to a local  authority  or 
a governing  body  were  to a proprietor  of an Academy, 
and 
(b) paragraphs  (f) to (h) were  omitted. ”; 
(c) in subsection  (2)(b), after  “local  authorities”  insert  “, teachers  and 
proprietors  of Academies”; 
(d) in subsection  (3), after  “122”  insert  “or 122A ”; 
(e) in subsection  (4), after  paragraph  (c) insert— 
“(d) that a payment  or entitlement  of a specified  kind is or 
is not to be treated  as remuneration  for the purpose 
of section  122A (1).” 
8 In section  124 (supplementary  provision),  after  “122”,  in each  place  it occurs 
(including  the heading),  insert  “or 122A ”. 
9 In section  125(1) (requirement  to refer  matter  before  making  order),  after 
“122”  insert  “or 122A ”. 
10 In section  126 (bodies  to be consulted  by the Secretary  of State)— 
(a) after  “122”  insert  “, 122A ”; 
(b) after  paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(ba) bodies  representing  the interests  of proprietors  of 
Academies, ”. 
11 In section  127 (guidance  issued  by the Secretary  of State)— 
(a) after  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(2A) The Secretary  of State  may issue  guidance  about  the 
determination  of whether,  for the purposes  of section  122A , 
a person’s  remuneration  is at least  equal  to the amount 
specified  in, or determined  in accordance  with,  an order  under 
that section. 49 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(2B) The proprietor  of an Academy  must  have  regard  to guidance 
under  subsection  (2A). ”; 
(b) in subsection  (3), after  “(1)”  insert  “or (2A)”; 
(c) in subsection  (4)— 
(i) after  “(1)”  insert  “or (2A)”; 
(ii) after  paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(ba) bodies  representing  the interests  of proprietors 
of Academies, ”. 
12 After  section  127 insert— 
“127A References  to “Academy”  and “Academy  arrangements” 
(1) In sections  121 to 127, a reference  to an Academy— 
(a) includes  a reference  to a city technology  college  and a city 
college  for the technology  of the arts, and 
(b) does  not include  a reference  to a 16 to 19 Academy. 
(2) A reference  in any of those  sections  to Academy  arrangements 
includes  a reference  to an agreement  under  section  482 of the 
Education  Act 1996  (city colleges). ” 
13 In section  210(6) (orders  not subject  to Parliamentary  procedure),  after  “122” 
insert  “or 122A ”.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This Schedule  provides  for an Academy  teacher’s  pay to be determined  under  their  contract  of 
employment  unless  the pay would  be less than  the minimum  set under  the Education  Act 2002  (as 
amended  by this Schedule).  It also requires  proprietors  of Academies  to have  regard  to conditions 
of employment  set under  that Act for teachers  at maintained  schools. 
Order  of the House 
[8 January  2025] 
That  the following  provisions  shall  apply  to the Children’s  Wellbeing  and Schools  Bill: 
Committal 
1. The Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  in Public  Bill Committee 
2. Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded) 
be brought  to a conclusion  on Tuesday  11 February. 
3. The Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it 
meets. 
Consideration  and Third  Reading COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 50 
4. Proceedings  on Consideration  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which 
those  proceedings  are commenced. 
5. Proceedings  on Third  Reading  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day. 
6. Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings 
on Consideration  and Third  Reading. 
Other  proceedings 
7. Any other  proceedings  on the Bill may be programmed. 
Order  of the Committee 
[Tuesday  21 January  2025] 
That— 
1. the Committee  shall  (in addition  to its first meeting  at 9.25 am on Tuesday  21 
January)  meet— 
(a) at 2.00 pm on Tuesday  21 January; 
(b) at 11.30  am and 2.00 pm on Thursday  23 January; 
(c) at 9.25 am and 2.00 pm on Tuesday  28 January; 
(d) at 11.30  am and 2.00 pm on Thursday  30 January; 
(e) at 9.25 am and 2.00 pm on Tuesday  4 February; 
(f) at 11.30  am and 2.00 pm on Thursday  6 February; 
(g) at 9.25 am and 2.00 pm on Tuesday  11 February; 
2. the Committee  shall  hear  oral evidence  in accordance  with  the following  Table: 
Witness Time Date 
Coram;  Centre  for Young  Lives Until  no later  than 
10.00  am Tuesday  21 January 
Association  of Directors  of 
Children’s  Services;  Local 
Government  Association Until  no later  than 
10.30am Tuesday  21 January 
Association  of School  and 
College  Leaders;  National 
Association  of Head  Teachers Until  no later  than 
11.00am Tuesday  21 January 51 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Witness Time Date 
Cafcass Until  no later  than 
11.25am Tuesday  21 January 
The Children’s  Commissioner  for 
England Until  no later  than 
2.20pm Tuesday  21 January 
Ofsted Until  no later  than 
2.40pm Tuesday  21 January 
The Children’s  Society;  Children's 
Charities  Coalition;  Become Until  no later  than 
3.15pm Tuesday  21 January 
Church  of England;  Catholic 
Education  Service Until  no later  than 
3.45pm Tuesday  21 January 
United  Learning;  Harris 
Federation;  Dixons  Academies 
Trust Until  no later  than 
4.20pm Tuesday  21 January 
Suffolk  Primary  Headteachers’ 
Association;  Northern  Education Until  no later  than 
4.55pm Tuesday  21 January 
Trust;  Confederation  of School 
Trusts 
Axiom  Maths Until  no later  than 
5.10pm Tuesday  21 January 
Child  Poverty  Action  Group Until  no later  than 
5.25pm Tuesday  21 January 
Department  for Education Until  no later  than 
5.45pm Tuesday  21 January 
3. proceedings  on consideration  of the Bill in Committee  shall  be taken  in the 
following  order:  Clauses  1 to 29; Schedule  1; Clauses  30 to 54; Schedule  2; Clauses 
55 to 60; new Clauses;  new Schedules;  remaining  proceedings  on the Bill; 
4. the proceedings  shall (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought  to a conclusion 
at 5.00 pm on Tuesday  11 February. 
Withdrawn  Amendments 
The following  amendments  were  withdrawn  on 20 January  2025: 
NC4 
The following  amendments  were  withdrawn  on 24 January  2025: 
50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 and NC43 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 52 
The following  amendments  were  withdrawn  on 29 January  2025: 
NC16,  NC26,  NC27,  NC28  and NC29 
The following  amendments  were  withdrawn  on 30 January  2025: 
NC41 53 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025



MAR-MAR-002- Bags of Taste et al  
 
House of Commons  
City of London (Markets) Bill  
 
1. Petitioner information  
In the box below, give the name and address of each individual, business or organisation 
submitting the petition.  Please note that names and addresses listed here will be provided to 
the Bill’s promoter, but will be redacted in the version of the petition published on the 
Parliament website.  
 
Bags of Taste Limited, London  
Makhdoom Foods Limited,  London  
PM Prime Fish, London  
L&A Fishmonger, London  
Amjad Choudry, Leyton  
Zafar Iqubal, London  
Alicia Weston, London  
Fi Glover, London  
Christine Jackson, London  
Anamaria Rusu , London  
Bogdan Rusu , London  
Trevor Daniel, London  
Cameron M artin, London  
Doria Gonzalez , London  
Sandra Lousa da London  
Kathleen Kelliher , London  
Philip Irvine , London  
Letticia Irvine, London  
Sam McMullen, London  
Tamara Tracz, London  
Maxine Cupitt, London  
Susanna Davies -Crook, London  
MAR-MAR-002- Bags of Taste et al  
 
Julia Jackson , London  
Tamara Stoll , London  
Martin Phipps , London  
Sophie Gardiner , London  
Mariarosa Frasca, London  
 
In the box below, give a description of the petitioners. For example, “ We are the 
owners/tenants of the addresses above”; “ My company has offices at the address above”; 
“Our organisation represents the interests of…”; “ We are the parish council of…”.  
 
Bags of Taste is an organisation that supports people living in food poverty.  Many of 
the people it supports shop in clearing  markets across London.   These markets allow 
them to access low cost fresh produce , including fish , that is often towards end of life – 
which means that they can buy it cheaply and the food does not go to waste.  
Makhdoom Foods, PM Prime Fish and L&A Fishmonger are fishmongers who primarily 
source the fish they sell from Billingsgate market  
The remaining petitioners  are local residents who shop in the local clearing market, 
Ridley Road, that is will be detrimentally affected. Much of the fish sold in the market is 
sourced in Billingsgate.  
 
 
  
MAR-MAR-002- Bags of Taste et al  
 
2. Objections to the Bill  
In the box below, write your objections to the Bill and why your property or other interests are  
directly and specially affected . Please number each paragraph.  
Only objections outlined in this petition can be presented when giving evidence to the 
Committee. You will not be entitled to be heard by the Committee on new matters  not 
included in your written petition . 
 
 
1.  The current proposed closure of Billingsgate Market, with no replacement, is 
premature and we believe that it should not be permitted until a suitable 
replacement is certain.  Our petition is on behalf of market traders from Ridley 
Road Market in Hackney, London, whose business relies on  fish sourced from  
Billingsgate market and who would close without it; and local residents who use 
the local market and would also be affected.  
2. We are concerned that the information on this closure with no replacement has 
not been well disseminated and as such we believe that the number of 
objections may be lower than they would otherwise be. Only 1 of the 6 
fishmongers that I spoke to on Ridley Road knew that the replacement market in 
Dagenham had been cancelled; they all believed that the market was moving to 
Dagenham  and they would be fine.    
3. In addition, the small, minority run businesses that are typical of these small 
fishmongers have limited language skills and on their own, may feel both 
disempowered and incapable of engaging with Parliament in such a formal 
manner.  As some put it “oh my God, what will we do?  We can do nothing” and 
“these big people already made the decision”  
4. On speaking to 6 local fish sellers, one is part of a larger organisation that is 
intimately linked with Billingsgate; 2 source from wholesalers direct  or primarily 
sell frozen fish  and believe they would be OK.  However, 3 traders (notably, the 
smallest), source their fish from Billingsgate where they visit 3x a week.   
5. The 3 listed petitioner businesses say that they would close if there was no 
central fish market that they could access.  They employ staff (2 -3 each) and 
everyone would be made redundant.  Specifically, they said that they cannot 
afford to buy a whole container of fish, in Billingsgate they can shop with several 
different distributors for smaller quantities , and compare prices to buy the best 
value fish that their customers demand .  If there was no central market they 
would need to “spend the whole day driving around London” to get the same fish 
from different suppliers, as they would not be willing to deliver such small 
quantities.   One business owner said that this is the only business he knows, 
and would end up on benefits as he didn’t have any other options.  
6. By forcing through this closure with no replacement there is an effective 
concentration of power in the hands of those businesses who are large enough 
to command good relationships with wholesalers, and disadvantage those 
smaller businesses who rely on a market to source produce.  
7. Fish is a product uniquely suited to a market situation.  Because fish goes off, 
and through varying stages of freshness, a market enables the fish to find a 
suitable market price and be sold before going to waste.  It is this low -priced fish 
that ends up in markets in low income areas like Ridley Road.   A well functioning 
market reduces costs for all involved, in any commodity, and is absolutely critical 
MAR-MAR-002- Bags of Taste et al  
 
for perishable items, particularly fish.  
8. People living in food poverty and on low incomes are often reliant on the low cost 
of local markets, particularly clearing markets like Ridley Road and others across 
London, to access cheap  and healthy  food.  Please remember that fish is one of 
the healthiest foods around.  
9. Particularly for ethnic minorities, fish is often a large part of their diet and so the 
impact is disproportionate on ethnic minorities, who are usually also on lower 
incomes.  
10. Local residents are concerned that there will not only be an impact on their ability 
to buy fish locally at a low price, but also that this will continue to undermine the 
once -thriving Ridley Road market, and similar ones across London.  This will 
therefore reduce access for the lowest income people to fresh and healthy food, 
not only fish but the wide range that is on sale.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MAR-MAR-002- Bags of Taste et al  
 
3. What do you want to be done in response?  
In the box below, tell us what you think should be done in response to your objections  to the 
Bill. You do not have to complete this box if you do not want to.  
You can include this information in your response to the previous section on ‘Objections to 
the Bill’ if you prefer. Please number each paragraph.  
 
1. Billingsgate Market is currently in an accessible site that is not so time 
consuming for traders to visit.  It is something that businesses around London 
have come to depend on, providing access to some of the healthiest food to be 
found in London. Ideally  it should remain in this accessible location.  
2. We believe that any legislation to allow the closure of the market should be 
delayed till a viable , accessible  and alternative site has been found.  It is 
premature to close the market at this time when the Dagenham proposal has 
fallen through and livelihoods hang in the balance.



Climate  and Nature  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duty  of the Secretary  of State:  climate  and nature  targets 
2 Duty  of the Secretary  of State:  climate  and nature  strategy 
3 Establishment  of Climate  and Nature  Assembly 
4 Duties  of the Committee  on Climate  Change  and the Joint  Nature  Conservation 
Committee 
5 Approval  by devolved  legislatures 
6 Acceptance  and implementation  of the strategy  and any revisions 
7 Financial  provisions 
8 Interpretation 
9 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 14 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the United  Kingdom  to achieve  climate  and nature  targets;  to give 
the Secretary  of State  a duty  to implement  a strategy  to achieve  those  targets; 
to establish  a Climate  and Nature  Assembly  to advise  the Secretary  of State 
in creating  that strategy;  to give  duties  to the Committee  on Climate  Change 
and the Joint  Nature  Conservation  Committee  regarding  the strategy  and 
targets;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  of the Secretary  of State:  climate  and nature  targets 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  achieve  the objectives  in subsection  (2) (“the 
objectives”). 
(2) The objectives  are to ensure  that the United  Kingdom— 
5 (a) reduces  its overall  contribution  to global  greenhouse  gas emissions  to 
net zero  at a rate consistent  with— 
(i) achieving  its Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC) 
emissions  reduction  targets,  submitted  in accordance  with  the 
10Paris  Agreement  under  the United  Nations  Framework 
Convention  on Climate  Change  (UNFCCC),  including  its 2030 
NDC,  its 2035  NDC,  and all future  NDCs;  and 
(ii) fulfilling  its obligations  and commitments  under  the UNFCCC 
and the Paris  Agreement,  taking  into account  the United 
15Kingdom’s  and other  countries’  common  but differentiated 
responsibilities,  and respective  capabilities,  considering  national 
circumstances 
(‘the  climate  target’);  and 
(b) halts  and reverses  its overall  contribution  to the degradation  and loss 
of nature  in the United  Kingdom,  overseas,  and in the oceans,  by— 
20 (i) increasing  the health,  abundance,  diversity,  and resilience  of 
species,  populations,  habitats,  and ecosystems,  as part of 
fulfilling  its obligations  under  the UN Convention  on Biological 1 
Diversity  and its protocols,  including  the Kunming-Montreal 
59/1 Bill 14 1 Climate  and Nature  Bill 
Global  Biodiversity  Framework,  and the commitments  set out 
in the Leaders’  Pledge  for Nature;  and 
(ii) following  the principle  of common  but differentiated 
responsibilities 
5 (‘the  nature  target’). 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  fulfil  the duty  in subsection  (1) by acting  on matters 
of devolved  legislative  competence,  subject  to section  5. 
2 Duty  of the Secretary  of State:  climate  and nature  strategy 
(1) 
10The Secretary  of State  must,  within  18 months  of the passing  of this Act, 
publish  and lay before  Parliament  a Climate  and Nature  Delivery  Strategy 
(‘the  strategy’)  to achieve  the objectives  specified  in section  1. 
(2) The strategy  must  include  annual  interim  targets  consistent  with  the 
achievement  of the objectives  and the Secretary  of State  must  take all 
reasonable  steps  to meet  those  annual  interim  targets. 
15 (3) The Secretary  of State  must  ensure  that,  as far as possible,  the actions  set out 
in the strategy  to achieve  the objectives  are complementary. 
(4) The strategy  must  require  the Secretary  of State,  relevant  Ministers  of the 
Crown  and relevant  public  bodies  to cooperate  with  each  other  in seeking  to 
achieve  the objectives. 
20 (5) The strategy  may  include  measures  in areas  of devolved  legislative 
competence,  subject  to section  5. 
(6) The strategy  must  include  measures  that,  subject  to sections  4 and 5, will 
achieve  the objectives  specified  in section  1, by— 
(a) 
25limiting  the United  Kingdom’s  total  emissions  of carbon  dioxide, 
including  territorial  emissions  and emissions  from  international  aviation 
and shipping,  to the emissions  levels  committed  to in its Nationally 
Determined  Contributions  made  under  the Paris  Agreement; 
(b) reducing  emissions  of carbon  dioxide  in respect  of imports  to the 
30United  Kingdom,  at the same  percentage  rate each  year  as the annual 
reduction  of the United  Kingdom’s  total  emissions  of carbon  dioxide 
required  by paragraph  (a) above; 
(c) reducing  the United  Kingdom’s  total  emissions  of greenhouse  gases 
other  than  carbon  dioxide  to a level  consistent  with  achieving  its 
35obligations  under  the Paris  Agreement  and under  the Global  Methane 
Pledge; 
(d) ensuring  the end of the exploration,  extraction,  export  and import  of 
fossil  fuels  by the United  Kingdom  as rapidly  as possible; 
(e) ensuring  that steps  taken  under  the strategy  to mitigate  emissions  in 
40the United  Kingdom  and overseas  minimise  damage  to ecosystems, 
food  and water  availability  and human  health  as far as possible; 
(f) enhancing  the management  of ecosystems  in the United  Kingdom, 
overseas,  and in the oceans  to protect  and enhance  biodiversity, 1 
ecological  processes,  and ecosystem  service  provision,  including  by Climate  and Nature  Bill 2 
supporting  local  communities,  landowners,  farmers,  and businesses 
to restore  and expand  natural  ecosystems; 
(g) ensuring  that all activities  in the United  Kingdom  which  affect  the 
5health,  abundance,  diversity  and resilience  of species,  populations  and 
ecosystems  prioritise  avoidance  of the loss of nature,  through  adherence 
to the Mitigation  and Conservation  Hierarchy; 
(h) taking  every  possible  step to avoid,  where  avoidance  is not possible, 
limit,  and where  limiting  is not possible,  restore,  or otherwise  offset, 
10the adverse  impacts  in the United  Kingdom  and overseas  on 
ecosystems  and human  health  of— 
(i) United  Kingdom-generated  production  and consumption  of 
goods  and services,  and 
(ii) all related  trade,  transport  and financing  including  impacts 
15from  the extraction  of raw materials,  deforestation,  land  and 
water  degradation,  pollution  and waste  production; 
(i) setting  out a process  for decision-making  in relation  to energy  projects 
with  a view  to achieving  the objectives,  including— 
(i) a presumption  in favour  of community  energy  projects  up to 
100MW  generation  capacity;  and 
20 (ii) a presumption  against  large  scale  energy  projects  over  100MW 
generation  capacity,  unless  it can be demonstrated  that local 
residents  have  been  consulted  on the project  and have 
expressed  support  for it. 
(7) 
25With  respect  to subsections  (6)(a),  (b) and (c), measures  in the strategy  must 
seek  to achieve  the objectives  by reducing  the United  Kingdom’s  gross 
greenhouse  gas emissions,  and those  in respect  of imports  to the United 
Kingdom,  as far and as rapidly  as possible. 
(8) The strategy  must— 
(a) 
30in the opinion  of the Secretary  of State,  be projected  to have  an overall 
positive  impact  on local  communities  with  a high  deprivation  rating 
according  to Government  deprivation  indices;  young  people;  people 
with  protected  characteristics  under  section  4 of the Equality  Act 2010; 
and on the wellbeing  of future  generations; 
(b) set out how  the requirements  under  subsection  (a) have  been  met;  and 
35 (c) include  financial  support  and retraining  for people  whose  livelihoods 
and jobs will be affected  by the proposed  measures—including  those 
measures  that require  transitioning  out of industries  characterised  by 
high  emissions  and high  impacts  on ecosystems. 
(9) In preparing  the strategy,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult— 
40 (a) the Committee  on Climate  Change, 
(b) the Joint  Nature  Conservation  Committee, 
(c) the Office  for Environmental  Protection, 
(d) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 3 Climate  and Nature  Bill 
3 Establishment  of Climate  and Nature  Assembly 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, 
procure,  by open  tender,  an expert  independent  body  to establish  a Climate 
5and Nature  Assembly  (‘the  Assembly’)  comprising  a representative  sample 
of the United  Kingdom  population. 
(2) The body  appointed  pursuant  to subsection  (1) must  secure  the establishment 
of the Assembly  within  six months  of appointment. 
(3) The Assembly  must— 
(a) 
10consider  advice  from  experts  who  appear  to the independent  body  to 
be representative  of the scientific  community,  and 
(b) publish  its recommendations  for measures  to be included  in the 
strategy. 
(4) Working  together,  the Committee  on Climate  Change  (CCC)  and the Joint 
Nature  Conservation  Committee  (JNCC)  must— 
15 (a) review  the Assembly’s  recommendations  under  subsection  (3) and 
relevant  expert  advice;  and 
(b) publish  a joint  proposal  for measures  to be included  in the strategy, 
including  all recommendations  by the Assembly  that have  the support 
20of 66% or more  of its members  unless,  in the opinion  of either  the 
CCC  or the JNCC,  there  are exceptional  and compelling  reasons,  which 
must  be stated,  not to implement  those  recommendations. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  include  in the strategy  all recommendations  by 
the Assembly  that have  the support  of 66% or more  of its members,  where 
those  recommendations  are also jointly  proposed  by the CCC  and the JNCC. 
25 (6) Subsection  (5) does  not apply  where,  in the opinion  of the Secretary  of State, 
there  are exceptional  and compelling  reasons,  which  must  be stated  in the 
strategy,  not to implement  those  recommendations. 
4 Duties  of the Committee  on Climate  Change  and the Joint  Nature 
Conservation  Committee 
30 (1) The Committee  on Climate  Change  and the Joint  Nature  Conservation 
Committee  must  jointly— 
(a) evaluate,  monitor  and report  annually  to Parliament  on the 
implementation  of the strategy  and on the achievement  of the interim 
targets; 
35 (b) undertake  the duties  referred  to in sections  3 and 6. 
(2) In fulfilling  the duty  under  subsection  (1), the CCC  and JNCC  must  consult 
and work  with— 
(a) the Office  for Environmental  Protection,  and 
(b) any other  public  body  which  appears  to them  to be relevant. 
40 (3) The Committee  on Climate  Change  must  recommend  annual  emissions  budgets 
for each  greenhouse  gas for the United  Kingdom,  Scotland,  Wales,  and 
Northern  Ireland  with  a view  to the requirements  of section  2 being  met. Climate  and Nature  Bill 4 
5 Approval  by devolved  legislatures 
(1) The targets  in section  1 apply  to matters  of devolved  legislative  competence 
if the condition  in subsection  (2) is met. 
(2) That  condition  is— 
5 (a) in relation  to Scotland,  that the Scottish  Parliament  has passed  a motion 
of the form  “That  this Parliament  agrees  to the climate  and nature 
targets  in section  1 of the Climate  and Nature  Act 2025”; 
(b) in relation  to Wales,  that Senedd  Cymru  has passed  a motion  of the 
10form  “That  the Senedd  agrees  to the climate  and nature  targets  in 
section  1 of the Climate  and Nature  Act 2025”; 
(c) in relation  to Northern  Ireland,  that the Northern  Ireland  Assembly 
has passed  a motion  of the form  “That  this Assembly  agrees  to the 
climate  and nature  targets  in section  1 of the Climate  and Nature  Act 
2025”. 
15 (3) The strategy  under  subsection  (2) may  include  measures  in areas  of devolved 
legislative  competence  if the condition  in subsection  (4) is met. 
(4) That  condition  is— 
(a) in relation  to matters  within  the legislative  competence  of the Scottish 
20Parliament,  that the Scottish  Parliament  has passed  a motion  of the 
form  “That  this Parliament  agrees  to the measures  in the Climate  and 
Nature  Delivery  Strategy”; 
(b) in relation  to matters  within  the legislative  competence  of Senedd 
Cymru,  that Senedd  Cymru  has passed  a motion  of the form  “That 
25this Senedd  agrees  to the measures  in the Climate  and Nature  Delivery 
Strategy”;  and 
(c) in relation  to matters  within  the legislative  competence  of the Northern 
Ireland  Assembly,  that the Assembly  has passed  a motion  of the form 
“That  this Assembly  agrees  to the measures  in the Climate  and Nature 
Delivery  Strategy”. 
30 6 Acceptance  and implementation  of the strategy  and any revisions 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  lay the strategy  before  the House  of Commons. 
(2) A Minister  of the Crown  must  move  a motion  for resolution  of the House  of 
Commons  of the form  in subsection  (3). 
(3) 
35The form  of the motion  is “That  this House  approves  the Climate  and Nature 
Strategy,  laid before  this House  on [date].” 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  implement  the strategy,  including— 
(a) any amendments  made  to the strategy  in accordance  with  the 
resolution  of the House  of Commons  under  subsection  (2); 
(b) any revisions  made  under  subsection  (8). 
40 (5) The Secretary  of State  must  report  annually  to Parliament  on the 
implementation  of the strategy  or any revisions  thereto;  and on progress 
towards  achieving  the objectives  and interim  targets  under  sections  1 and 2. 5 Climate  and Nature  Bill 
(6) A report  under  subsection  (5) must  use metrics  that cover  a range  of 
biodiversity  measures,  including— 
(a) ecosystem  integrity  and functioning, 
(b) species  richness  and abundance, 
5 (c) genetic  diversity,  and 
(d) such  other  metrics  as appear  to the Secretary  of State  to be necessary. 
(7) A report  under  subsection  (5) must  include,  in the opinion  of the Committee 
on Climate  Change,  the Joint  Nature  Conservation  Committee,  and the Office 
10for Environmental  Protection,  whether  the Secretary  of State  is likely  to achieve 
the objectives. 
(8) If, after  one year  following  its publication,  and at annual  intervals  thereafter, 
in the opinion  of the Secretary  of State,  the CCC,  the JNCC,  or the OEP,  based 
on up-to-date  scientific  evidence,  or of the House  of Commons  expressed  by 
15resolution,  the measures  in the strategy  or the interim  targets  are unlikely  to 
achieve  the objectives,  the Secretary  of State  must  revise  the strategy,  or make 
a statement  to the House  of Commons  explaining  why  a revision  is not 
necessary. 
(9) Whenever  the strategy  is revised  under  subsection  (8), the provisions  of 
subsections  (4) and (5) apply. 
20 7 Financial  provisions 
There  is to be paid out of money  provided  by Parliament— 
(a) any expenditure  incurred  under  or by virtue  of this Act, including  for the 
implementation  of the strategy;  and 
(b) 
25any increase  attributable  to this Act in the sums  payable  under  any other 
Act out of money  so provided. 
8 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
“nature”  includes  (a) the abundance,  diversity  and distribution  of animal, 
30plant,  fungal  and microbial  life; (b) the extent  and condition  of habitats; 
and (c) the health  and integrity  of ecosystems; 
“greenhouse  gas”  has the same  meaning  as in section  92 of the Climate 
Change  Act 2008; 
“Nationally  Determined  Contribution”  means  the United  Kingdom’s 
35Nationally  Determined  Contributions,  submitted  in accordance  with 
the Paris  Agreement  under  the UN Convention  on Climate  Change, 
which  outline  the United  Kingdom’s  commitments  to reducing 
greenhouse  gas emissions  and addressing  climate  change; 
“the Paris  Agreement”  means  the agreement  within  the United  Nations 
40Framework  Convention  on Climate  Change  adopted  on 12 December 
2015; 
“UN  Framework  Convention  on Climate  Change”  means  the United 1 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on Climate  Change  which  entered Climate  and Nature  Bill 6 
into force  on 21 March  1994,  and all subsequent  agreements  and 
protocols  arising  from  it; 
“common  but differentiated  responsibilities”  refers  to a principle  of 
5international  environmental  law, enshrined  in article  3(1) of the UN 
Framework  Convention  on Climate  Change  1992,  and article  2(2) of 
the Paris  Agreement,  and means  that developed  countries  acknowledge 
the responsibility  that they  bear  in the international  pursuit  of 
sustainable  development  in view  of the pressures  their  societies  place 
10on the global  environment  and of the technologies  and financial 
resources  they  command; 
“ecosystems”  includes  natural  and managed  ecosystems  and the air, soils, 
water  and abundance  and diversity  of organisms  of which  they  are 
composed,  and their  interactions; 
15“UN  Convention  on Biological  Diversity  and its protocols”  means  the 
United  Nations  Convention  on Biological  Diversity,  which  entered 
into force  on 29 December  1993,  and all subsequent  agreements  and 
protocols  arising  from  it; 
“the Kunming-Montreal  Global  Biodiversity  Framework”  means  the 
20framework  adopted  by the decision  of the Conference  of the Parties 
to the Convention  on Biological  Diversity  in Montreal  on 19 December 
2022; 
“the Leaders’  Pledge  for Nature”  means  the agreement  of the United 
Nations  Summit  on Biodiversity  of 28 September  2020; 
25“the United  Kingdom’s  total  emissions  of carbon  dioxide”  means  (a) all 
territorial  emissions  of carbon  dioxide  from  the United  Kingdom;  and 
(b) all emissions  of carbon  dioxide  generated  by the United  Kingdom’s 
share  of international  aviation  and shipping; 
“emissions  of carbon  dioxide  in respect  of imports  to the United 
30Kingdom”  means  emissions  of carbon  dioxide  generated  outside  the 
United  Kingdom  by the production  of goods  that are imported  to the 
United  Kingdom,  and by the provision  of services  overseas  that are 
received  in the United  Kingdom; 
“Global  Methane  Pledge”  means  the international  agreement  launched 
in Glasgow  at COP26  in November  2021; 
35 “fossil  fuels”  has the same  meaning  as in section  32M  of the Energy  Act 
2008; 
“the Mitigation  and Conservation  Hierarchy”  means  the hierarchy  adopted 
by resolution  58 of the World  Conservation  Congress  at the 
40International  Union  for Conservation  of Nature  from  1 to 10 September 
2016;  and 
“community  energy  projects”  means  community-led  renewable  energy, 
energy  demand  reduction-  and energy  supply-projects,  whether  wholly 
owned  or controlled  by communities,  or through  partnerships  with 
commercial  or public  sector  partners. 
45 9 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 7 Climate  and Nature  Bill 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Climate  and Nature  Act 2025. Climate  and Nature  Bill 8 
Climate  and Nature  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the United  Kingdom  to achieve  climate  and nature  targets;  to give the Secretary 
of State  a duty  to implement  a strategy  to achieve  those  targets;  to establish  a Climate 
and Nature  Assembly  to advise  the Secretary  of State  in creating  that strategy;  to give 
duties  to the Committee  on Climate  Change  and the Joint  Nature  Conservation 
Committee  regarding  the strategy  and targets;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Dr Roz Savage 
supported  by Alex  Sobel , Olivia  Blake , 
Dr Simon  Opher , Clive  Lewis , Nadia  Whittome , 
Sir Roger  Gale, Simon  Hoare , Pippa  Heylings , 
Carla  Denyer , Kirsty  Blackman  and Llinos  Medi . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 14



Report  Stage:  Wednesday  18 December  2024 
Commonwealth  Parliamentary  Association  and 
International  Committee  of the Red Cross 
(Status)  Bill [HL] 
(Report  Stage  Decisions) 
This document  sets out the fate of each  clause,  schedule,  amendment  and new clause  considered  at report 
stage. 
A glossary  with  key terms  can be found  at the end of this document. 
No amendments  on consideration. 
Bill, as amended,  read  the third  time  and passed. 
Glossary 
Not called:  debated  in a group  of amendments, 
but not put to a decision. Added:  New  Clause  agreed  without  a vote and 
added  to the Bill. 
Not moved:  not debated  or put to a decision. Agreed  to: agreed  without  a vote. 
Not selected:  not chosen  for debate  by the 
Speaker. Agreed  to on division:  agreed  following  a vote. 
Negatived:  rejected  without  a vote. 
Question  proposed:  debate  underway  but not 
concluded. Negatived  on division:  rejected  following  a 
vote. 
Withdrawn  after  debate:  moved  and debated 
but then  withdrawn,  so not put to a decision.



Complications  from  Abortions  (Annual  Report)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
9 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
BARONESS  THORNTON 
_ Baroness  Thornton  gives  notice  of her intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  1 stand  part 
of the Bill. 
59/1 HL Bill 16—Running  List 9 January 
Complications  from  Abortions  (Annual  Report)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
9 January  2025 
9 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 16—Running  List 9 January



Consumer  Products  (Control  of Biocides)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
24 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  3 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
_ Baroness  Anelay  of St Johns  gives  notice  of her intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  3 
stand  part of the Bill. 
After  Clause  3 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
★_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Membership  and functions  of the Biocidal  Consumer  Products  Advisory  Board 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  ensure  that the interests  of the following  groups  are 
represented  by members  of the Biocidal  Consumer  Products  Advisory  Board  (“the 
Board”)— 
(a) environmental  organisations, 
(b) academia, 
(c) industry  groups  and trade  associations,  including  the cosmetics  and 
chemicals  industries,  and 
(d) any other  such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  sees fit. 
(2) Before  appointing  a person  to be the chair  or another  member  of the Board,  the 
Secretary  of State  must  satisfy  themselves  that the appointee  will not have  any 
financial  or other  interest  which  would  be likely  prejudicially  to affect  the carrying 
out by the appointee  of any of their  functions  as chair  or member  of the Board. 
(3) Every  person  whom  the Secretary  of State  proposes  to appoint  to be the chair  or 
another  member  of the Board  must,  whenever  requested  to do so by the Secretary 
59/1 HL Bill 32—Running  List 24 January 
of State,  furnish  the Secretary  of State  with  any information  the Secretary  of State 
considers  necessary  for the performance  of their  duty  under  subsection  (2). 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may,  by regulations,  confer  duties  on the Board,  in addition 
to those  set out in section  3(2). 
(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  sets out more  detail  about  the membership  and functions  of the Biocidal  Consumer 
Products  Advisory  Board. 
Clause  4 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 40, leave  out subsections  (2) and (3) 
Clause  6 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
_ Clause  6, page  3, line 17, leave  out from  “sanitiser”  to end of line 18 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
_ Clause  6, page  3, line 20, leave  out “5” and insert  “4” Consumer  Products  (Control  of Biocides)  Bill [HL] 2 
Consumer  Products  (Control  of Biocides)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
24 January  2025 
24 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 32—Running  List 24 January



Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Home  Office  with the consent  of Alex  McIntyre, 
the Member  in charge of the Bill, are published  separately  as Bill 20—EN. 
59/1 Bill 20 
Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of the Misuse  of Drugs  Act 1971 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 20 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
change  the procedure  for amending  Schedule  2 to the Misuse  of Drugs  Act 
1971. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of the Misuse  of Drugs  Act 1971 
(1) The Misuse  of Drugs  Act 1971  (“the 1971  Act”)  is amended  in accordance 
with  subsections  (2) to (4). 
(2) In section  2 (controlled  drugs  and their  classification)— 
5 (a) for subsection  (2) substitute— 
“(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory 
instrument  amend  Schedule  2.”; 
(b) omit  subsections  (3) and (4); 
(c) for subsection  (5) substitute— 
10 “(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection 
(2) (whether  alone  or with  other  provision)  may  not be made 
unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and 
approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(6) 
15The Secretary  of State  may  lay a draft  of such  an instrument 
before  Parliament  only  after  consultation  with,  or on the 
recommendation  of, the Advisory  Council. ” 
(3) In section  2A (temporary  class  drug  orders),  in subsection  (6)(b), for “an Order 
in Council”  substitute  “regulations”. 
(4) In section  31 (general  provisions  as to regulations)— 
20 (a) in subsection  (1), after  “Act”,  in the first place  it occurs,  insert  “other 
than  section  2(2) (power  to amend  Schedule  2)”; 
(b) in subsection  (2), after  “Act”  insert  “, other  than  the power  under 
section  2(2),”; 
(c) 
25in subsection  (3), for “under  this Act”  substitute  “under  any provision 
of this Act other  than  section  2(2)”. 
59/1 Bill 20 1 Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 
(5) The amendments  made  by this section— 
(a) do not apply  in relation  to the making  of an Order  in Council  under 
section  2 of the 1971  Act where  a draft  of the Order  was laid before 
Parliament  before  the coming  into force  of this Act; 
5 (b) do not affect  any amendments  to Schedule  2 to the 1971  Act made  by 
an Order  in Council  under  section  2 of that Act (at any time). 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
10 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 
Act 2024. Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 2 
Controlled  Drugs  (Procedure  for Specification) 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
change  the procedure  for amending  Schedule  2 to the Misuse  of Drugs  Act 1971. 
Presented  by Alex  McIntyre 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 20



Committee  Stage:  Wednesday  15 May 2024 
Courts  (Remote  Hearings)  Bill 
(Committee  Stage  Decisions) 
This document  sets out the fate of each  clause,  schedule,  amendment  and new clause  considered  at 
committee  stage. 
A glossary  with  key terms  can be found  at the end of this document. 
Clauses  1 and 2 agreed  to. 
Bill, to be reported. 
Glossary 
Not called:  debated  in a group  of amendments, 
but not put to a decision. Added:  New  Clause  agreed  without  a vote and 
added  to the Bill. 
Not moved:  not debated  or put to a decision. Agreed  to: agreed  without  a vote. 
Question  proposed:  debate  underway  but not 
concluded. Agreed  to on division:  agreed  following  a vote. 
Negatived:  rejected  without  a vote. 
Withdrawn  after  debate:  moved  and debated 
but then  withdrawn,  so not put to a decision. Negatived  on division:  rejected  following  a 
vote. 
Not selected:  not chosen  for debate  by the 
Chair.



Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Independent  review  of Covid-19  vaccine  damage 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 58 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to establish  an independent  review  of 
disablement  caused  by Covid-19  vaccinations  and the adequacy  of the 
compensation  offered  to persons  so disabled;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Independent  review  of Covid-19  vaccine  damage 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  before  the end of the period  of 30 days  beginning 
with  the day on which  this Act is passed,  appoint  a current  or former  High 
5Court  judge  to lead an independent  review  of disablement  caused  by Covid-19 
vaccinations  administered  in the United  Kingdom  and the adequacy  of the 
compensation  offered  to persons  so disabled . 
(2) The review  must  consider— 
(a) the rates  and extent  of disablement  caused  by each  type  of Covid-19 
vaccination  offered  in the United  Kingdom, 
10 (b) the effectiveness  of Medicines  and Healthcare  products  Regulatory 
Agency  monitoring  of such  side effects,  and National  Health  Service 
and Government  responses  to such  monitoring, 
(c) the adequacy  of compensation  offered  to persons  so disabled, 
including— 
15 (i) the criteria  for eligibility  for compensation; 
(ii) the impact  of time  limits  under  the Limitation  Act 1980  on 
claims  for compensation,  and whether  such  limits  should  be 
increased; 
(iii) 
20the potential  merits  of establishing  a scheme  to provide  such 
compensation  without  the need  to establish  fault  and the 
appropriate  terms  for such  a scheme;  and 
(d) the efficacy  of the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979  and regulations 
made  under  it, including  in particular  the 60% disablement  threshold 
under  section  1(4) of that Act. 
25 (3) The review  must  assess  the costs  and benefits  of providing  compensation  to 
all persons  who  have  been  disabled  by a Covid-19  vaccination  administered 
in the United  Kingdom  without  the need  to establish  fault. 
59/1 Bill 58 1 Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Bill 
(4) In making  that assessment,  the review  must  have  regard  to the effects  of 
providing  such  compensation  on public  confidence  in vaccination  programmes 
in the United  Kingdom. 
(5) 
5The person  appointed  under  subsection  (1) must,  before  the end of the period 
of 90 days  beginning  with  the day on which  they  are appointed— 
(a) prepare  a report  on the review,  and 
(b) provide  that report  to the Secretary  of State. 
(6) The report  may  make  recommendations  for legislative  or policy  change. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  must— 
10 (a) as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  receipt,  lay before  Parliament 
the report  provided  under  subsection  (5), and 
(b) before  the end of the period  of 30 days  beginning  with  the day on 
which  the report  is laid under  paragraph  (a), lay before  Parliament 
15the Government’s  response  to the findings  and any recommendations 
of that report  under  subsection  (6). 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Act 2024. Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Bill 2 
Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to establish  an independent  review  of disablement  caused 
by Covid-19  vaccinations  and the adequacy  of the compensation  offered  to persons  so 
disabled;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Jeremy  Wright . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 58



Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by Sir Christopher  Chope,  are published  separately  as 
Bill 87—EN. 
59/1 Bill 87 
Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Review  of financial  assistance 
2 Financial  assistance  for Covid-19  vaccine  damage 
3 Amendment  of the Limitation  Act 1980  in respect  of Covid-19  vaccination 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 87 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to make  provision  about  financial 
assistance  to persons  who  have  suffered  disablement  following  vaccination 
against  Covid-19  and to the next  of kin of persons  who  have  died  shortly  after 
vaccination  against  Covid-19;  to require  the Secretary  of State  to report  to 
Parliament  on the merits  of a no-fault  compensation  scheme  to provide  such 
financial  assistance,  on whether  there  should  be any upper  limit  on the financial 
assistance  available,  on the criteria  for eligibility  and on whether  payment 
should  be made  in all cases  where  there  is no other  reasonable  cause  for the 
death  or disablement  suffered;  to provide  for a special  time  limit  under  the 
Limitation  Act 1980  for actions  in respect  of personal  injury  or death  following 
a Covid-19  vaccination;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Review  of financial  assistance 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  before  the end of the period  of 30 days beginning  with 
the day on which  this Act is passed,  appoint  a current  or former  High  Court  judge 
5to lead an independent  review  to assess  the costs  and benefits  of providing 
compensation,  without  the need to establish  fault,  to all persons  who have been 
disabled  by a Covid-19  vaccination  administered  in the United  Kingdom  and to the 
next of kin of persons  who have died shortly  after a vaccination  against  Covid-19 
administered  in the United  Kingdom. 
(2) In making  its assessment,  the review  must  consider— 
10 (a) the nature,  range,  severity  and duration  of disablement  caused  by 
each  type  of Covid-19  vaccination  offered  in the UK, 
(b) the adequacy  of compensation  offered  to persons  so disabled, 
(c) whether  specific  provision  should  be made  for compensation  for a 
15person’s  next  of kin in cases  where  it can be proven  that that person 
has died  as a result  of a Covid-19  vaccination, 
(d) the effectiveness  of the Medicines  and Healthcare  products  Regulatory 
Agency  in identifying  and publicising  adverse  reactions  to Covid-19 
vaccinations, 
59/1 Bill 87 1 Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 
(e) the efficiency  and effectiveness  of the NHS  in diagnosing  and treating 
those  who  have  suffered  adverse  reactions  to Covid-19  vaccinations, 
(f) whether  compensation  should  be disregarded  for the purposes  of 
Universal  Credit  entitlements,  and 
5 (g) the efficacy  of the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979  and regulations 
made  under  it, including  in particular  the 60% disablement  threshold 
under  section  1(4) of that Act. 
(3) In making  its assessment,  the review  must  consider— 
(a) 
10whether  the criteria  for assessing  disablement  under  section  1(4) of 
the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979  are sufficient  for the purposes 
of assessing  all possible  conditions  resulting  in disablement,  including 
psychological  conditions,  multi-system  inflammatory  syndrome  and 
related  conditions,  autoimmune  conditions  and any other  conditions 
not included  in those  criteria, 
15 (b) whether  there  should  be any upper  limit  on the financial  assistance 
available  under  such  a scheme, 
(c) what  criteria  for eligibility  could  be used  for the purposes  of providing 
compensation,  and 
(d) 
20whether  payment  should  be made  in all cases  where  there  is no other 
reasonable  cause  for the death  or disablement  suffered. 
(4) In making  its assessment,  the review  must  have  regard  to the effects  of 
providing  such  compensation  on public  confidence  in vaccination  programmes 
in the United  Kingdom. 
(5) 
25The person  appointed  under  subsection  (1) must  prepare  a report  on the 
review. 
(6) The report  must  make  recommendations  for legislative  or policy  change. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) before  the end of the period  of 90 days  beginning  with  the day on 
30which  the independent  person  is appointed,  lay before  Parliament  the 
report  under  subsection  (5), and 
(b) before  the end of the period  of 30 days  beginning  with  the day on 
which  the report  is laid under  paragraph  (a), lay before  Parliament 
the Government’s  response  to the findings  and any recommendations 
of that report  under  subsection  (6). 
35 2 Financial  assistance  for Covid-19  vaccine  damage 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  before  the end of the period  of six months 
beginning  with  the day on which  this Act is passed,  bring  forward  proposals 
for financial  assistance  to persons  who  have  suffered  any disablement  as a 
40result  of vaccination  against  Covid-19  and to the next  of kin of persons  who 
have  died  shortly  after  vaccination  against  Covid-19,  and subject  those 
proposals  to consultation  for a period  of 12 weeks. Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 2 
(2) Proposals  under  section  2(1) must  include  specific  provision  for compensation 
for the next  of kin of persons  who  have  died  as a result  of a vaccination 
against  Covid-19. 
(3) 
5The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  the Government’s  response 
to the consultation  under  section  2(1) within  90 days  of the end of the 12 
week  consultation  period. 
3 Amendment  of the Limitation  Act 1980  in respect  of Covid-19  vaccination 
(1) The Limitation  Act 1980  is amended  as follows. 
(2) 
10After  section  13 (operation  of time  limit  under  section  12 in relation  to different 
dependants),  insert— 
“13A Actions  in respect  of Covid-19  vaccination 
An action  in respect  of personal  injury  or death  following  a Covid-19 
vaccination  shall  be not brought  after  the expiration  of six years  from— 
(a) 
15for actions  in respect  of personal  injury,  the date  of knowledge 
of the person  injured,  or 
(b) for actions  in respect  of death— 
(i) the date  of death,  or 
(ii) the date  of knowledge  of the person  for whose  benefit 
the action  is brought, 
20 whichever  is the later. ” 
(3) In section  14(definition  of date  of knowledge  for purposes  of sections  11 to 
12)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), for “11 and 12” substitute  “11, 12 and 13A”,  and 
(b) 
25in subsection  (2), for “section  12 of this Act so far as that section 
applies”  substitute  “sections  12 and 13A of this Act so far as those 
sections  apply”. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act, other  than  section  3, extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and 
Northern  Ireland. 
30 (2) Section  3 extends  to England  and Wales. 
(3) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(4) This  Act may  be cited  as the Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 2025. 3 Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 
Covid-19  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to make  provision  about  financial  assistance  to 
persons  who  have  suffered  disablement  following  vaccination  against  Covid-19  and 
to the next  of kin of persons  who  have  died  shortly  after  vaccination  against  Covid-19; 
to require  the Secretary  of State  to report  to Parliament  on the merits  of a no-fault 
compensation  scheme  to provide  such  financial  assistance,  on whether  there  should  be 
any upper  limit  on the financial  assistance  available,  on the criteria  for eligibility  and 
on whether  payment  should  be made  in all cases  where  there  is no other  reasonable 
cause  for the death  or disablement  suffered;  to provide  for a special  time  limit  under 
the Limitation  Act 1980  for actions  in respect  of personal  injury  or death  following  a 
Covid-19  vaccination;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Jeremy  Wright . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 87



Committee  Stage:  Monday  3 February  2025 
Crown  Estate  Bill [HL] 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Crown  Estate  Bill [HL].  Any withdrawn  amendments 
are listed  at the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which  it is expected 
they will be decided. 
★ New  Amendments. 
New  Amendments:  2 and NC2 
James  Murray 
That,  subject  to the discretion  of the Chair,  any written  evidence  received  by the Committee 
shall  be reported  to the House  for publication. 
_1 Henry  Tufnell 
. Clause  3, page  2, line 17, at end insert― 
“(3B) In keeping  the impact  of their  activities  under  review,  the Commissioners  must 
have  regard  to— 
(a) the United  Kingdom’s  net zero targets; 
(b) regional  economic  growth;  and 
(c) ensuring  resilience  in respect  of managing  uncertainty,  risk and national 
security  interests. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Crown  Estate  Commissioners,  in reviewing  the impact  of their 
activities  on the achievement  of sustainable  development,  to have  specific  regard  to the United 
Kingdom’s  net zero targets,  regional  economic  growth,  and resilience  in respect  of managing 
uncertainty,  risk and national  security  interests. 
_Gov_2 James  Murray 
★. Page  2, line 29, leave  out clause  5 

Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  removes  clause  5, which  was inserted  at Report  stage  in the Lords. 
_Gov_NC2 James  Murray 
★. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Territorial  seabed 
After  section  3A of the Crown  Estate  Act 1961  (inserted  by section  1 of this 
Act) insert— 
“3AA Restriction  on permanently  disposing  of interest  in seabed  etc 
(1) The Commissioners  may not without  the consent  of the Treasury 
permanently  dispose  of— 
(a) any part of the territorial  seabed,  or 
(b) any interest,  right  or privilege  over or in relation  to the territorial 
seabed, 
which  forms  part of the Crown  Estate. 
(2) Accordingly,  without  that consent,  any purported  disposal  of a kind 
mentioned  in subsection  (1) is void. 
(3) In subsection  (1), “territorial  seabed”  means  the seabed  and subsoil 
within  the seaward  limits  of the United  Kingdom  territorial  waters. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Crown  Estate  Commissioners  to obtain  consent  from  the Treasury  before 
they permanently  dispose  of any of the Crown  Estate’s  interest  in, or rights  or privileges  in relation 
to, the territorial  seabed. 
_NC1 Llinos  Medi 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Ben Lake 
Ann Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Management  of the Crown  Estate  in Wales 
Within  two years  of the day on which  this Act is commenced,  the Treasury 
must  have  completed  a transfer  of the responsibility  of the management  of 
the Crown  Estate  in Wales  to the Welsh  Government. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  places  a duty  on the Treasury  to transfer  management  of the Crown  Estate  in Wales 
to the Welsh  Government  within  two years  of the commencement  of the Act. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 2 
Order  of the House 
[7 January  2025] 
That  the following  provisions  shall  apply  to the Crown  Estate  Bill [Lords]: 
Committal 
1. The Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  in Public  Bill Committee 
2. Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded) 
be brought  to a conclusion  on Tuesday  11 February. 
3. The Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it 
meets. 
Proceedings  on Consideration  and Third  Reading 
4. Proceedings  on Consideration  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which 
proceedings  on Consideration  are commenced. 
5. Proceedings  on Third  Reading  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day. 
6. Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings 
on Consideration  and Third  Reading. 
Other  proceedings 
7. Any other  proceedings  on the Bill may be programmed. 3 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025



Ordered to be printed 8 January 2025 and published 14 January 2025
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 64  11th Report of Session 2024–25
  Regulated and Other Activities 
(Mandatory Reporting of Child 
Sexual Abuse) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate (Wales) Bill [HL]
  National Insurance Contributions 
(Secondary Class 1 Contributions) 
Bill
  Financial Assistance  to Ukraine 
Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power,
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree ofparliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
(b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or(c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
(b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,(c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,(d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or(e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 h
ttp://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 h
ldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Eleventh Report
   PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.   This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to two private 
members’ Bills. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
2
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
   REGULATED AND OTHER ACTIVITIES (MANDATORY 
REPORTING OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE) BILL [HL]
2.   This private member’s Bill, which is expected to have its second reading on 
17 January, imposes a duty (subject to criminal sanction) on the providers 
of a range of education, healthcare and other settings to report to the local 
authority where they know or reasonably suspect a child in their care to be 
subject to sexual abuse. The activities which are the subject of the reporting 
duty are listed in the Schedule to the Bill. Clause 2(9) confers a power on 
the Secretary of State by regulations to amend the Schedule by adding to 
the activities, or varying or deleting an activity set out in the Schedule. 
Despite being a Henry VIII power,1  the Bill does not make provision for the 
regulations to be made by statutory instrument. There is also no parliamentary 
scrutiny attached to the power. Accordingly, we recommend that, if 
the Bill proceeds to its further stages, it should be amended so that 
regulations under clause 2(9) are required to be made by statutory 
instrument subject to the draft affirmative resolution procedure.
1 A Henry VIII power is a power that allows amendment, repeal or other alteration of the effect of 
primary legislation.
3
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    CROWN ESTATE (WALES) BILL [HL]
3.   This private member’s Bill makes provision for the transfer to the 
Welsh Ministers, or a person nominated by them, of the Crown Estate 
Commissioners’ functions in Wales.
4.   Clause 1 of the Bill inserts a new section 52A into the Wales Act 2017 which 
confers a power on the Treasury to make a scheme transferring all the 
existing Welsh functions of the Crown Estate Commissioners to the Welsh 
Ministers or a person nominated by the Welsh Ministers. The Treasury may 
only make a transfer scheme with the agreement of the Welsh Ministers.
5.   The provisions of section 52A are based on section 90B of the Scotland 
Act 1998 which they to a very large extent replicate, although in the latter 
case the power relates to the transfer of the Crown Estate Commissioners’ 
existing Scottish functions to the Scottish Ministers. In both cases, the 
power to make a transfer scheme is subject to parliamentary scrutiny, with 
the draft affirmative resolution procedure applying. There is however one 
significant difference in the scrutiny provisions: whereas section 90B of the 
Scotland Act 1998 provides for scrutiny only by both Houses of Parliament, 
section 52A provides for scrutiny by both Houses and Senedd Cymru.
6.   We do not consider that scrutiny of the power by Senedd Cymru is 
appropriate. The purpose of the transfer scheme is to set out the terms 
on which a reserved matter, namely management of the Crown Estate in 
Wales, should be devolved. In this context, the Bill enables the Treasury to 
include in the transfer scheme such provision as they consider necessary or 
expedient in the interests of defence or national security, and also to include 
such provision as they consider necessary to ensure that the management 
of the Crown Estate in Wales does not conflict with other reserved maters, 
namely the exploitation of oil or gas resources. Decisions relating to reserved 
matters, and the terms on which they should be devolved, are in our view 
appropriately for the UK Government to make subject to scrutiny by the 
UK Parliament, and this is reflected in the fact that the power to make the 
scheme is conferred on the Treasury. It does not seem to us appropriate (or 
consistent with previous practice) to make powers exercisable solely by UK 
Ministers subject to scrutiny by a devolved legislature.
7.    Accordingly, we consider that, consistently with the approach for 
Scotland under section 90B of the Scotland Act 1998, the powers 
conferred by section 52A of the Wales Act 2017 should be subject to 
scrutiny solely by both Houses of Parliament.
4
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    NATIONAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS (SECONDARY 
CLASS 1 CONTRIBUTIONS) BILL
8.   This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO UKRAINE BILL
9.   
This Money Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
5
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
AP PENDIX  1:    MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
   Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
  For the business taken at the meeting on 08 January 2025, Members declared no 
interests. 
  Attendance
  The meeting was attended by Lord McLoughlin, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, 
Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville, Lord Carlile or Berriew, The Earl of Lindsay, Lord Rooker and Baroness Finlay of Llandaff.



Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of the Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 112 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  that,  before  making  any order  to designate  a type  of dog for the 
purposes  of section  1 or 2 of the Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  carry  out a public  consultation  and publish  a comparative  review 
of data  showing  the incidences  of fatalities  resulting  from  bites  of dogs  of that 
type  in the last three  years. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of the Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991 
(1) The Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  1 (dogs  bred  for fighting),  after  subsection  (8) insert— 
“(8A) 
5Before  making  an order  under  subsection  (1)(c)  above,  the Secretary 
of State  must— 
(a) carry  out a public  consultation  on the proposed  order,  and 
(b) publish  information  about— 
(i) the number  of fatalities,  in each  of the preceding  three 
10years,  resulting  from  bites  of dogs  of the type  to which 
the proposed  order  relates,  and 
(ii) the number  of fatalities,  in each  of the preceding  three 
years,  resulting  from  bites  of other  types  of dog.” 
(3) In section  2 (other  specially  dangerous  dogs),  after  subsection  (4) insert— 
“(4A) 
15Before  making  an order  under  this section,  the Secretary  of State 
must— 
(a) carry  out a public  consultation  on the proposed  order,  and 
(b) publish  information  about— 
(i) the number  of fatalities,  in each  of the preceding  three 
20years,  resulting  from  bites  of dogs  of the type  to which 
the proposed  order  relates,  and 
(ii) the number  of fatalities,  in each  of the preceding  three 
years,  resulting  from  bites  of other  types  of dog.” 
58/4 Bill 112 1 Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  (Amendment)  Bill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
5This  Act may  be cited  as the Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  (Amendment)  Act 
2024. Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  (Amendment)  Bill 2 
Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  that,  before  making  any order  to designate  a type  of dog for the purposes  of 
section  1 or 2 of the Dangerous  Dogs  Act 1991,  the Secretary  of State  must  carry  out a 
public  consultation  and publish  a comparative  review  of data  showing  the incidences 
of fatalities  resulting  from  bites  of dogs  of that type  in the last three  years. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Edward  Leigh . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 112



Data  (Use  and Access)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON THIRD  READING 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
After  Clause  80 
LORD  VALLANCE  OF BALHAM 
★_ After  Clause  80, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Data  protection  by design:  children’s  higher  protection  matters 
(1) Article  25 of the UK GDPR  (data  protection  by design  and by default)  is amended 
as follows. 
(2) After  paragraph  1 insert— 
“1A. In the case of processing  carried  out in the course  of providing  information 
society  services  which  are likely  to be accessed  by children,  when  assessing 
what  are appropriate  technical  and organisational  measures  in accordance 
with  paragraph  1, the controller  must  take into account  the children’s 
higher  protection  matters. 
1B. The children’s  higher  protection  matters  are— 
(a) how  children  can best be protected  and supported  when  using  the 
services,  and 
(b) the fact that children— 
(i) merit  specific  protection  with  regard  to their  personal  data 
because  they  may  be less aware  of the risks  and consequences 
associated  with  processing  of personal  data  and of their  rights 
in relation  to such  processing,  and 
(ii) have  different  needs  at different  ages  and at different  stages 
of development. ” 
59/1 HL Bill 64—Running  List 31 January 
(3) In paragraph  3, for “1 and 2” substitute  “1 to 2”. 
(4) At the end insert— 
“4. Paragraphs  1A and 1B are not to be read  as implying  anything  about  the 
matters  that may  be relevant  to the assessment  of what  are appropriate 
technical  and organisational  measures  for the purposes  of paragraph  1 in 
cases  other  than  those  described  in paragraph  1A. 
5. In this Article,  “information  society  services”  does  not include  preventive 
or counselling  services. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  imposes  duties  to take account  of matters  relating  to children  on controllers 
involved  in providing  information  society  services  which  are likely  to be accessed  by children.    The 
duties  apply  when  these  controllers  are designing  the means  of processing  personal  data and when 
carrying  out the processing. 
After  Clause  139 
BARONESS  OWEN  OF ALDERLEY  EDGE 
LORD  CLEMENT-JONES 
LORD  PANNICK 
LORD  BROWNE  OF LADYTON 
★_ After  Clause  139, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Digitally  created  sexually  explicit  photographs,  films  or images 
In the Sexual  Offences  Act 2003,  after  section  66D,  insert— 
“66E Creating  or soliciting  a non-consensual  digitally  produced  sexually  explicit 
photograph,  film or image 
(1) A person  (A) commits  an offence  if— 
(a) A creates  or solicits  the creation  of a digitally  produced  sexually 
explicit  photograph,  film or image  which  appears  to be of another 
person  (B), 
(b) B does  not consent  to the creation  or solicitation  of the photograph, 
film or image,  and 
(c) A does  not reasonably  believe  that B consents. 
(2) Subsection  (1) applies  when  the solicitation  of the digitally  produced 
sexually  explicit  photograph,  film or image  occurs  in the United  Kingdom, 
irrespective  of the location  of the person  or persons  (whether  or not 
identified)  who  have  been  solicited  for the creation  of such  a photograph, 
film or image. 
(3) A person  (A) may  commit  a solicitation  offence  under  this section  whether 
or not creation  occurs. Data  (Use  and Access)  Bill [HL] 2 
(4) A person  who  commits  an offence  under  subsection  (1) is liable  on 
summary  conviction  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  the 
maximum  term  for summary  offences  or a fine (or both). 
(5) In relation  to section  127(1)  of the Magistrates’  Court  Act 1980  (limitation 
of time)  the date  on which  the “matter  of complaint”  arose  shall  be taken 
to be the date  on which  B becomes  aware  that an offence  under  this section 
may  have  been  committed. 
(6) The photograph,  film or image  to which  the offence  under  this section 
relates,  and anything  containing  it, is to be regarded  for the purposes  of 
sections  153 and 157(3)(b)  of the Sentencing  Code  (deprivation  orders)  as 
used  for the purpose  of committing  the offence  (including  where  it is 
committed  by aiding,  abetting,  counselling  or procuring). 
(7) In this section— 
“digitally  produced”  means  created,  in whole  or in part,  by the use 
of any electronic  service  or programme  or electronic  means 
whatsoever; 
“film” , “photograph”  and “image”  have  the meaning  and the scope 
stated  in section  66A(3)  to (5); 
“sexually  explicit  photograph,  film or image”  means  a photograph, 
film or image  which  appears  to be of B in an “intimate  state”  as 
defined  in section  66D(5)  to (7); and 
“soliciting”  means  encouraging  or facilitating  the creation  of a digitally 
produced  sexually  explicit  photograph,  film or image. ”” 3 Data  (Use  and Access)  Bill [HL] 
Data  (Use  and Access)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON THIRD  READING 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
31 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 64—Running  List 31 January



Debt Relief (Developing Countries) 
Act 2010
CHAPTER 22
CONTENTS
Introduction
1 Meaning of “qualifying debt” etc
2 Qualifying debts: further definitions
Relief of debts etc
3 Amount recoverable in respect of claim for qualifying debt etc
4 Meaning of “the relevant proportion”5 Judgments for qualifying debts etc
Supplementary and general
6 Exception where debtor fails to make offer to pay recoverable amount
7 Exception for overriding EU or international obligations8S a v i n g9 Duration of Act
10 Commencement, extent and short title
ELIZABETH II c. 22
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) 
Act 2010
2010 CHAPTER 22
Make provision for or in connection with the relief of debts of certain
developing countries. [8th April 2010]
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the  authority of the same, as follows:— 
Introduction
1 Meaning of “qualifying debt” etc
(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Act.
(2) “The Initiative” means the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
(3) “Qualifying debt” means a debt incurred before commencement that—
(a) is public or publicly guaranteed,
(b) is external,
(c) is a debt of a country to which the Initiative applies or a potentially
eligible Initiative country, and
(d) in the case of a debt of a country to which the Initiative applies, is
incurred before decision point is reached in respect of the country.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3) treat a debt incurred after commencement as
incurred before commencement if  (and so far as) it replaces one incurred before
commencement.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (3)(d) treat a debt incurred after decision point
as incurred before decision point if (and so far as) it replaces one incurredbefore decision point.B
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 2
(6) “Potentially eligible Initia tive country” means a country—
(a) that the Intern ational Monetary Fund and World Bank identify as
potentially eligible for debt relief under the Initiative, and
(b) in respect of which decisio n point has not been reached.
(7) Decision point is regarded as reached in  respect of a country if it is so regarded
for the purposes of the Initiative.
(8) For the meaning of other expressions used in subsection (3), see section 2.(9) “Country” includes a territory.
(10) “Commencement” means the commencement of this Act.
(11) If the terms of the Initiative are amende d after commencement in such a way
as to change a relevant eligibility condi tion, this Act has effect as if they had not
been so amended.
(12) In subsection (11) “relevant eligibility condit ion” means a condition as to the
level of a country’s income or debt or the size of its economy that  must be met
in order for the country to be eligible for debt relief under the Initiative.
2 Qualifying debts: further definitions
(1) The expressions used in section 1(3) have the meaning given below.(2) “Debt” includes—
(a) a liability that falls to be discharged otherwise than by the making of a
payment,
(b) an obligation to repurchase property that arises under an agreement for
the sale and repurchase of property (whether or not the same property),
and
(c) a liability of the lessee under a fina nce lease (except a liability so far as
relating to the operation or maintenance of property subject to thelease).
(3) “Debt” does not include—
(a) a liability to pay for goods or services that arose on the delivery of the
goods or the provision of services,
(b) a liability that falls to be discharged in less than a year from the time it
was incurred (“a short-term debt”) unless the short-term debt is withinsubsection (4), or
(c) a liability incurred after commencement that replaces anything that
was (at the time of the replacement) within paragraph (a) or (b).
(4) A short-term debt is within this subsection if it ought to have been
discharged—
(a) more than a year before commencement, and
(b) (where decision point has been reached in respect of the country
concerned) more than a year before decision point.
(5) A debt is a “public” debt of a country if it was incurred by—
(a) the country or any part of it (or the government of the country or any
part of the country or any department of any such government),
(b) the central bank or other monetary authority of the country, or
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 3
(c) a body corporate controlled (directly or indirectly) by anything within
paragraph (a) or (b).
(6) In subsection (5)(a) references to part of a country include any municipality or
other local government area in the country.
(7) A debt is a “publicly guaranteed” debt of a country if—
(a) it is guaranteed,
(b) the guarantee was entered into—
(i) before commencement, and
(ii) where decision point has been reached in respect of the country,
before that point wa s reached, and
(c) the debt would be a public debt of the country if it had been incurred
by the guarantor.
(8) If the conditions in subsection (7)(a) to (c) are met as regards part of a debt, that
part is regarded as a publicly guaranteed debt of the country concerned.
(9) A public or publicly guaranteed debt of a country is “external” unless the
creditor was resident in the country—
(a) if decision point was reached in respect of the country before
commencement, at the time th at point was reached, or
(b) otherwise, at commencement.
(10) If in any proceedin gs there is an issue as to whether a debt is a qualifying debt,
treat the debt as external unless it is proved in those proceedings that it is notexternal.
Relief of debts etc
3 Amount recoverable in respect of claim for qualifying debt etc
(1) The amount recoverable in respect of—
(a) a qualifying debt, or
(b) any cause of action relating to a qualifying debt,
is the relevant proportion of the amount that  would otherwise be recoverable
in respect of the qualifying debt or cause of action.
(2) For the meaning of “the relevant proportion”, see section 4.
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to an agreement (a “compromise
agreement”) that compromises—
(a) a claim for a qualifying debt, or
(b) a claim in respect of a cause of action relating to a qualifying debt.
(4) But the amount recoverable under a compromise agreement is limited to the
amount that would be recoverable in respect of the claim if the agreement hadnot been made (and subsection (1) applied to the claim).
(5) Subsection (1) does not apply where an agreement that is not a compromise
agreement (a “refinancing agreement”) has been made—
(a) that changes the terms for repayment of a debt (“the rescheduled debt”)
in such a way as to reduce its net present value, or
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 4
(b) by virtue of which a debt (“the original debt”) is replaced by a debt (“the
new debt”) whose net present value is less than the net present value of
the original debt.
(6) But the amount recoverable in respect of the rescheduled debt or the new debt
is limited to the amount that would be recoverable in respect of the  initial debt
if the refinancing agreement had not been made (and subs ection (1) applied to
that debt).
(7) In subsection (6) “the initial debt” means the debt mentioned in  subsection
(5)(a) or (as the case may be) the original debt.
(8) References in this section to the amount recoverable include the amount
recoverable on the enforcement of any security.
(9) This section applies even if the law applicable to the qualifying de bt, or to any
compromise agreement, refinancing agre ement or security, is the law of a
country outside the United Kingdom.
4 Meaning of “the relevant proportion”
(1) In this Act any reference to the relevant proportion, in relation to a qualifying
debt, is to be read as follows.
(2) Where the qualifying debt  is one to which the Initiative applies, the relevant
proportion is—
where—
A is the amount the debt would be if it were reduced in accordance with
the Initiative (on the assumption, if it is not the case, that completion
point has been reached, for the purposes of the Initiative, in respect ofthe country whose debt it is), and
B is the amount of the debt without it having been so reduced.
(3) Where the qualifying debt is a debt of a potentially eligible Initiative country,
the relevant proportion is 33%.
5 Judgments for qualifying debts etc
(1) This section applies to—
(a) a judgment on a relevant claim given by a court in the United Kingdom
before commencement,
(b) a foreign judgment given (whether before or after commencement) on
a relevant claim, and
(c) an award made (whether before or after commencement) on a relevant
claim in an arbitration (con ducted under any laws).
(2) “Relevant claim” means—
(a) a claim for, or relating to, a qualifying debt, or
(b) a claim under an agreement compromising a claim within paragraph
(a).A
B----
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 5
(3) The amount of the judgment or award is to be treated as equal to the amount
it would be if the court, tribunal or ar bitrator had applied section 3 in relation
to the relevant claim.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply in relation to a clai m if the effect of it so applying
would be to increase the amount of the judgment or award.
(5) In this section—
“judgment” includes an order (and references to the giving of a judgment
are to be read accordingly), and
“foreign judgment” means a jud gment (however described) of a court or
tribunal of a country outside the United Kingdom, and includesanything (other than an arbitration awa rd) which is enforceable as if it
were such a judgment.
(6) This section applies to anything that  gives effect to a compromise of a relevant
claim as if in subsection (3) after “if” there were inserted “the relevant claimhad not been compromised and”.
Supplementary and general
6 Exception where debtor fails to make offer to pay recoverable amount
(1) This Act does not apply to a releva nt claim, a relevant foreign judgment or a
relevant arbitration award if—
(a) proceedings are brought in respec t of the relevant claim, foreign
judgment or arbitration award, and
( b ) t h e  d e b t o r  d o e s  n o t ,  b e f o r e  t h e  r e l e v a n t  t i m e ,  m a k e  a n  o f f e r  t o
compromise the proceedings on comparable Initiative terms.
( 2 ) F o r  t h e  p u r p o s e s  o f  t h i s  s e c t i o n  a n  o f f e r  i s  m a d e  o n  “ c o m p a r a b l e  I n i t i a t i v e
terms” if the net present value of payments to be made in accordance with the
offer is equal to or exceeds the net present value of the payment required tosatisfy the relevant claim, foreign judgme nt or arbitration award (reduced in
accordance with this Act).
(3) In this section—
“foreign judgment” has the meaning given by section 5(5),
“judgment” includes an order,“proceedings” means proceedings in a part of the United Kingdom, and
includes proceedings for—
(a) the registration of a foreign judgmen t or an arbitration award,
or
(b) permission to enforce an arbitration award in the same manner
as a judgment of the court,
but does not include proceedings for the enforcement of a judgment or
award,
“relevant arbitration award” means an awar d within section 5(1)(c),
“relevant claim” has the me aning given by section 5(2),
“relevant foreign judgment” means a foreign ju dgment within section
5(1)(b), and
“the relevant time” means—
(a) the time when a court first gives judgment on the relevant
claim,
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 6
(b) the time when the foreign  judgment or arbitration award is
registered, or (as the case may be)
(c) the time when permis sion is given to enforce the arbitration
award in the same manner as a judgment of the court.
(4) This section applies to cases where the proceedings were brought before
commencement (as well as cases where they are brought aftercommencement), but not to cases where the re levant time occurred before
commencement.
7 Exception for overriding EU or international obligations
(1) Nothing in this Act applie s to a foreign judgment or an arbitration award of a
kind required by European Union law, or by an international  obligation of the
United Kingdom, to be enforced in full even in cases where such enforcement
is contrary to the public policy of the United Kingdom.
(2) Accordingly, this Act does not apply to—
(a) a foreign judgment that is certified as a European Enforcement Order
(within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No. 805/2004 of the European
Parliament and of the Council),
(b) a foreign judgment that is an enforceable European Order for Payment
(within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No. 1896/2006 of the European
Parliament and of the Council), or
(c) an award to which section 1 of the Arbitration (Inte rnational
Investment Disputes) Act 1966 applies (awards made under the
Convention on the settlement of investmen t disputes between States
and nationals of other States).
(3) “Foreign judgment” has the meaning given by section 5(5).
8S a v i n g
Nothing in this Act enables a person to recover anything paid in (total or
partial) satisfaction of an y liability (whether arising under an agreement,
judgment, order, award or otherwise).
9 Duration of Act
(1) This Act expires at the end of the period of one year beginning with
commencement; but this is subject to subsections (2) and (3).
(2) The Treasury may by order provide that this Act (instead of expiring at the
time it would otherwise expire) expires at the end of the period of one yearfrom that time.
(3) The Treasury may by order provide that this Act has permanent effect.
(4) An order under this section is to be  made by statutory instrument.
(5) An order under this section may be made only if a draft of the statutory
instrument containing it has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of,each House of Parliament.
(6) If this Act expires by virtue of this section—
(a) the Act is to be treated as neve r having been in force, and
Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010 (c. 22) 7
(b) accordingly, where—
(i) a judgment was given, or order or arbitration award made, on a
relevant claim (as defined by section 5(2)) while the Act was inforce, and
(ii) the amount of the judgment, order or aw ard is, as a result of
section 3, less than it would be if that section had not applied in
relation to the claim,
the amount of the judgment, order or award is to be treated as equal to
the amount it would be if the section had not applied in relation to theclaim.
10 Commencement, extent and short title
(1) This Act comes into force at the end of the period of two months beginning
with the day on which it is passed.
(2) This Act extends to each part of the United Kingdom.
(3) This Act may be cited as the Debt Relief (Developing Countries) Act 2010.
?Crown copyright 2010
Printed in the UK by The Stationery O Yce Limited under the authority and superintendence of Carol Tullo, Controller
of Her Majesty’s Stationery O Yce and Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
4/2010 445942 19585



Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Department  for Environment,  Food  and Rural 
Affairs with the consent  of Aphra  Brandreth,  are published  separately  as Bill 62—EN. 
59/1 Bill 62 
Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Livestock  worrying:  scope  and consequences  of offence 
2 Seizure  and detention  of dogs 
3 Collection  of samples  and impressions 
4 Powers  of entry 
5 Extent,  commencement,  transitional  provision  and short  title 
Amendments  to the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953 Schedule  —  
59/1 Bill 62 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  changing  the law about  the offence  of livestock  worrying, 
including  changes  to what  constitutes  an offence  and increased  powers  for 
investigation  of suspected  offences;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Livestock  worrying:  scope  and consequences  of offence 
The Schedule  contains  amendments  to the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 
1953  that— 
(a) 
5bring  incidents  on roads  and paths  within  the scope  of the offence  in 
section  1 of that Act; 
(b) bring  camelids  within  the definition  of “livestock”  that applies  for the 
purposes  of that offence; 
(c) exempt  a dog owner  from  liability  for that offence  where  the dog is 
in the charge  of another  person  without  the owner’s  consent; 
10 (d) increase  the penalty  that may  be imposed  where  a person  is convicted 
of that offence; 
(e) allow  for a court  to order  an offender  to pay expenses  associated  with 
seizing  and detaining  a dog; 
(f) 
15update  the terminology  used  in that Act so that attacking  livestock  is 
dealt  with  separately  from  worrying  livestock. 
2 Seizure  and detention  of dogs 
(1) For section  2 of the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953  substitute— 
“2 Seizure  and detention  of dogs 
Dog found  without  owner  or person  in charge 
20 (1) A constable  may  seize  a dog if— 
(a) they  have  reasonable  grounds  to believe  that the dog has 
attacked  or worried  livestock  on agricultural  land  or on a road 
or path,  and 
59/1 Bill 62 1 Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
(b) nobody  present  where  the dog is found  admits  to being  the 
dog’s  owner  or in charge  of it. 
(2) A constable  may  detain  a dog seized  under  subsection  (1) until  the 
5owner  has claimed  it and paid  all expenses  incurred  by reason  of its 
seizure  and detention. 
(3) If the owner  of the dog does  not claim  it and pay those  expenses 
before  the end of the period  of seven  days  beginning  with  the day 
after  the day on which  the dog was seized  under  subsection  (1), a 
constable  may  dispose  of the dog. 
10 (4) If the constable  disposes  of the dog by giving  it or selling  it to a person 
acting  in good  faith,  that person  becomes  the owner  of the dog. 
(5) The chief  officer  of police  for each  police  area must  keep,  or cause  to 
be kept,  a register  of all dogs  seized  under  subsection  (1) in their  area, 
containing  the following  information— 
15 (a) a brief  description  of the dog; 
(b) the date  of seizure  of the dog; 
(c) if the dog is disposed  of under  subsection  (3), how. 
(6) Each  register  kept  under  subsection  (5) must  be available,  at all 
reasonable  times,  for inspection  by the public  free of charge. 
20 (7) For the purposes  of this section,  “disposing  of” a dog includes— 
(a) causing  it to be disposed  of, and 
(b) destroying  it or causing  it to be destroyed, 
but does  not include  disposing  of it for the purposes  of vivisection. 
Dog posing  continuing  threat 
25 (8) A constable  may  seize  a dog if they  have  reasonable  grounds  to believe 
that— 
(a) the dog has attacked  or worried  livestock  on agricultural  land 
or on a road  or path,  and 
(b) 
30unless  it is detained,  there  is a risk that the dog could  attack 
or worry  livestock  again. 
(9) A constable  may  detain  a dog seized  under  subsection  (8)— 
(a) until  an investigation  has been  carried  out into whether  an 
offence  under  section  1 has been  committed  by reason  of the 
dog attacking  or worrying  livestock,  or 
35 (b) if proceedings  are brought  in respect  of such  an offence,  until 
those  proceedings  have  been  determined  or withdrawn. ” 
(2) Section  3 of the Dogs  Act 1906  (seizure  of stray  dogs),  so far as still in force 
by virtue  of section  68(2) of the Clean  Neighbourhoods  and Environment  Act 
2005 , is repealed. Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 2 
3 Collection  of samples  and impressions 
After  section  2 of the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953  insert— 
“2ZA Collection  of samples  and impressions 
(1) 
5Subsection  (2) applies  where  a constable  has reasonable  grounds  to 
believe  that— 
(a) a dog has attacked  or worried  livestock  on agricultural  land 
or on a road  or path,  and 
(b) information  derived  from  a sample  or impression  taken  from 
the dog might  provide  evidence  of an offence  under  section  1. 
10 (2) A sample  or impression  may  be taken  from  the dog;  and a constable 
may  seize  and detain  the dog in order  that the sample  or impression 
may  be taken. 
(3) Subsection  (4) applies  where  a constable  has reasonable  grounds  to 
believe  that— 
15 (a) a dog has attacked  or worried  livestock  on agricultural  land 
or on a road  or path,  and 
(b) information  derived  from  a sample  or impression  taken  from 
any livestock  might  provide  evidence  of an offence  under 
section  1. 
20 (4) A sample  or impression  may  be taken  from  the livestock. 
(5) If taking  a sample  or impression  under  this section  would  amount  to 
veterinary  surgery,  it must  be done  by a veterinary  surgeon. 
(6) A sample  or impression  taken  under  this section  may  be retained— 
(a) 
25until  an investigation  has been  carried  out into whether  an 
offence  under  section  1 has been  committed  by reason  of the 
dog attacking  or worrying  livestock,  or 
(b) if proceedings  are brought  in respect  of such  an offence,  until 
those  proceedings  have  been  determined  or withdrawn. 
(7) In this section— 
30 “sample”  means  any material  that has come  from  the body  of an 
animal  and consists  of, or includes,  animal  cells; 
“veterinary  surgeon”  means  a person  registered  in the register  of 
veterinary  surgeons,  or the supplementary  veterinary  register, 
kept  under  the Veterinary  Surgeons  Act 1966 ; 
35 “veterinary  surgery”  has the same  meaning  as in that Act.” 3 Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
4 Powers  of entry 
For section  2A of the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953  substitute— 
“2A Power  of justice  of the peace  to authorise  entry  and search 
(1) 
5Subsection  (2) applies  if, on an application  made  by a constable,  a 
justice  of the peace  is satisfied  that there  are reasonable  grounds  for 
believing— 
(a) that an offence  under  section  1 has been  committed,  and 
(b) that the dog in respect  of which  the offence  has been  committed 
is on premises  specified  in the application. 
10 (2) The justice  of the peace  may  issue  a warrant  authorising  a constable 
to enter  and search  the premises  in order  to— 
(a) identify  the dog, 
(b) seize  and detain  the dog under  section  2, or 
(c) take a sample  or impression  from  the dog under  section  2ZA. 
15 (3) Subsection  (4) applies  if, on an application  made  by a constable,  a 
justice  of the peace  is satisfied  that there  are reasonable  grounds  for 
believing— 
(a) that an offence  under  section  1 has been  committed,  and 
(b) 
20that anything  that may  be evidence  of that offence  could  be 
on premises  specified  in the application. 
(4) The justice  of the peace  may  issue  a warrant  authorising  a constable 
to enter  and search  the premises  in order  to seize  any evidence  of that 
offence  that may  be found. 
(5) 
25A warrant  under  this section  may  authorise  the constable  executing 
it to use reasonable  force  if necessary. ” 
5 Extent,  commencement,  transitional  provision  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  this Act is passed. 
30 (3) The fact that any worrying  or attacking  of livestock  took  place  (or is alleged 
to have  taken  place)  before  this Act comes  into force  does  not in itself  affect 
the availability,  in connection  with  that worrying  or attacking,  of the powers 
conferred  by virtue  of sections  2, 3 and 4. 
(4) 
35This  Act may  be cited  as the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment) 
Act 2025. Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 4 
Section  1 SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DOGS (PROTECTION OF LIVESTOCK) ACT 1953 
1 Section  1 of the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953  (offence)  is amended 
as follows. (1) 
5 (2) In subsection  (1) (creation  of offence)— 
(a) before  “worries”  insert  “attacks  or”; 
(b) after  “land”  insert  “or on a road  or path”. 
(3) In subsection  (2) (meaning  of “worrying  livestock”),  omit  paragraph  (a). 
(4) 
10In subsection  (3) (livestock  trespassing),  after  “a dog”  insert  “on any 
agricultural  land”. 
(5) After  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) A person  is not guilty  of an offence  under  this Act by reason  of 
anything  done  by a dog on a road  or path  if at the material  time 
15the livestock  are on the road  or path  as a result  of straying  from 
where  they  are kept,  unless  the person  causes  the dog to attack  the 
livestock. ” 
(6) In subsection  (4) (dog  in charge  of someone  other  than  owner)— 
(a) before  “worrying”  insert  “attacking  or”; 
(b) for “he proves”  substitute  “the owner  proves”; 
20 (c) before  “worried”  insert  “attacked  or”; 
(d) for the words  from  “, whom”  to the end substitute  “and  that— 
(a) the owner  reasonably  believed  that other  person  to 
be a fit and proper  person  to be in charge  of the dog, 
or 
25 (b) the owner  did not consent  to the dog’s  being  in the 
charge  of that other  person. ” 
(7) For subsection  (6) substitute— 
“(6) A person  who  commits  an offence  under  this section  is liable  on 
summary  conviction  to a fine. 
30 (7) Where— 
(a) a person  is convicted  of an offence  under  this section  which 
was committed  on or after  this subsection  comes  into force, 
and 
(b) 
35the dog in respect  of which  the offence  was committed  was 
seized  and detained  in connection  with  the offence  in 
accordance  with  section  2(8) and (9) (dogs  posing  continuing 
threat), 
the court  may  order  the person  to pay whatever  sum  the court 
40determines  to be the reasonable  expenses  incurred  by reason  of the 
dog’s  seizure  and detention. 5 Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
Schedule—Amendments  to the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953 
(8) A court  may  make  an order  under  subsection  (7) whether  or not it 
deals  with  the person  in any other  way  for the offence. 
(9) A sum  required  to be paid  by an order  under  subsection  (7) is 
5treated  for the purposes  of enforcement  as if it were  compensation 
payable  under  a compensation  order  (as defined  in section  133 of 
the Sentencing  Code). ” 
(8) For the heading  substitute  “Offence  where  dog attacks  or worries  livestock”. 
2 In section  3 of the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953  (interpretation), 
10in subsection  (1), in the definition  of “livestock”,  after  “horses,”  insert 
“camelids”. Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 6 
Schedule—Amendments  to the Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  Act 1953 
Dogs  (Protection  of Livestock)  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  changing  the law about  the offence  of livestock  worrying,  including 
changes  to what  constitutes  an offence  and increased  powers  for investigation  of 
suspected  offences;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Aphra  Brandreth 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 62



Domestic  Building  Works  (Consumer  Protection) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Licensing  of builders  for domestic  works 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/2 Bill 38 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  consumer  protection  in relation  to domestic  building 
works;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Licensing  of builders  for domestic  works 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  for a licensing 
scheme  for builders  undertaking  domestic  building  works  in England. 
(2) The purposes  of a scheme  made  under  this section  are— 
5 (a) to protect  consumers  who  are not professional  property  developers, 
and 
(b) to promote  fair competition  among  reputable  builders. 
(3) The regulations  may  make  provision  for— 
(a) 
10the licensing  of sole traders,  partnerships  and other  companies, 
including  primary  contractors  and sub-contractors,  but not the licensing 
of employees; 
(b) the definition  of “domestic  building  works”  for the purposes  of the 
scheme; 
(c) 
15requirements  for companies  to hold  a licence  under  paragraph  (a) in 
order  to undertake  domestic  building  works; 
(d) creating  offences  punishable  with  a fine in respect  of undertaking  such 
works  without  a licence,  and about  such  offences; 
(e) an ombudsman  service  to resolve  disputes  between  consumers  and 
licensees; 
20 (f) sanctions  for breaches  of licensing  conditions,  including  the loss of 
licences; 
(g) the payment  of compensation  to consumers; 
(h) a licensing  body  to administer  the scheme; 
(i) 
25membership  fees for licensees  to cover  the costs  of administering  the scheme, 
including  compensation  and the ombudsman  service ; 
(j) other  matters  in accordance  with  the purposes  of the scheme  as the 
Secretary  of State  sees fit. 
58/2 Bill 38 1 Domestic  Building  Works  (Consumer  Protection)  Bill 
(4) Regulations  under  this section— 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
(b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
(c) 
5may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory  instrument  containing 
them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by resolution  of, each  House 
of Parliament. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) 
10This  Act comes  into force  on such  day or days  as the Secretary  of State  may 
by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Domestic  Building  Works  (Consumer  Protection) 
Act 2021. Domestic  Building  Works  (Consumer  Protection)  Bill 2 
Domestic  Building  Works  (Consumer  Protection) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  consumer  protection  in relation  to domestic  building  works;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Mark  Garnier 
supported  by Mr Steve  Baker , Anthony  Mangnall , 
David  Morris , Kelly  Tolhurst , Caroline  Nokes , 
Jake Berry  and Fleur  Anderson . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  21st June  2021 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2021 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/2 Bill 38



Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Domestic  electricity,  oil and gas exempt  from  liability  to VAT 
2 Consequential  amendments 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/3 94 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  from  VAT  supplies  of electricity,  oil and gas for domestic  purposes; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Domestic  electricity,  oil and gas exempt  from  liability  to VAT 
(1) The Value  Added  Tax Act 1994  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In Schedule  9 (exemptions),  in Part 1 (index)  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
““Domestic  electricity,  oil and gas.….….…..Group  17”. 
5 (3) In Schedule  9 in Part 2 (the Groups),  after  Group  16 insert— 
“GROUP 17 
DOMESTIC ELECTRICITY, OIL AND GAS 
Item no. 
1 Supplies  for qualifying  use of— 
10 (a) coal gas, water  gas, producer  gases  or similar  gases; 
(b) petroleum  gases,  or other  gaseous  hydrocarbons,  whether 
in gaseous  or liquid  state; 
(c) fuel oil, gas oil or kerosene; 
(d) electricity. 
15 NOTES 
1 Matters  included  or not included  in the supplies 
(1) Item  1(a) and (b) shall  not include  any road  fuel gas (within 
the meaning  of the Hydrocarbon  Oil Duties  Act 1979)  on 
which  a duty  of excise  has been  charged  or is chargeable. 
20 (2) Item  1(c) shall  not include  hydrocarbon  oil on which  a duty 
of excise  has been  or is to be charged  without  relief  from, 
or rebate  of, such  duty  by virtue  of the provisions  of the 1 
Hydrocarbon  Oil Duties  Act 1979,  unless  the oil is kerosene 
58/3 94 1 Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
in respect  of which  a relevant  declaration  has been  made 
under  section  13AC(3)  of that Act (use of rebated  kerosene 
for private  pleasure-flying.) 
2 Meaning  of “fuel  oil”, “gas  oil” and “kerosene” 
5In this Group  “fuel  oil” means  heavy  oil which  contains  in 
solution  an amount  of asphaltenes  of not less than  0.5 per (1) 
cent.  or which  contains  less than  0.5 per cent.  but not less 
than  0.1 per cent.  of asphaltenes  and has a closed  flash  point 
not exceeding  150°C. 
10 (2) In this Group  “gas  oil” means  heavy  oil of which  not more 
than  50 per cent.  by volume  distils  at a temperature  not 
exceeding  240°C  and of which  more  than  50 per cent.  by 
volume  distils  at a temperature  not exceeding  340°C. 
(3) 
15In this Group  “kerosene”  means  heavy  oil of which  more 
than  50 per cent.  by volume  distils  at a temperature  not 
exceeding  240°C. 
(4) In this paragraph  “heavy  oil” has the same  meaning  as in 
the Hydrocarbon  Oil Duties  Act 1979. 
3 Meaning  of “qualifying  use” 
20 In this Group  “qualifying  use”  means— 
(a) domestic  use; or 
(b) use by a charity  otherwise  than  in the course  or furtherance 
of a business. 
4 Supplies  only  partly  for qualifying  use 
25 For the purposes  of this Group,  where  there  is a supply  of goods 
partly  for qualifying  use and partly  not— 
(a) if at least  60 per cent.  of the goods  are supplied  for qualifying 
use, the whole  supply  shall  be treated  as a supply  for 
qualifying  use; and 
30 (b) in any other  case,  an apportionment  shall  be made  to 
determine  the extent  to which  the supply  is a supply  for 
qualifying  use. 
5 Supplies  deemed  to be for domestic  use 
35For the purposes  of this Group  the following  supplies  are always 
for domestic  use— 
(a) a supply  to a person  at any premises  of piped  gas (that  is, 
gas within  item  1(a),  or petroleum  gas in a gaseous  state, 
provided  through  pipes)  where  the gas (together  with  any 
40other  piped  gas provided  to him at the premises  by the same 
supplier)  was not provided  at a rate exceeding  150 therms 
a month  or, if the supplier  charges  for the gas by reference 
to the number  of kilowatt  hours  supplied,  4397  kilowatt 
hours  a month; 
(b) 
45a supply  of petroleum  gas in a liquid  state  where  the gas is 
supplied  in cylinders  the net weight  of each  of which  is less 1 
than  50 kilogrammes  and either  the number  of cylinders Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 2 
supplied  is 20 or fewer  or the gas is not intended  for sale 
by the recipient; 
(c) a supply  of petroleum  gas in a liquid  state,  otherwise  than 
5in cylinders,  to a person  at any premises  at which  he is not 
able to store  more  than  two tonnes  of such  gas; 
(d) a supply  of not more  than  2,300  litres  of fuel oil, gas oil or 
kerosene; 
(e) a supply  of electricity  to a person  at any premises  where  the 
10electricity  (together  with  any other  electricity  provided  to 
him at the premises  by the same  supplier)  was not provided 
at a rate exceeding  1000  kilowatt  hours  a month. 
6 Other  supplies  that are for domestic  use 
For the purposes  of this Group  supplies  not within  paragraph  5 are 
for domestic  use if and only  if the goods  supplied  are for use in— 
15 (a) a building,  or part of a building,  that consists  of a dwelling 
or number  of dwellings; 
(b) a building,  or part of a building,  used  for a relevant 
residential  purpose; 
(c) self-catering  holiday  accommodation; 
20 (d) a caravan;  or 
(e) a houseboat. 
7 Interpretation  of paragraph  6 
(1) For the purposes  of this Group  “use  for a relevant  residential 
purpose”  means  use as— 
25 (a) a home  or other  institution  providing  residential 
accommodation  for children, 
(b) a home  or other  institution  providing  residential 
accommodation  with  personal  care for persons  in 
30need  of personal  care by reason  of old age, 
disablement,  past or present  dependence  on alcohol 
or drugs  or past or present  mental  disorder, 
(c) a hospice, 
(d) residential  accommodation  for students  or school 
pupils, 
35 (e) residential  accommodation  for members  of any of 
the armed  forces, 
(f) a monastery,  nunnery  or similar  establishment,  or 
(g) an institution  which  is the sole or main  residence  of 
at least  90 per cent.  of its residents, 
40 except  use as a hospital,  prison  or similar  institution  or an 
hotel,  inn or similar  establishment. 
(2) For the purposes  of this Group  “self-catering  holiday 
accommodation”  includes  any accommodation  advertised  or 
held  out as such. 
45 (3) In paragraph  6 “houseboat”  means  a boat  or other  floating 1 
decked  structure  designed  or adapted  for use solely  as a 3 Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
place  of permanent  habitation  and not having  means  of, or 
capable  of being  readily  adapted  for, self-propulsion.” 
2 Consequential  amendments 
5It shall  be the duty  of the Treasury  to exercise  its power  under  section  29A(3) 
of the Value  Added  Tax 1994  (power  to amend  or vary  Schedule  7A in respect 
of reduced  rate)  in consequence  of the changes  made  by section  1. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on 1 April  2023. 
10 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Act 2022. Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 4 
Domestic  Energy  (Value  Added  Tax)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  from  VAT  supplies  of electricity,  oil and gas for domestic  purposes;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   20th  June  2022 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2022 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/3 94



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  1st Report of Session 2024–25
 Lithium-ion Battery Safety Bill [HL]
  Arbitration Bill [HL]
  Bank Resolution (Recapitalisation) Bill [HL]
  Budget Responsibility Bill
  Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
and International Committee of the Red Cross 
(Status) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate Bill [HL]
  Holocaust Memorial Bill
Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015 (Extension) 
Bill [HL]
Support for Infants and Parents etc 
(Information) Bill [HL]
Education (Values of British Citizenship) Bill 
[HL]
Statutory Instruments (Amendment) Bill [HL]
 Ordered to be printed 4 September 2024 and published 5 September 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 6
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 First Report
 PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.  This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to a private 
member’s Bill. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
 LITHIUM-ION BATTERY SAFETY BILL [HL]
2. This private member’s Bill is intended to make provision for the safe storage, 
use and disposal of lithium-ion batteries. It is due to have its second reading 
on 6 September. There is no delegated powers memorandum as the Bill has 
not been produced with the help of the Government.
3. The Bill contains five regulation making powers each of which would appear 
to allow for the creation of criminal offences:
• Two of the regulation making powers are explicit in conferring powers 
to create offences. In those cases, there is also a power to provide for 
the imposition of civil sanctions (clauses 3 and 4).
• In one case the power to create an offence appears to be a necessary 
consequence of the power being conferred (clause 2).
• In the other two cases, the nature of the regulation making power 
requires an enforcement mechanism, but without making it explicit 
what the nature of the enforcement mechanism is. Such a mechanism 
would have to be the creation of offences or the imposition of civil 
sanctions (clauses 5 and 6).
4. All of the powers in the Bill are subject to the negative resolution procedure. 
In our guidance to Departments1, we make it clear that the use of subordinate 
legislation to create criminal offences should be treated as exceptional and 
that it should only be done where there is a compelling justification. We 
also consider that, where subordinate legislation is used to create criminal 
offences (or where it is used to impose civil sanctions), it should be subject to 
the affirmative resolution procedure.
5. In the circumstances, we consider that the Bill should be amended 
so that the regulation making powers conferred by it are all made 
subject to the affirmative resolution procedure .
6. Clause 5 requires the Secretary of State to make regulations regarding the 
safety standards for conversion kits for use with micromobility vehicles that 
run on lithium-ion batteries, and relating to the use of charging systems for 
electric-powered micromobility vehicles. Clause 6 requires the Secretary of 
1 Paragraph 12 of the Guidance for Departments , December 2023.
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
State to make regulations with respect to the disposal of lithium-ion batteries. 
In both cases, although any requirements imposed by the regulations would 
need to be enforced in order to be effective, nothing is said on the face of the 
Bill as to what provision may be made in the regulations for the enforcement 
of their requirements. As noted above, it seems to us that the only possible 
enforcement mechanisms would be either the creation of criminal offences 
or the imposition of civil sanctions.
7. We consider that clauses 5 and 6 are defective in failing to specify 
the provision which is to be made in the regulations to enforce the 
requirements imposed by them. We consider that the failure to 
specify the enforcement mechanisms is particularly objectionable 
if the intention is that they should include the creation of criminal 
offences, given the constitutional significance of using subordinate 
legislation in this way.
 ARBITRATION BILL [HL]
8. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BANK RESOLUTION (RECAPITALISATION) BILL [HL]
9. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BUDGET RESPONSIBILITY BILL
10. There is nothing in this Money Bill which we would wish to draw to the 
attention of the House.
 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION AND 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (STATUS) 
BILL [HL]
11. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 CROWN ESTATE BILL [HL]
12. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL BILL
13. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LORDS SPIRITUAL (WOMEN) ACT 2015 (EXTENSION) BILL 
[HL]
14. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 SUPPORT FOR INFANTS AND PARENTS ETC (INFORMATION) 
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
BILL [HL]
15. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (VALUES OF BRITISH CITIZENSHIP) BILL [HL]
16. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL [HL]
17. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
For the business taken at the meeting on 4 September 2024, Members declared 
no interests.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by Lord Rooker, The Earl of Lindsay, Baroness 
Humphreys, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, Baroness Chakrabarti, Lord Carlile of 
Berriew, Baroness Bakewell of Hardington of Mandeville.



Elections  (Proportional  Representation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Proportional  representation  system  for parliamentary  general  elections 
2 Proportional  representation  for elections  to local  authorities  in England 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 138 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Introduce  a system  of proportional  representation  for parliamentary  elections 
and for local  government  elections  in England;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Proportional  representation  system  for parliamentary  general  elections 
(1) The simple  majority  system  must  not be used  for any Parliamentary  general 
election  after  the end of the period  of six months  beginning  on the day on 
which  this Act is passed. 
5 (2) The Secretary  of State  must  take all reasonable  steps  to establish  a new 
proportional  representation  system  of election  for Members  of the House  of 
Commons  that would  be expected  to result  in seats  being  held  by each  party 
roughly  reflecting  the proportion  of votes  cast for candidates  of that party  at 
the preceding  general  election. 
10 (3) A system  is suitable  for the purposes  of subsection  (2) if it would  over  the 
past five Parliamentary  general  elections  have  had a mean  average  Gallagher 
proportionality  index  of less than  10. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  (which  may  include 
15provision  amending  any enactment)  contingent  on the prohibition  in subsection 
(1). 
2 Proportional  representation  for elections  to local  authorities  in England 
(1) The simple  majority  system  must  not be used  for any local  elections  in England 
after  the end of the period  of six months  beginning  on the day on which  this 
Act is passed. 
20 (2) The Secretary  of State  must  take all reasonable  steps  to establish  a new 
proportional  representation  system  of election  for councillors  to English  local 
authorities  that would  be expected  to result  in seats  being  held  by each  party 
roughly  reflecting  the proportion  of votes  cast for candidates  of that party. 
59/1 Bill 138 1 Elections  (Proportional  Representation)  Bill 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  (which  may  include 
provision  amending  any enactment)  contingent  on the prohibition  in subsection 
(1). 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
5 (1) Section  1 and this section  extend  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern 
Ireland. 
(2) Section  2 extends  to England  and Wales. 
(3) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
10 (4) This  Act may  be cited  as the Elections  (Proportional  Representation)  Act 2025. Elections  (Proportional  Representation)  Bill 2 
Elections  (Proportional  Representation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Introduce  a system  of proportional  representation  for parliamentary  elections  and for 
local  government  elections  in England;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sarah  Olney 
supported  by Wendy  Chamberlain , David  Chadwick , 
Sorcha  Eastwood , Marie  Goldman , Richard  Foord , 
Tim Farron , Ed Davey , Christine  Jardine , 
Dr Al Pinkerton  and Daisy  Cooper . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   3rd December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 138



Report  Stage:  Monday  3 February  2025 
Employment  Rights  Bill, As Amended 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Employment  Rights  Bill. Any withdrawn  amendments 
are listed  at the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which  it is expected 
they will be decided. 
_NC1 Apsana  Begum 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Sarah  Dyke 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Siân Berry 
Jess Asato 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy 
Caroline  Voaden Ellie Chowns 
Chris  Law 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Jon Trickett Jess Brown-Fuller 
Alex Brewer 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Domestic  abuse  victims’  leave 
(1) Within  twelve  months  of the passage  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must 
make  regulations  entitling  a worker  who is a victim  of domestic  abuse  to be 
absent  from  work  on leave  under  this section. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in accordance 
with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021. 
(3) The regulations  must  include  provision  for determining— 
(a) the extent  of a worker's  entitlement  to leave  under  this section;  and 
(b) when  leave  under  this section  may be taken. 
(4) Provision  under  subsection  (3)(a)  must  secure  that,  where  a worker  is entitled 
to take leave  under  this section,  that worker  is entitled  to― 
(a) at least  ten working  days’  leave;  and 
(b) the benefit  of the terms  and conditions  of employment  which  would 
have  applied  but for the absence. 

(5) The regulations  may― 
(a) make  provision  about  how leave  under  this section  is to be taken; 
(b) make  different  provision  for different  cases  or circumstances;  and 
(c) make  consequential  provision. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to provide  for statutory  leave  for victims  of 
domestic  abuse,  with  regulations  providing  for a minimum  of ten days’  leave. 
_NC2 Apsana  Begum 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Sarah  Dyke 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Siân Berry 
Jess Asato 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy 
Caroline  Voaden Ellie Chowns 
Chris  Law 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Jon Trickett Jess Brown-Fuller 
Alex Brewer 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Domestic  abuse:  right  not to suffer  detriment 
In Part V of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  (Rights  not to suffer  detriment), 
after  section  47G,  insert  new section  47H― 
“Domestic  abuse 
(1) A worker  has the right  not to be subjected  to any detriment  by any act, or any 
deliberate  failure  to act, by their  employer  done  on the ground  that the worker 
has been,  or is suspected  to have  been― 
(a) a victim  of domestic  abuse;  or 
(b) affected  directly  by domestic  abuse. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in accordance 
with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  amend  the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  to protect  workers  from  adverse 
treatment  on the grounds  that they are, or are suspected  to be, a person  affected  by domestic  abuse. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 2 
_NC3 Apsana  Begum 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Ellie Chowns 
Jess Asato 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Chris  Law 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Jon Trickett Siân Berry 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Dismissal  for reasons  related  to domestic  abuse 
In Part 10 of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996,  after  section  99, insert─ 
“99B Domestic  abuse 
(1) A worker  who is dismissed  shall  be regarded  for the purposes  of this 
Part as having  been  unfairly  dismissed  if the reason  for the dismissal  is 
that the worker  has been,  or is suspected  to have  been― 
(a) a victim  of domestic  abuse;  or 
(b) affected  directly  by domestic  abuse. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in 
accordance  with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  amend  the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  to protect  workers  from  dismissal 
on the grounds  that they are, or are suspected  to be, a victim  or a person  affected  by domestic  abuse. 
_NC4 Apsana  Begum 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Ellie Chowns 
Jess Asato 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Chris  Law 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Jon Trickett Siân Berry 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Employers  to take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  domestic  abuse 
After  section  40A of the Equality  Act 2010  (employer  duty  to prevent  sexual 
harassment  of workers),  insert― 
“40B Employer  duty  to prevent  workers  from  experiencing  domestic  abuse 
(1) An employer  (A) must  take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  their  workers 
from  experiencing  domestic  abuse  in the course  of their  employment. 3 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in 
accordance  with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021 ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  employers  to take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  their  workers  from 
experiencing  domestic  abuse. 
_NC5 Apsana  Begum 
Florence  Eshalomi 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Ellie Chowns 
Jess Asato 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Chris  Law 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Jon Trickett Siân Berry 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Employers  to take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  domestic  abuse  (contract 
workers) 
After  section  41 of the Equality  Act 2010  (contract  workers),  insert― 
“41A Employer  duty  to prevent  workers  from  experiencing  domestic  abuse 
(1) An employer  (A) must  take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  a contract 
worker  working  for or on behalf  of (A) from  experiencing  domestic 
abuse  in the course  of their  engagement. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in 
accordance  with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  employers  to take all reasonable  steps  to prevent  contract  workers 
from  experiencing  domestic  abuse. 
_NC6 Richard  Burgon 
Barry  Gardiner 
Andy  McDonald 
Rachael  Maskell 
Clive  Lewis 
Nadia  Whittome 
Grahame  Morris 
John  McDonnell 
Rebecca  Long  Bailey 
Zarah  Sultana 
Neil Duncan-Jordan Bell Ribeiro-Addy 
Steve  Witherden 
Jeremy  Corbyn 
Brian  Leishman 
Dr Simon  Opher Jon Trickett 
Ian Lavery 
Imran  Hussain 
Ian Byrne 
Apsana  Begum 
Kim Johnson REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 4 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Workplace  contravention  of Equality  Act: obtaining  information 
(1) In this section— 
(a) P is a worker  who thinks  that a contravention  of the Equality  Act 2010 
has occurred  in relation  to P’s employment  or working  practices; 
(b) R is P’s employer  and P thinks  that R is responsible  for the contravention 
mentioned  in paragraph  (a). 
(2) A Minister  of the Crown  must  by order  prescribe— 
(a) forms  by which  P may question  R on any matter  which  is or may be 
relevant  to subsection  (1); 
(b) forms  by which  R may answer  questions  by P. 
(3) A question  by P or an answer  by R is admissible  as evidence  in proceedings 
under  this Act (whether  or not the question  or answer  is contained  in a 
prescribed  form). 
(4) A court  or tribunal  may draw  an inference  from— 
(a) a failure  by R to answer  a question  by P before  the end of the period 
of 8 weeks  beginning  with  the day on which  the question  is served; 
(b) an evasive  or equivocal  answer. 
(5) Subsection  (4) does  not apply  if— 
(a) R reasonably  asserts  that to have  answered  differently  or at all might 
have  prejudiced  a criminal  matter; 
(b) R reasonably  asserts  that to have  answered  differently  or at all would 
have  revealed  the reason  for not commencing  or not continuing  criminal 
proceedings; 
(c) R's answer  is of a kind specified  for the purposes  of this paragraph  by 
order  of a Minister  of the Crown; 
(d) R's answer  is given  in circumstances  specified  for the purposes  of this 
paragraph  by order  of a Minister  of the Crown; 
(e) R's failure  to answer  occurs  in circumstances  specified  for the purposes 
of this paragraph  by order  of a Minister  of the Crown. 
(6) The reference  to a contravention  of the Equality  Act 2010  includes  a reference 
to a breach  of an equality  clause  or rule,  insofar  as it relates  to employment 
or working  practices. 
(7) A Minister  of the Crown  may by order— 
(a) prescribe  the period  within  which  a question  must  be served  to be 
admissible  under  subsection  (3); 
(b) prescribe  the manner  in which  a question  by P, or an answer  by R, may 
be served. 
(8) This section— 
(a) does  not affect  any other  enactment  or rule of law relating  to interim 
or preliminary  matters  in proceedings  before  a county  court,  the sheriff 
or an employment  tribunal,  and 5 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(b) has effect  subject  to any enactment  or rule of law regulating  the 
admissibility  of evidence  in such proceedings. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  reintroduce,  for workers  in relation  to employers,  the right  to statutory 
Discrimination  Questionnaires  pursuant  to the Equality  Act 2010  regarding  age, disability,  sex, race, 
sexual  orientation,  pregnancy  and maternity,  gender  reassignment,  religion  or belief  and marriage 
and civil partnership  discrimination. 
_NC7 Ms Stella  Creasy 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Christine  Jardine 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Alex Brewer 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy 
Carla  Denyer 
Mr Jonathan  Brash 
Dr Allison  Gardner 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Sarah  Champion 
Ian Byrne 
Mike  Amesbury 
John  McDonnell 
Jess Asato 
Clive  Lewis 
Daniel  Francis 
Ben Lake 
Kirith  Entwistle 
Mr Luke  Charters 
Afzal  Khan 
Anna  Sabine Wera  Hobhouse 
Kim Johnson 
Sarah  Owen 
Ellie Chowns 
Mrs Elsie Blundell 
Fabian  Hamilton 
Paula  Barker 
Siân Berry 
Natalie  Fleet 
Chris  Webb 
Alison  Hume 
Dr Rosena  Allin-Khan 
Chris  Evans 
Tulip  Siddiq 
Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck 
Jon Trickett 
Patricia  Ferguson 
Maya  Ellis Peter  Lamb 
Richard  Burgon 
Dr Simon  Opher 
Zarah  Sultana 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Olivia  Blake 
Sarah  Hall 
Claire  Hanna 
Helen  Hayes 
Sarah  Smith 
Matt  Turmaine 
Paulette  Hamilton 
Mrs Sharon  Hodgson 
Cat Eccles 
Darren  Paffey 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Rachael  Maskell 
Steve  Witherden 
. To move  the following  Clause― 
“Protected  paternity  or parental  partner  leave 
(1) Within  six months  of the passage  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
on the introduction  of protected  paternity  or parental  partner  leave  for all 
employees. 
(2) A consultation  under  subsection  (1) must  consider ― 
(a) the minimum  duration  for a period  of protected  paternity  or parental 
partner  leave; 
(b) how best to ensure  that protected  paternity  or parental  partner  leave 
is protected,  non-transferable  and does  not result  in discrimination 
against  the employee  taking  that leave; 
(c) how best to ensure  that protected  paternity  or parental  partner  leave 
reduces  the risk of employees  experiencing  discrimination  as a result 
of being  eligible  for ordinary  maternity  leave;  and REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 6 
(d) the extent  to which  the costs  to employers  of protected  paternity  or 
parental  partner  leave  should  be reimbursed,  in full or in part,  and the 
manner  in which  this should  be achieved. 
(3) Following  a consultation  under  subsection  (2), within  twelve  months  of 
commencing  the consultation,  the Secretary  of State  must  by regulations ― 
(a) introduce  protected  paternity  or parental  partner  leave,  ensuring  that 
it is paid,  protected  and non-transferable; 
(b) define  the length  of any period  of protected  paternity  or parental 
partner  leave  under  subsection  (3)(a);  and 
(c) make  provision  for any other  matters  the Secretary  of State  considers 
relevant  to the matters  under  subsections  (3)(a)  and (3)(b). 
(4) For the purposes  of this section― 
(a) “protected”  leave  means  leave  during  which  an employer  must  not 
permit  an employee  who satisfies  prescribed  conditions  to work;  and 
(b) “parental  partner  leave”  means  leave  taken  for the purposes  of caring 
for a child,  with  the exception  of maternity  leave  taken  under  sections 
71 to 73 of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996. 
(5) For the purposes  of subsections  (2)(b)  and (2)(c),  “discrimination”  is defined 
according  to sections  13 to 19 of the Equality  Act 2010. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to consult  on a period  of protected  paternity 
or parental  partner  leave,  and require  them  to introduce  protected  paternity  or parental  partner 
leave  by regulations  at a subsequent  date. 
_NC8 John  McDonnell 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Prison  officers:  inducements  to withhold  services 
In section  127 of the Criminal  Justice  and Public  Order  Act 1994  (Inducements 
to withhold  services  or to indiscipline)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), omit  paragraph  (a); 
(b) omit  subsection  (1A); 
(c) omit  subsection  (7).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  repeal  provisions  in the Criminal  Justice  and Public  Order  Act 1994  that 
prohibit  inducing  a prison  officer  to take (or continue  to take)  any industrial  action. 
_NC9 John  McDonnell 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 7 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Inducement  of prison  officers:  exempted  persons 
After  section  127A  of the Criminal  Justice  and Public  Order  Act 1994 
(inducements  to withhold  services  or to indiscipline),  insert— 
“Section  127B:  Prison  officers  and trade  unions:  exempted  persons 
Section  127 (inducements  to withhold  services  or to indiscipline)  does 
not apply  to— 
(a) Any listed  trade  union  representing  prison  officers,  or 
(b) any person  acting  on behalf  of a listed  trade  union  representing 
prison  officers. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  repeal,  with  respect  to trade  unions  representing  prison  officers,  provisions 
that prohibit  the inducement  of industrial  action  or indiscipline  by a prison  officer. 
_NC10 Steve  Darling 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Munira  Wilson 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller Claire  Hanna 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Carer’s  leave:  remuneration 
(1) In section  80K of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996,  omit  subsection  (3) and 
insert— 
“(3) In subsection  (1)(a),  “terms  and conditions  of employment”  includes— 
(a) matters  connected  with  an employee’s  employment  whether  or 
not they arise  under  the contract  of employment,  and 
(b) terms  and conditions  about  remuneration. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  make  Carer’s  Leave  a paid entitlement. 
_NC11 Steve  Darling 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Munira  Wilson 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 8 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Caring  as a protected  characteristic 
(1) The Equality  Act 2010  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  4, after  “sexual  orientation”  insert  “caring”. 
(3) After  section  12, insert— 
“12A Caring 
(1) Caring  means  the provision  or intention  of person  (A) to provide  care 
to a person  (B) with  a long  term  care need,  if person  (B)— 
(a) is a spouse,  civil partner,  child  or parent  of person  (A); or 
(b) lives in the same  household  as person  (A) or reasonably  relies 
on person  (A) to provide  or arrange  care. 
(2) In subsection  (1), person  (B) has a long-term  care need  if person  (B)― 
(a) has an illness  or injury  (whether  physical  or mental)  that requires, 
or is likely  to require,  care for more  than  three  months; 
(b) has a disability  under  this Act; or 
(c) requires  care for a reason  connected  with  old age. 
(3) In subsection  (1), the provision  of care is regarded  as relevant  under 
this section  if person  (A) provides  or intends  to provide  care— 
(a) under  or by virtue  of a contract,  or 
(b) as voluntary  work. 
(4) In relation  to the protected  characteristic  of caring— 
(a) a reference  to a person  who has a particular  protected 
characteristic  is a reference  to a person  who has particular  caring 
responsibilities; 
(b) a reference  to persons  who share  a protected  characteristic  is a 
reference  to persons  who are of the same  type of caring 
responsibilities  in respect  of the relationship  to the person  being 
cared  for.”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  make  caring  a protected  characteristic  under  the Equality  Act 2010. 
_NC12 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Liz Jarvis 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Mike  Martin 
Manuela  Perteghella Caroline  Voaden 
Mr Lee Dillon 
Luke  Taylor 
John  Milne Tim Farron 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
Olly Glover 
Victoria  Collins 9 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Rates  of statutory  maternity  pay, etc 
(1) In regulation  6 of the Statutory  Maternity  Pay (General)  Regulations  1986 
(prescribed  rate of statutory  maternity  pay) for “£184.03”  substitute  “£368.06”. 
(2) In the Statutory  Paternity  Pay and Statutory  Adoption  Pay (Weekly  Rates) 
Regulations  2002— 
(a) in regulation  2(a) (weekly  rate of payment  of statutory  paternity  pay) 
for “£184.03”  substitute  “£368.06”;  and 
(b) in regulation  3(a) (weekly  rate of payment  of statutory  adoption  pay) 
for “£184.03”  substitute  “£368.06”. 
(3) In regulation  40(1)(a)  of the Statutory  Shared  Parental  Pay (General)  Regulations 
2014  (weekly  rate of payment  of statutory  shared  parental  pay) for “£184.03” 
substitute  “£368.06”. 
(4) In regulation  20(1)(a)  of the Statutory  Parental  Bereavement  Pay (General) 
Regulations  2020  (weekly  rate of payment)for  “£184.03”  substitute  “£368.06”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  sets out rates  of Statutory  Maternity  Pay, Statutory  Paternity  Pay, Statutory  Adoption 
Pay, Statutory  Shared  Parental  Pay and Statutory  Parental  Bereavement  Pay. 
_NC13 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Liz Jarvis 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Mike  Martin 
Manuela  Perteghella Caroline  Voaden 
Mr Lee Dillon 
Luke  Taylor 
John  Milne Tim Farron 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
Olly Glover 
Victoria  Collins 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Publication  of information  about  parental  leave  policies:  regulations 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  make  regulations  to require  any employer  with 
more  than  250 employees  to publish  information  on the internet  about  the 
employer’s  policies  on parental  leave  and pay for parental  leave. 
(2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) must  be published  within  one year of this 
Act being  passed. 
(3) Regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the affirmative  regulation 
procedure. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  companies  with  more  than  250 employees  to publish  information 
about  their  parental  leave  and pay policies. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 10 
_NC14 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Liz Jarvis 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
Mike  Martin 
Manuela  Perteghella Caroline  Voaden 
Freddie  van Mierlo 
Luke  Taylor 
John  Milne Tim Farron 
Mr Lee Dillon 
Olly Glover 
Victoria  Collins 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Entitlement  to paternity  leave 
(1) The Employment  Rights  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  80A (entitlement  to paternity  leave:  birth)— 
(a) in subsection  (3), for “two”  substitute  “six”, 
(b) in subsection  (4), for “56 days”  substitute  “52 weeks”. 
(3) In section  80B (entitlement  to paternity  leave:  adoption)— 
(a) in subsection  (3), for “two”  substitute  “six” 
(b) in subsection  (4), for “56 days”  substitute  “52 weeks”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  sets out an entitlement  to paternity  leave. 
_NC15 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Whistleblowers:  protected  disclosures 
In Part X of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996,  for section  103A,  substitute— 
“103A  Protected  disclosure. 
An employee  who is dismissed  shall  be regarded  for the purposes  of 
this Part as unfairly  dismissed  if the reason  (or one of the reasons)  for 
the dismissal  is that the employee  made  a protected  disclosure. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  slightly  extend  the circumstances  in which  an employee  is considered  as 
unfairly  dismissed  after  making  a protected  disclosure. 11 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC16 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Adoption  pay: self-employed  persons 
(1) Within  six months  of the passage  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  by 
regulations  enable  statutory  adoption  pay to be payable  to persons  who are— 
(a) self-employed,  or 
(b) contractors. 
(2) For the purposes  of subsection  (1), the meaning  of “self-employed”  and 
“contractors”  shall  be set out in regulations  under  this section. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  extends  statutory  adoption  pay to the self-employed  and contractors. 
_NC17 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Meaning  of “kinship  care” 
(1) This section  defines  “kinship  care”  for the purposes  of sections  80EF  to 80EI 
of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  (inserted  by section  (Kinship  care leave ) 
of this Act). 
(2) Kinship  care describes  an arrangement  where  a child  is raised  by a friend, 
relative  or extended  family  member  other  than  a parent. 
(3) Subsections  (4) to (9) set out the arrangements  that are recognised  as being 
types  of kinship  care. 
(4) An arrangement  where  a child  is adopted  (within  the meaning  of Chapter  4 
of the Adoption  and Children  Act 2002)  by a friend,  relative  or extended  family 
member  (“kinship  adoption”). 
(5) An arrangement  where— 
(a) a child  is looked  after  by a local  authority  (within  the meaning  of section 
22 of the Children  Act 1989),  and REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 12 
(b) a friend,  relative  or extended  family  member  of that child  is approved 
by the local  authority  to be a foster  carer  for that child  (“kinship  foster 
care”). 
(6) An arrangement  created  by a special  guardianship  order  pursuant  to section 
14A of the Children  Act 1989  (“special  guardianship”). 
(7) An arrangement  created  by a child  arrangements  order  pursuant  to section  8 
of the Children  Act 1989  where  the court  orders  that a child  is to live 
predominantly  with  a friend,  relative  or extended  family  member  of that child 
(“kinship  child  arrangement”). 
(8) An arrangement  where  a child  is fostered  privately  (within  the meaning  of 
section  66 of the Children  Act 1989)  by a friend  or extended  family  member 
(“private  fostering  arrangement”). 
(9) Any other  arrangement  where  a child  is cared  for, and provided  with 
accommodation  in their  own home— 
(a) by a relative  of the child,  other  than— 
(i) a parent  of the child;  or 
(ii) a person  who is not a parent  of the child  but who has parental 
responsibility  for the child;  and 
(b) where  the arrangement  has lasted,  or is intended  to last, for at least 
28 days (“private  family  arrangement”). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  is subsequent  to the new clause  about  kinship  care leave. 
_NC18 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Olly Glover 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Kinship  care leave 
(1) The Employment  Rights  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  80EE  insert— 
“CHAPTER 5 
KINSHIP CARE LEAVE 
80EF Kinship  care leave 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  make  regulations  entitling  an employee  to 
be absent  from  work  on leave  under  this section  if the employee  satisfies 13 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
conditions  specified  in the regulations  as to an eligible  kinship  care 
arrangement  with  a child. 
(2) The regulations  must  include  provision  for determining— 
(a) the extent  of an employee’s  entitlement  to leave  under  this 
section  in respect  of a child; 
(b) when  leave  under  this section  may be taken. 
(3) Provision  under  subsection  (2)(a)  must  secure  that— 
(a) where  only one employee  is entitled  to leave  under  this section 
in respect  of a given  child,  the employee  is entitled  to at least 
52 weeks’  leave; 
(b) where  more  than  one employee  is entitled  to leave  under  this 
section  in respect  of the same  child,  those  employees  are entitled 
to share  at least  52 weeks’  leave  between  them. 
(4) An employee  is entitled  to leave  under  this section  only if the eligible 
kinship  care arrangement  is intended  to last— 
(a) at least  one year,  and 
(b) until  the child  being  cared  for attains  the age of 18. 
(5) For the purposes  of this Chapter,  “eligible  kinship  care arrangement” 
means— 
(a) special  guardianship, 
(b) a kinship  child  arrangement, 
(c) a private  fostering  arrangement,  or 
(d) a private  family  arrangement 
within  the meaning  given  by section  [Meaning  of ‘kinship  care’ ] of the 
Employment  Rights  Act 2024. 
(6) The regulations  may make  provision  about  how leave  under  this section 
is to be taken. 
(7) In this section— 
(a) “special  guardianship”,  “kinship  child  arrangement”,  “private 
fostering  arrangement”  and “private  family  arrangement”  have 
the same  meanings  as in section  [Meaning  of ‘kinship  care’ ] of 
the Employment  Rights  Act 2024. 
(b) “week”  means  any period  of seven  days. 
80EG Rights  during  and after  kinship  care leave 
(1) Regulations  under  section  80EF  must  provide— 
(a) that an employee  who is absent  on leave  under  that section  is 
entitled,  for such purposes  and to such extent  as the regulations 
may prescribe,  to the benefit  of the terms  and conditions  of 
employment  which  would  have  applied  but for the absence, 
(b) that an employee  who is absent  on leave  under  that section  is 
bound,  for such purposes  and to such extent  as the regulations 
may prescribe,  by obligations  arising  under  those  terms  and REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 14 
conditions  (except  in so far as they are inconsistent  with 
subsection  (1) of that section),  and 
(c) that an employee  who is absent  on leave  under  that section  is 
entitled  to return  from  leave  to a job of a kind prescribed  by 
regulations,  subject  to section  80EH. 
(2) The reference  in subsection  (1)(c)  to absence  on leave  under  section 
80EF  includes,  where  appropriate,  a reference  to a continuous  period 
of absence  attributable  partly  to leave  under  that section  and partly  to 
any one or more  of the following— 
(a) maternity  leave, 
(b) paternity  leave, 
(c) adoption  leave, 
(d) shared  parental  leave, 
(e) parental  leave, 
(f) parental  bereavement  leave. 
(3) In subsection  (1)(a),  “terms  and conditions  of employment”— 
(a) includes  matters  connected  with  an employee’s  employment 
whether  or not they arise  under  the contract  of employment, 
but 
(b) does  not include  terms  and conditions  about  remuneration. 
(4) Regulations  under  section  80EF  may specify  matters  which  are, or are 
not, to be treated  as remuneration  for the purposes  of this section. 
(5) Regulations  under  section  80EF  may make  provision,  in relation  to the 
right  to return  mentioned  in subsection  (1)(c),  about— 
(a) seniority,  pension  rights  and similar  rights; 
(b) terms  and conditions  of employment  on return. 
80EH Special  cases 
(1) Regulations  under  section  80EF  may make  provision  about— 
(a) redundancy  during  or after  a period  of leave  under  that section, 
or 
(b) dismissal  (other  than  by reason  of redundancy)  during  a period 
of leave  under  that section. 
(2) Provision  by virtue  of subsection  (1) may include— 
(a) provision  requiring  an employer  to offer  alternative  employment; 
(b) provision  for the consequences  of failure  to comply  with  the 
regulations  (which  may include  provision  for a dismissal  to be 
treated  as unfair  for the purposes  of Part 10). 
80EI Chapter  5: supplemental 
(1) Regulations  under  section  80EF  may— 15 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
make  provision  about  notices  to be given,  evidence  to be 
produced  and other  procedures  to be followed  by employees 
and employers; (a) 
(b) make  provision  requiring  employers  or employees  to keep 
records; 
(c) make  provision  for the consequences  of failure  to give notices, 
to produce  evidence,  to keep  records  or to comply  with  other 
procedural  requirements; 
(d) make  provision  for the consequences  of failure  to act in 
accordance  with  a notice  given  by virtue  of paragraph  (a); 
(e) make  special  provision  for cases  where  an employee  has a right 
which  corresponds  to a right  under  section80EF  and which  arises 
under  the person’s  contract  of employment  or otherwise; 
(f) make  provision  modifying  the effect  of Chapter  2 of Part 14 
(calculation  of a week’s  pay) in relation  to an employee  who is 
or has been  absent  from  work  on leave  under  section  80EF; 
(g) make  provision  applying,  modifying  or excluding  an enactment, 
in such circumstances  as may be specified  and subject  to any 
conditions  which  may be specified,  in relation  to a person 
entitled  to take leave  under  section  80EF; 
(h) make  different  provision  for different  cases  or circumstances; 
(i) make  consequential  provision. 
(2) The cases  or circumstances  mentioned  in subsection  (1)(h)  include— 
(a) more  than  one child  being  subject  to the same  eligible  kinship 
care arrangement,  and 
(b) a child  being  subject  to an eligible  kinship  care arrangement  on 
two or more  separate  occasions,  and regulations  may,  in 
particular,  make  special  provision  regarding  the applicability 
and extent  of the entitlement  to leave  in such circumstances. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may by regulations  make  provision  for some  or 
all of a period  of kinship  care leave  to be paid. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  sets out an entitlement  to kinship  care leave. 
_NC19 Steve  Darling 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Cameron  Thomas 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
Ian Sollom REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 16 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Right  to be accompanied 
(1) Section  10 of the Employment  Relations  Act 1999  (right  to be accompanied) 
is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (3), after  paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(ba) person  who has been  reasonably  certified  in writing  by a 
Professional  Body  as having  experience  of, or as having  received 
training  in, acting  as a worker’s  companion  at disciplinary  or 
grievance  hearings,  or” 
(3) After  subsection  (7) insert— 
“(8) In this section,  “Professional  Body”  means  any organisation  which  is 
authorised  by a regulation  made  by the Secretary  of State  pursuant  to 
subsection  (9). 
(9) The Secretary  of State  may make  a regulation  or regulations  authorising 
any organisation  as a Professional  Body  for the purposes  of this 
section. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  expand  the right  to be accompanied  by a certified  companion  at disciplinary 
and grievance  hearings. 
_NC20 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Duty  to prevent  violence  and harassment  in the workplace 
(1) Section  2 of the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  subsection  (2)(e)  insert— 
“(f) the adoption  of proactive  and preventative  measures  to protect 
all persons  working  in their  workplace  from  violence  and 
harassment,  including— 
(i) gender-based  violence; 
(ii) sexual  harassment; 
(iii) psychological  and emotional  abuse; 
(iv) physical  and sexual  abuse; 
(v) stalking  and harassment,  including  online  harassment; 
(vi) threats  of violence. ” 
(3) After  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) It shall  be the duty  of every  employer  to prepare,  and as often  as may 
be appropriate  revise,  an assessment  to identify  potential  risks of 
violence  and harassment  in the workplace  and implement  policies  and 
procedures  to eliminate  these  risks so far as is reasonably  practicable. 17 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
(3B) It shall  be the duty  of every  employer  to provide  training  to all 
employees  on recognising  and preventing  violence  and harassment  in 
the workplace,  with  a focus  on gender-responsive  approaches. 
(3C) In subsection  (3B) a “gender-responsive  approach”  means  taking  into 
account  the various  needs,  interests,  and experiences  of people  of 
different  gender  identities,  including  women  and girls,  when  designing 
and implementing  policies  and procedures. 
(3D) In this section,  “persons  working  in the workplace”  includes— 
(a) employees; 
(b) full-time,  part-time,  and temporary  workers;  and 
(c) interns  and apprentices. 
(3E) In subsection  (2)(f)  and subsections  (3A) and (3B),  a reference  to the 
workplace  includes  remote  and hybrid  work  environments. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  will amend  the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  to place  a duty  on employers 
to protect  all those  working  in their  workplace  from  gender-based  violence  and harassment. 
_NC21 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Expanded  duties  of the Health  and Safety  Executive 
In the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974,  after  section  11 (functions  of 
the Executive)  insert— 
“11ZA Duties  of the Executive:  health  and safety  framework  on violence  and 
harassment 
(1) It shall  be the duty  of the Executive  to develop,  publish  and as often  as 
may be appropriate  revise  a health  and safety  framework  on violence 
and harassment  in the workplace. 
(2) This framework  shall  include  specific  provisions  relating  to— 
(a) the prevention  of gender-based  violence  and harassment  of 
those  in the workplace  including  the prevention  of physical, 
emotional,  and psychological  abuse; 
(b) the duty  of employers  to create  safe and inclusive  workplaces 
and the preventative  measures  they must  adopt;  and 
(c) the use of monitoring  and enforcement  mechanisms  to ensure 
compliance  with  the duty  of the employer  in relation  to violence 
and harassment  (see section  2(2)(f)). 
(3) The Executive  shall  work  with  other  relevant  bodies,  including  the 
Equality  and Human  Rights  Commission  and law enforcement  agencies, 
to develop  and revise  this framework. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 18 
11ZB Duties  of the Executive:  guidance  for employers 
The Executive  shall,  in consultation  with  such other  persons  as it 
considers  to be relevant,  issue  guidance  for employers  about  the 
protection  of those  facing  violence  and harassment  on the basis  of 
gender  in the workplace  by— 
(a) implementing  workplace  policies  to prevent  violence  and 
harassment; 
(b) establishing  confidential  reporting  mechanisms  to allow  victims 
to report  incidents; 
(c) conducting  risk assessments  and ensuring  compliance  with  the 
health  and safety  framework  (see section  11ZA); 
(d) reporting  and addressing  incidents  of violence  and harassment; 
and 
(e) supporting  victims  of violence  and harassment,  including  making 
accommodations  in the workplace  to support  such victims. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  will create  a duty  on the Health  and Safety  Executive  to develop  a health  and safety 
framework  on violence  and harassment  and to issue  guidance  for employers  about  the protection 
of those  facing  violence  and harassment  on the basis  of gender  in the workplace. 
_NC22 Jess Asato 
Apsana  Begum 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Sarah  Hall 
Warinder  Juss 
Tonia  Antoniazzi 
Dr Simon  Opher 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Duty  of employer  to prepare  domestic  abuse  policy 
(1) It is the duty  of every  employer  to develop,  publish  and as often  as may be 
appropriate  revise  a written  statement  of its general  policy  with  respect  to the 
support  it provides  to workers  who are victims  of domestic  abuse. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  make  provision  for determining— 
(a) the scope  of a domestic  abuse  policy; 
(b) the form  and manner  in which  a domestic  abuse  policy  is to be 
published; 
(c) when  and how frequently  a domestic  abuse  policy  is to be published 
or revised; 
(d) requirements  for senior  approval  before  a domestic  abuse  policy  is 
published. 
(3) The regulations  may make  provision  for a failure  to comply  with  subsection 
(1)— 
(a) to be an offence  punishable  on summary  conviction— 19 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
in England  and Wales  by a fine; (i) 
(ii) in Scotland  or Northern  Ireland  by a fine not exceeding  level  5 
on the standard  scale; 
(b) to be enforced,  otherwise  than  as an offence,  by such means  as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The regulations  may not require  an employer  to revise  the policy  more 
frequently  than  at intervals  of 24 months. 
(5) For the purposes  of this section,  “domestic  abuse”  is defined  in accordance 
with  sections  1 and 2 of the Domestic  Abuse  Act 2021. 
(6) This section  does  not apply  to an employer  who has fewer  than  5 employees. 
(7) Regulations  under  this section  must  be made  no later  than  twelve  months 
after  the passage  of this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  create  a duty on employers  with 5 or more  employees  to have  a policy  outlining 
the support  they provide  to workers  who are victims  of domestic  abuse. 
_NC23 Claire  Hanna 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Prescribed  rate of statutory  maternity  pay 
In regulation  6 of the Statutory  Maternity  Pay (General)  Regulations  1986, 
delete  “is a weekly  rate of £184.03”  and insert  "is a rate of £12.60  per hour  in 
the UK and £13.85  per hour  in London”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  increase  the current  rate of statutory  maternity  pay, bringing  it in line with 
the “real  Living  Wage”. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 20 
_1 Sarah  Owen 
Alex Brewer 
Rachel  Taylor 
Rosie  Duffield 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Rachael  Maskell 
Mrs Elsie Blundell 
Paul Davies 
Kate  Osborne 
Anna  Sabine 
Ann Davies 
Kim Johnson 
Olivia  Blake 
Tahir  Ali 
Lorraine  Beavers 
Siân Berry 
Ms Stella  Creasy 
Adrian  Ramsay 
Liz Jarvis 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Alison  Hume 
Kirith  Entwistle 
Samantha  Niblett 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy Sarah  Hall 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Chris  Webb 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Tony  Vaughan 
Llinos  Medi 
Chris  Hinchliff 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Iqbal  Mohamed 
Jon Trickett 
Ellie Chowns 
Mr James  Frith 
Shockat  Adam 
Susan  Murray 
Steve  Witherden 
Daisy  Cooper 
Nadia  Whittome 
Christine  Jardine 
Alice  Macdonald 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Rachel  Gilmour 
Robin  Swann 
Andy  McDonald 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Henry  Tufnell 
Ben Lake 
Lee Anderson 
Paula  Barker 
John  McDonnell 
Zarah  Sultana 
Irene  Campbell 
Will Stone 
Dr Marie  Tidball 
Lillian  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Naz Shah 
Kirsteen  Sullivan 
David  Burton-Sampson 
Catherine  Fookes 
Jess Asato 
Anna  Dixon 
. Clause  16, page  33, line 8, at end insert— 
“(   ) after  subsection  (2) insert— 
“(2A) The conditions  specified  under  subsection  (2) must  be framed  so as to 
ensure  that a “bereaved  person”  includes  those  bereaved  by pregnancy 
loss. 
(2B) In subsection  (2A) “pregnancy  loss”  includes— 
(a) a pregnancy  that that ends  as a result  of— 
(i) a miscarriage; 
(ii) an ectopic  pregnancy; 
(iii) a molar  pregnancy; 
(iv) a medical  termination  conducted  in accordance  with 
section  1 of the Abortion  Act 1967; 
(b) an unsuccessful  attempt  at in vitro  fertilisation  due to embryo 
transfer  loss.”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  that any regulations  made  under  section  80EA  of the Employment  Rights 
Act 1996  (as amended  by the Bill) must  include  conditions  framed  by reference  to those  bereaved 
by pregnancy  loss. 21 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_2 Sarah  Owen 
Alex Brewer 
Rachel  Taylor 
Rosie  Duffield 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Rachael  Maskell 
Mrs Elsie Blundell 
Paul Davies 
Kate  Osborne 
Anna  Sabine 
Ann Davies 
Kim Johnson 
Olivia  Blake 
Tahir  Ali 
Lorraine  Beavers 
Siân Berry 
Ms Stella  Creasy 
Adrian  Ramsay 
Liz Jarvis 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Alison  Hume 
Kirith  Entwistle 
Samantha  Niblett 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy Sarah  Hall 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Chris  Webb 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Tony  Vaughan 
Llinos  Medi 
Chris  Hinchliff 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Iqbal  Mohamed 
Jon Trickett 
Ellie Chowns 
Mr James  Frith 
Shockat  Adam 
Susan  Murray 
Steve  Witherden 
Daisy  Cooper 
Nadia  Whittome 
Christine  Jardine 
Alice  Macdonald 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Rachel  Gilmour 
Robin  Swann 
Andy  McDonald 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Henry  Tufnell 
Ben Lake 
Lee Anderson 
Paula  Barker 
John  McDonnell 
Zarah  Sultana 
Irene  Campbell 
Will Stone 
Dr Marie  Tidball 
Lillian  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Naz Shah 
Kirsteen  Sullivan 
David  Burton-Sampson 
Catherine  Fookes 
Jess Asato 
Anna  Dixon 
. Clause  16, page  33, line 11, at end insert— 
“(   ) in subsection  (5), after  “child”  insert  “or as a result  of pregnancy  loss.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  amends  section  80EA(5)  of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  to ensure  that the two 
week  leave  period  is made  available  to those  bereaved  as a result  of pregnancy  loss. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 22 
_3 Sarah  Owen 
Alex Brewer 
Rachel  Taylor 
Rosie  Duffield 
Carla  Denyer 
Liz Saville  Roberts 
Rachael  Maskell 
Mrs Elsie Blundell 
Paul Davies 
Kate  Osborne 
Anna  Sabine 
Ann Davies 
Kim Johnson 
Olivia  Blake 
Tahir  Ali 
Lorraine  Beavers 
Siân Berry 
Ms Stella  Creasy 
Adrian  Ramsay 
Liz Jarvis 
Wera  Hobhouse 
Alison  Hume 
Kirith  Entwistle 
Samantha  Niblett 
Claire  Hanna 
Mary  Kelly  Foy Sarah  Hall 
Sorcha  Eastwood 
Chris  Webb 
Charlotte  Nichols 
Tony  Vaughan 
Llinos  Medi 
Chris  Hinchliff 
Abtisam  Mohamed 
Iqbal  Mohamed 
Jon Trickett 
Ellie Chowns 
Mr James  Frith 
Shockat  Adam 
Susan  Murray 
Steve  Witherden 
Daisy  Cooper 
Nadia  Whittome 
Christine  Jardine 
Alice  Macdonald 
Bell Ribeiro-Addy Rachel  Gilmour 
Robin  Swann 
Andy  McDonald 
Neil Duncan-Jordan 
Henry  Tufnell 
Ben Lake 
Lee Anderson 
Paula  Barker 
John  McDonnell 
Zarah  Sultana 
Irene  Campbell 
Will Stone 
Dr Marie  Tidball 
Lillian  Jones 
Wendy  Chamberlain 
Naz Shah 
Kirsteen  Sullivan 
David  Burton-Sampson 
Catherine  Fookes 
Jess Asato 
Anna  Dixon 
. Clause  16, page  34, line 8, at end insert— 
“(   ) In section  171ZZ6  of the Social  Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992 
(entitlement  to statutory  pregnancy  loss pay),  after  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) The conditions  specified  under  subsection  (2) must  be framed  so as to 
ensure  that a “bereaved  parent”  includes  those  bereaved  by pregnancy 
loss. 
(3B) In subsection  (3A) “pregnancy  loss”  includes— 
(a) a pregnancy  that that ends  as a result  of— 
(i) a miscarriage; 
(ii) an ectopic  pregnancy; 
(iii) a molar  pregnancy; 
(iv) a medical  termination  conducted  in accordance  with 
section  1 of the Abortion  Act 1967; 
(b) an unsuccessful  attempt  at in vitro  fertilisation  due to embryo 
transfer  loss.”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  amends  the Social  Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992  to ensure  that the 
entitlement  to statutory  pregnancy  loss pay extends  to those  bereaved  by pregnancy  loss. 23 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_4 Steve  Darling 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Munira  Wilson 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. Clause  28, page  47, line 3, at end insert— 
“(c) supporting  employees  who provide  or arrange  care for a dependant 
with  a long-term  care need,  as defined  by the Carer’s  Leave  Act 2023. ” 
_5 Steve  Darling 
Munira  Wilson 
Sarah  Gibson 
Daisy  Cooper 
Clive  Jones 
Jess Brown-Fuller 
. Schedule  2, page  127, line 37, leave  out from  “period”  to the end of line 38 and insert  “of 
not less than  3 months  and not more  than  9 months  from  the day on which  the employee 
starts  work.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  will ensure  that the initial  period  of employment  is between  3 and 9 months. 
Order  of the House 
[21 October  2024  ] 
That  the following  provisions  shall  apply  to the Employment  Rights  Bill: 
Committal 
1. The Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  in Public  Bill Committee 
2. Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded) 
be brought  to a conclusion  on Tuesday  21 January  2025. 
3. Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it 
meets. 
Consideration  and Third  Reading REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 24 
4. Proceedings  on Consideration  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which 
those  proceedings  are commenced. 
5. Proceedings  on Third  Reading  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day. 
6. Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings 
on Consideration  and Third  Reading. 
Other  proceedings 
7. Any other  proceedings  on the Bill may be programmed. 25 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025



Employment  Rights  (Special  Constables)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Special  constables:  right  to time  off for public  duties 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 53 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  Section  50 of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  to add Special 
Constables  to the list of those  granted  the right  to take time  off work  to 
perform  their  duties. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Special  constables:  right  to time  off for public  duties 
(1) The Employment  Rights  Act 1996  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  50 (right  to time  off for public  duties),  after  subsection  (1), insert— 
“(1A) 
5An employer  shall  permit  an employee  who  is a special  constable, 
appointed  in accordance  with  section  27 of the Police  Act 1996  or 
section  9 of the Police  and Fire Reform  (Scotland)  Act 2012,  to take 
time  off during  the employee’s  working  hours  for the purpose  of 
performing  their  duties. 
(1B) 
10In section  (1A),  “duties”  means  any activity  under  the direction  of a 
chief  officer  of police. ” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  this Act is passed. 
15 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Employment  Rights  (Special  Constables)  Act 
2025. 
59/1 Bill 53 1 Employment  Rights  (Special  Constables)  Bill 
Employment  Rights  (Special  Constables)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  Section  50 of the Employment  Rights  Act 1996  to add Special  Constables  to the 
list of those  granted  the right  to take time  off work  to perform  their  duties. 
Presented  by Sir Ashley  Fox 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 53



Environmental  Targets  (Public  Authorities)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
6 November  2024 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
LORD  HAMILTON  OF EPSOM 
★_ Clause  1, page  1, line 6, leave  out from  “2008”  to end of line 11 
59/1 HL Bill 15(Rev)—Running  List 6 November 
Environmental  Targets  (Public  Authorities)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
6 November  2024 
6 November  2024 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 15(Rev)—Running  List 6 November



Bill 18-EN  59/1 EUROPEAN  UNION  (WITHDRAWAL  
ARRANGE MENTS)  BILL  2024   
 
EXPLANATORY  NOTES  
What these notes do  
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements)  Bill introduced in the 
House  of Commons on 16 October 2024  (Bill 18) . 
• These Explanatory Notes have been prepared by Jim Allister MP, the member in charge  of the Bill, in 
order to assist the reader of the Bill and to help inform debate on it. They do not  form part of the Bill 
and have not been endorsed by Parliament.  
• These Explanatory Notes explain what each part of the Bill will mean in practice; provide  background 
information on the development of policy; and provide additional information on  how the Bill will 
affect existing legislation in this area.  
• These Explanatory Notes might best be read alongside the Bill. They are not, and are not  intended to 
be, a comprehensive description of the Bill.  
 
  
1 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18).  
Contents  
What these notes do  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  0 
Overview of the Bill  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  2 
Policy background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
The Bill  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 3 
Legal background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  4 
Territorial extent  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  5 
Commentary on provisions of Bill  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  5 
Clause 1: Overview of main provisions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  5 
Clause 2: Amendment of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018  ................................ ...................  6 
Clause 3: Limitation of general implementation of the Northern Ireland Protocol  ...............................  6 
Clause 4: Other limitations in interpretation of law  ................................ ................................ ...................  6 
Clause 5: Annex 2 of the Windsor Framework: excluded provision  ................................ ........................  6 
Clause 6: Movement of goods (including customs): excluded Protocol provision  ................................  7 
Clause 7: Movement of goods: new law about matters other than customs  ................................ ...........  7 
Clause 8: Customs matters: new law  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  7 
Clause 9: Regulation of goods  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  8 
Clause 10: Meaning of "regulation of goods"  ................................ ................................ ..............................  8 
Clause 11: Subsidy control  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  8 
Clause 12: Implementation, application, supervision and enforcement of the Windsor Framework  . 9 
Clause 13: Provision of the Windsor Framework etc applying to other exclusions  .............................  10 
Clause 14: Changes to, and exceptions from, excluded provision  ................................ .........................  10 
Clause 15: Additional excluded provision: new law  ................................ ................................ ................  11 
Clause 16: Value added tax, excise duties and other taxes: new law  ................................ .....................  11 
Clause 17: Other Ministerial powers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
Clause 18: Role of the European Court in court and tribunal proceedings  ................................ ...........  12 
Clause 19: Continued application of Articles 5 to 10 of the Windsor Framework  ...............................  12 
Clause 20: Preparatory expenditure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  12 
Clause 21: Regulations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 12 
Clause 22: Making regulations under this Act: general provisions  ................................ ........................  13 
Clause 23: Regulations relating to tax or customs matters  ................................ ................................ ...... 14 
Clause 24: Interpretation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  15 
Clause 25: Extent, commencement and short title  ................................ ................................ ....................  15 
Commencement  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  15 
Related documents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
 
2 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). Overview of the Bill  
 
1. The European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill ("the Bill") has 25 clauses. A summary 
of, and background to, the Bill is provided below.  
 
2. The Bill will provide the basis to amend the operation of the Windsor Framework, previously 
referred to as the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland, ("the Northern Ireland Protocol") 
included in the UK -EU Withdrawal Agreement ("Withdrawal Agreement") in th e domestic 
law of the UK. It will disapply elements of the Windsor Framework, and provide delegated 
powers to Ministers to make new law in connection with the Windsor Framework (including 
where provision ceases to have effect in the UK). Additionally, the Bill will provide delegated 
powers for Ministers to provide that other provisions of the Windsor Framework should 
cease to have effect in the UK. The Bill will also provide that any vote of the Northern Ireland 
Assembly in respect of continuing application  of the Windsor Framework will be on a cross -
community basis.  
 
Policy background  
 
3. The people of the United Kingdom and Gibraltar decided by referendum on 23 June 2016 to 
leave the EU.  
 
4. The terms of the UK’s departure from the EU were agreed and set out in the Withdrawal 
Agreement. This included the Northern Ireland Protocol setting out unique arrangements for 
Northern Ireland. On 19 October 2019, the Government laid the Withdrawal Agreem ent and 
the Political Declaration before Parliament; and on 23 January 2020 the European Union 
(Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020 received Royal Assent. This enabled the United Kingdom 
to leave the European Union at 11pm (UK time) on 31 January 2020.  
 
5. The Withdrawal Agreement provided for a time -limited transition period which ended at 
11pm (UK time) on 31 December 2020. During 2020 the United Kingdom engaged in 
discussions which culminated in the UK -EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement, establishing 
the terms of the UK’s future relationship with the EU. Alongside the Withdrawal Agreement, 
several elements of the operation of the Northern Ireland Protocol were left to be discussed 
and agreed by the Withdrawal Agreement Joint Committee. An agreement regardi ng those 
issues was reached at the Joint Committee meeting on 17 December 2020. This included 
several grace periods and easements before the application of the full requirements of the 
Northern Ireland Protocol, to avoid disruption for businesses and citiz ens. In addition 
significant work was undertaken by the Government to deliver the underpinning 
arrangements for the operation of the Northern Ireland Protocol, including IT systems and a 
new Trader Support Service. Following those preparations, the Norther n Ireland Protocol 
came into force at the end of the transition period.  
 
6. The Northern Ireland Protocol was intended to meet several overall policy objectives: to 
safeguard the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement in all dimensions; to avoid a hard border on 
the island of Ireland; to protect Northern Ireland’s place in the United Kin gdom and its 
internal market; and to safeguard the EU’s Single Market. Its operation has continued to 
support trade between Northern Ireland and Ireland as intended. However, its 
requirements —for full EU customs, sanitary and phytosanitary and other controls, as well as 
3 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). for Northern Ireland to apply EU rules in a variety of areas concerning goods —have led to a 
significant degree of disruption and burdens in practice.  
 
7. In recognition of these concerns, the Government took some steps to avoid further disruption. 
These included the extension of several easements in March 2021 and the application of 
"standstill" arrangements in September 2021, which continued to operate the  initial set of 
grace periods and easements  with the aim  of maintaining a stable basis for trade and 
movements between Great Britain and Northern Ireland in the light of the difficulties 
experienced by businesses and citizens.   
 
8. The Government looked to work with the EU to find joint solutions to the underlying 
challenges posed by the Northern Ireland Protocol and propose ways forward to operate the 
Northern Ireland Protocol sustainably. These discussions proceeded since January 2 021 but in 
February 2022 the Co -Chairs of the Withdrawal Agreement Joint Committee took stock of the 
talks that had taken place, and noted that agreement had not been possible at that point.  
 
9. The Government thereupon introduced the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill 2022, which would 
have disapplied portions of the Protocol in order to restore full UK lawmaking in Northern 
Ireland and unfettered trade within the United Kingdom. It could also have permitted an 
arrangement of mutual enforcement with the EU whereby each entity would enforce the rules 
of the other in respect of goods moving from one cust oms territory to the other. The 2022 Bill 
duly passed the House of Commons but was discontinued in th e House of Lords when the 
Government reached ‘The Windsor Framework’ with the EU. The Windsor Framework, while 
changing the nomenclature of the Protocol to ‘The Windsor Framework’, did not alter the 
fundamentals of the Protocol, though it made the passage of some goods easier from GB to 
Northern Ireland, particularly for supermarkets. However, its retention in Northern Ireland 
of EU law, an Irish Sea Border and the authority of the ECJ, did not ameliorate unionist 
opposition to the post -Brexit arrangements.  
 
10. In January 2024 the Government published ‘Safeguarding the Union’, which outlined further 
adjustments but retained the application of EU law and customs code in Northern Ireland. In 
the light of continuing concerns about the Windsor Framework, this Bill proposes more 
extensive changes to its operation and application in UK law.  
 
The Bill  
 
11. The purpose of the Bill is to provide Ministers with the power to make changes to the 
operation of the Windsor Framework in domestic law ,  restore the cross -community 
imperative of  the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement  in respect of continuance of the Windsor 
Framework and to safeguard democracy, peace and stability in Northern Ireland.  
 
12. The Bill makes certain provisions of the Windsor Framework "excluded provision". Where 
provision is excluded, clause 3 provides that section 7A(2) of the European Union 
(Withdrawal) Act 2018 no longer applies to it, and the provision will not be applicable in 
domestic law. Clause 4 provides that section 7C of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 
2018 does not apply so far as it would produce an effect which is incompatible with any 
provision made by or under the Bill.  
 
4 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). 13. The Bill specifies which elements of the Northern Ireland Protocol are "excluded provision", 
particularly Article 5(4) and Annex 2. The Bill in order to restore domestic law control 
excludes elements of the Windsor Framework dealing with the movement of go ods and the 
regulation of goods in Northern Ireland; subsidy control; and the governance arrangements 
under the Northern Ireland Protocol. Where provisions of the Bill create "excluded provision" 
they are accompanied by a delegated power to make appropriat e new provision in domestic 
law. Powers are also provided in relation to VAT and excise.  
 
14. The Bill also provides powers to reflect in domestic law the disapplication of additional 
elements of the Northern Ireland Protocol and to make new law as appropriate in connection 
with this.   
Legal background  
 
15. The Windsor Framework is an integral part of the Withdrawal Agreement.  
 
16. Section 7A of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 ("EUWA") gives effect to Article 4 
of the Withdrawal Agreement. Article 4 provides that the Withdrawal Agreement and the 
provisions of EU law which it makes applicable are to have "the same legal effec ts" in the UK 
as those which they produce within the EU and its Member States. The effect of this is that the 
EU law applied under the Windsor Framework has supremacy in the UK’s legal order 
(meaning incompatible domestic legislation would be disapplied); EU law applied under the 
Windsor Framework will have direct effect in the UK (provided that the EU law conditions 
for direct effect are satisfied); and EU law remedies will be available (including the 
availability of Francovich damages).  
 
17. Section 7C supplements section 7A in ensuring the "same legal effect" of EU law in the UK 
that it produces in the EU by directing courts to interpret relevant separation agreement law 
in accordance with the Withdrawal Agreement. "Relevant separation agreem ent law" is 
defined in section 7C(3) and, amongst other things, includes anything which is domestic law 
by virtue of section 7A and the power to implement the Windsor Framework in section 8C, as 
well as anything else so far as it is domestic law for the pu rpose of, or otherwise in scope of, 
the Withdrawal Agreement.  
 
18. Section 7A(2) works as a "conduit pipe" through which directly effective provisions of the 
Withdrawal Agreement (including the Windsor Framework) and EU law made applicable by 
it (e.g. regulations, decisions) flow into domestic law without the need for any  further 
implementing legislation.  
 
19. Although directives are not generally capable of direct application, to the extent they contain 
directly effective rights, those provisions are also capable of flowing through into domestic 
law. For provisions of directives and other EU law made applicable  by the Withdrawal 
Agreement that are not directly applicable, EUWA provides powers to implement them. 
Section 8C EUWA provides powers to implement the Windsor Framework and to 
supplement the effect of section 7A in relation to the Windsor Framework.  
 
20. The Withdrawal Agreement Joint Committee ("Joint Committee") is responsible for the 
implementation and application of the Withdrawal Agreement, including the Windsor 
Framework. The Joint Committee can take binding decisions in respect of all matters for 
5 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). which the Withdrawal Agreement so provides and Joint Committee decisions have the same 
legal effect as the Withdrawal Agreement pursuant to Article 166.2. Article 13.4 of the 
Windsor Framework gives the Joint Committee powers to take a decision to add a ne w EU act 
which is within the scope of the Windsor Framework to one of the   Windsor Framework’s 
Annexes, provided that the act neither amends nor replaces an EU act made applicable by the 
Windsor Framework, following a procedure set out in Article 13.4.  
 
21. Article 6.3 of the Withdrawal Agreement provides that references to provisions of EU law 
made applicable by the Withdrawal Agreement include "relevant Union acts supplementing 
or implementing those provisions". This means that any implementing and delegate d acts 
enacted under the EU acts included in the annexes to the Northern Ireland Protocol apply to 
the United Kingdom. By virtue of Article 13.3 of the Windsor Framework, EU law made 
applicable by the Windsor Framework is also to be read as including amend ments to the EU 
acts and replacements of such EU acts. It is not specified further how "amendments and 
replacements" is to be understood. Where these new acts are directly applicable, they will 
also be given effect by section 7A which in accordance with se ction 7A(1) gives effect to all 
rights, obligations etc "from time to time created or arising by or under the Withdrawal 
Agreement".  
 
 
Territorial extent  
 
22. The territorial extent and application of the Bill is UK -wide. Clause 25 sets out the territorial 
extent of the Bill.  
 
Commentary on provisions of Bill  
Clause 1: Overview of main provisions  
 
23. Clause 1 summarises the effect of the Bill. It sets out that the Bill ends the effect of - i.e. 
disapplies - specific areas of the Windsor Framework in domestic law; provides Ministers 
with powers to disapply further areas of the Windsor Framework accordin g to specific 
purposes; provides Ministers with powers to make new law related to the Windsor 
Framework, putting in place suitable domestic arrangements where needed; and provides 
that cross -community support in the Northern Ireland Assembly is required to  approve 
continued application of Articles 5 -10 of the Windsor Framework.  
 
24. Subsection (1)(c) makes clear that where other enactments are subject to the Windsor 
Framework in domestic law, this ceases where the Windsor Framework is excluded under the 
Bill - as for example with respect to Article VI of the Act of Union (Ireland) 180 0 and Act of 
Union with Ireland 1800 and section 38 of the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 
2020. 
 
6 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). Clause 2: Amendment of the European Union (Withdrawal) 
Act 2018  
 
25. Clause 2 circumscribes the effect of section 7A of the EUWA by requiring  compatibility with 
the Act of Union (Ireland) Act 1800, the Union with Ireland Act 1800, the territorial integrity 
of the United Kingdom, section 38 of the EUWA 2020 and the security interests of the United 
Kingdom , which includes effective control of the United Kingdom’s borders. Clause 2 also 
prevents domestic legal effect being given to Article 2 of the Windsor Framework.  
 
Clause 3: Limitation of general implementation of the 
Northern Ireland Protocol  
 
26. Clause 3 allows the rest of the Bill to take effect. It removes the effect (in domestic law) of 
"excluded" provisions of the Windsor Framework and of the Withdrawal Agreement, which 
are currently given effect by section 7A of the EUWA.  
 
27. Many of these provisions are EU law provisions that currently apply automatically in 
domestic law, without any further enactment. This is because section 7A of the EUWA allows 
them to retain their EU law characteristics of direct application, direct effect  and supremacy.  
 
28. Subsections (1) and (2) address section 7A of the EUWA to provide clarity in domestic law on 
the disapplication of the "excluded" provision of the Windsor Framework and Withdrawal 
Agreement, allowing new domestic law to operate clearly.  
 
29. Subsection (3) amends section 7A of the EUWA to reflect this.  
 
Clause 4: Other limitations in interpretation of law  
 
30. Clause 4 has ancillary function to clause 3, limiting the relevant part of the EUWA that would 
otherwise require domestic courts to interpret domestic law in light of relevant separation 
agreement law (i.e. the Withdrawal Agreement, EEA -EFTA Separation Agr eement and Swiss 
Citizens’ Rights Agreement). Without this clause, courts could be placed in a contradictory 
position whereby they would be required to interpret domestic law in light of EU law that no 
longer applies in the UK.  
 
31. Subsection (1) provides for the necessary change to section 7C of the EUWA, and subsection 
(2) amends the EUWA to reflect this.  
 
Clause 5: Annex 2 of the Windsor Framework: excluded 
provision  
 
32. Clause 5 makes Article 5(4) and Annex 2 of the Windsor Framework excluded provisions so 
as to address the application in Northern Ireland of EU laws.  
7 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18).  
Clause 6: Movement of goods (including customs): excluded 
Protocol provision  
 
33. Clause 6 provides for a default exclusion for both UK and non -EU destined goods moving 
between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The result is that these goods do not face the 
requirements placed on them under the Windsor Framework. This clause, along wi th clauses 
7 and 8, provides the basis for the Government to administer a different regime for the 
movement of goods.  
 
34. Clause 6 disapplies parts of Article 5.1 and Articles 5.2 and 5.3 of the Windsor Framework. 
These provisions set out that customs duty would only be due on goods entering Northern 
Ireland that were "at risk" of entering the EU. The clause removes the effect of these in 
domestic law as this "at risk" test will be replaced by an alternative model as per paragraph 3 6 
above. Clause 6 when taken with Clause 5, which disapplies Article 5(4) and Annex 2 of the 
Windsor Framework, removes customs requirements, tarif fs, and regulatory requirements on 
internal goods movements within the United Kingdom.   
 
Clause 7: Movement of goods: new law about matters other 
than customs  
 
35. Clause 7 allows a Minister of the Crown to make regulations in relation to clause 6. This 
clause enables a Minister to make provision for UK and EU destined goods to be 
distinguished, for example by providing for different requirements as to the checks and  
controls that will apply in respective cases.  
 
36. Subsection (1) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make appropriate 
provision in connection with any provision of the Northern Ireland Protocol to which clause 6 
relates.  
 
37. Subsection (2) clarifies that subsection (1) cannot be used to make provision about customs 
matters, which are instead covered by clause 8.  
 
38. Subsection (3) provides clarity that regulations made under subsection (1) may include 
provision for appropriate arrangements to apply to goods, regardless of destination. For 
example, this would enable the continued application of pre -EU Exit controls on the 
movement of live animals. It would also ensure that a ‘trusted trader’ regime in connection 
with mutual enforcement or alternative arrangements could be accompanied by appropriate 
underpinnings and restrictions to allow it to function effectively and a void abuse of the 
scheme.  
 
Clause 8: Customs matters: new law  
 
39. Clause 8 allows the Treasury and HMRC to bring forward legislation in relation to customs 
matters including duties and the administration and enforcement of customs. This is in line 
8 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). with standard legislative procedure in relation to legislating for the collection and 
administration of duties.  
 
40. Subsection (2) provides clarity regarding elements that such regulations could include. As 
with clause 7, this provides the means to establish the underpinnings of any future mutual 
enforcement regime, and accompanying ‘trusted trader’ scheme, and enable i t to function 
effectively.  
 
Clause 9: Regulation of goods  
 
41. Clause 9 provides for a Minister to make such regulations as are necessary to restore United 
Kingdom control over goods produced, traded and moving to and from the UK. Such would 
include manufactured goods, medicines and agri -food goods. This will change the present 
arrangements whereby goods are required to comply with the relevant EU requirements that 
are listed in Annex 2 of the Windsor Framework   - meaning that goods that only meet UK 
requirements and not the applicable EU requirements cannot currently be placed on the 
market i n Northern Ireland.  
 
 
Clause 10: Meaning of "regulation of goods"  
 
42. Clause 10 provides definitions in relation to the regulatory regime established in this Bill.  
 
43. Subsection (1) clarifies that "regulation of goods" in this Bill means regulation of making 
goods available on the market; putting goods into service; production of goods (whether by 
manufacture or any other process); and use and import of goods. This subs ection also makes 
clear that regulation of goods includes any matter relevant to the regulation of goods 
including matters that occur before or after goods are made available on the market, put into 
service, or produced.  
 
44. Subsection (2) sets out a further non -exhaustive list of what these regulatory matters may 
include.  
 
45. Subsection (3) makes clear that in the case of placing goods on the market or putting goods 
into service, those matters may also include production of goods (whether by manufacture or 
any other process).  
 
46. Subsection (4) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make provision 
about the meaning of regulation of goods in this Bill, including changing the effect of other 
provisions in this section.  
 
Clause 11: Subsidy control  
 
47. Clause 11 provides the basis for a single UK -wide subsidy control policy, rather than two 
separate regimes as currently provided for under the Windsor Framework. The clause 
provides clarity in domestic law on the disapplication of Article 10 (including the  obligation 
9 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). to notify measures currently in scope of the Northern Ireland Protocol to the European 
Commission).  
 
48. Subsection (1) excludes Article 10 and Annexes 5 and 6 of the Windsor Framework from the 
provisions given effect in domestic law under section 7A(2) of the EUWA.  
 
49. Article 10 of the   Windsor Framework applies EU State aid rules to the UK with regard to 
measures which affect trade in goods and wholesale electricity between Northern Ireland and 
the EU. Annex 5 of the Northern Ireland Protocol lists the substantive State aid rules which 
apply as part of the application of Article 10, and Annex 6 provides the procedures by which 
Article 10.2 is applied.  
 
50. Subsection (2) of this clause makes consequential amendments to the Subsidy Control Act 
2022. Section 42(8)(d) of the Subsidy Control Act ensures that the calculation of Minimal 
Financial Assistance ("MFA") and Services of Public Economic Interest ("SPEI")  Assistance 
includes De Minimis  aid given under Article 10 the   Windsor Framework. The disapplication 
of Article 10 means that MFA and SPEI Assistance can exclude the calculation of De Minimis  
aid given under Article 10 of the   Windsor Framework. Subsectio n (2) of this clause therefore 
amends Section 42(8)(d) of the Subsidy Control Act to confirm that this calculation is only 
necessary until Article 10 is disapplied and this Bill comes into force.  
 
51. Subsection (2) of this clause also amends section 48(3) of the Subsidy Control Act so it ceases 
to disapply UK subsidy control rules where the State aid rules apply by virtue of Article 10 of 
the  Windsor Framework. This will extend UK subsidy control rules to Northern Ireland once 
Article 10 is disapplied and this Bill comes into force.  
 
52. Subsection (3) of this clause provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make 
appropriate provision in connection with any provision of the Northern Ireland Protocol to 
which this clause relates.  
 
Clause 12: Implementation, application, supervision and 
enforcement of the Windsor Framework   
 
53. Clause 12 disapplies the effect in domestic law of provisions relating to implementation and 
enforcement of the   Windsor Framework.  
 
54. Subsection (1) sets out that any provision of the   Windsor Framework or Withdrawal 
Agreement is excluded so far as it confers jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European 
Union ("CJEU") in relation to the   Windsor Framework or related provision of the Withdrawal 
Agreement. That is the case whether the CJEU jurisdiction relates to excluded provisions or 
any other matter.  
 
55. Subsection (2) sets out that Article 12.2 and 12.3 of the   Windsor Framework are "excluded 
provision".  
 
56. Subsection (3) sets out that other provision relating to the implementation, application, 
supervision and enforcement of the   Windsor Framework is excluded under clause 13.  
 
10 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). 57. Subsection (4) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make appropriate 
provision in connection with any provision of the   Windsor Framework to which this clause 
relates.  
 
Clause 13: Provision of the Windsor Framework etc applying 
to other exclusions  
 
58. Clause 13 disapplies other ancillary provisions in the Windsor Framework and Withdrawal 
Agreement, insofar as they might otherwise apply in relation to the provisions of the Windsor 
Framework and Withdrawal Agreement that are disapplied by this Bill.  
 
59. Subsection (1) makes clear that, in domestic law, other provision of the Windsor Framework 
and Withdrawal Agreement does not apply, insofar as they otherwise would apply in 
relation to a provision that has been disapplied by this Bill.  
 
60. Subsection (2) then provides examples of the ancillary provision that is covered by subsection 
(1). For example, this includes parts of the Withdrawal Agreement that govern how 
references to EU law in the Windsor Framework should be read.  
 
61. Subsection (3) sets out that the matters which may be disapplied by this clause, so far as they 
apply in relation to other provision of the Windsor Framework that has been disapplied, this 
includes the responsibility of the authorities of the UK to impleme nt EU law and the 
requirement that such provision is to be interpreted in conformity with the methods and 
general principles of EU law and relevant EU case law.  
 
62. Subsection (4) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make appropriate 
provision related to the aspects of the Windsor Framework and other parts of the Withdrawal 
Agreement that are disapplied by this clause.  
 
Clause 14: Changes to, and exceptions from, excluded 
provision  
 
63. Clause 14 describes how Ministers may change which elements of the Windsor Framework or 
the Withdrawal Agreement are "excluded provision".  
 
64. Subsection (1) defines the purposes for which Ministers may disapply further areas of the 
Windsor Framework. These purposes include ensuring the effective flow of trade between 
Northern Ireland and another part of the United Kingdom; safeguarding animal, p lant or 
human welfare or health; and lessening, eliminating or avoiding difference between tax or 
customs duties in Northern Ireland and Great Britain (amongst other purposes). Subsections 
(1)(i)(i) and (1)(i)(ii) make clear that the international obligati ons included in subsection (1)(i) 
do not include the Windsor Framework or the Withdrawal Agreement.  
 
65. Subsection (2) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make provision 
that amends the extent of "excluded provision". Subsections (2)(a) and (2)(b) make clear that 
this power can be used either to exclude additional provisions or to incr ease the extent to 
which an already -excluded provision is excluded, whilst subsections (2)(c) makes clear that 
11 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). this power can be used to decrease the extent to which an already -excluded provision is 
excluded.  
 
66. Subsection (3) provides a limit to the power in subsection (2). It states that the power may not 
be exercised to provide for Article 2, Article 3, or Article 11 of the Windsor Framework to 
become excluded provision to any extent.  
 
Clause 15: Additional excluded provision: new law  
 
67. Clause 15 describes how Ministers may make new law in connection with provisions of the 
Windsor Framework or Withdrawal Agreement which are additional "excluded provision" by 
virtue of the powers in clause 14.  
 
68. Subsection (1) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make appropriate 
provision in relation to parts of the Windsor Framework or Withdrawal Agreement that are 
made "excluded provision" using the powers in clause 14.  
 
69. Subsection (2) clarifies that the power to make regulations contained in this clause is not 
limited in any way by the other powers in the Bill.  
 
70. Subsection (3) defines "additional excluded provision" as provisions made excluded under 
the powers in clause 1 4(2)(a) to 1 4(2)(c). This includes where that exclusion is subsequently 
precluded to a greater or lesser extent.  
 
Clause 16: Value added tax, excise duties and other taxes: 
new law  
 
71. Clause 16 provides that the Treasury may make provision related to VAT and excise law, and 
any other taxes, which they consider appropriate in connection with the Windsor Framework. 
This includes, but is not limited to, implementing VAT and excise measures  UK-wide that 
might otherwise not be permitted in Northern Ireland under the Windsor Framework. As 
such, it provides Ministers with the ability to ensure that VAT, excise and other tax policy can 
be applied throughout the entirety of the UK where appropria te, including Northern Ireland.  
 
72. Subsection (1) provides the Treasury with the power to make provision about VAT, excise 
duty and other taxes in relation to the Windsor Framework. It makes clear that this can 
include changes that would impose or vary the incidence of VAT, excise duty, and  any other 
tax. 
 
73. Subsection (2) clarifies that the Treasury may use this power in particular where doing so is 
necessary to lessen, eliminate, or avoid differences in VAT, excise duties or other taxes 
between Northern Ireland and Great Britain.    
 
Clause 17: Other Ministerial powers  
 
12 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). 74. Clause 17 clarifies the relationship between powers provided by this Bill and those arising 
otherwise, including by virtue of the Royal Prerogative.  
 
75. Subsection (1) provides that Ministers can engage in conduct (i.e. sub -legislative activity, such 
as producing guidance) relevant to the Windsor Framework if they consider it appropriate in 
connection with one or more of the purposes of this Bill.  
 
76. Subsection (2) clarifies that this Bill does not affect powers otherwise provided to Ministers of 
the Crown, including any power to make subordinate legislation or powers under the Royal 
Prerogative.  
 
Clause 18: Role of the European Court in court and tribunal 
proceedings  
 
77. Clause 18 makes provision regarding the effect in domestic law of rulings of the CJEU.  
 
78. Subsection (1) establishes the scope of clause 18, outlining that it applies to proceedings so far 
as they relate to: the Windsor Framework; related provision of the Withdrawal Agreement; or 
domestic law relating to the Windsor Framework or related provisi on of the Withdrawal 
Agreement.  
 
79. Subsection (2) provides that domestic courts and tribunals are not required in domestic law to 
follow the jurisprudence of the CJEU, and cannot refer cases to it in relation to the Windsor 
Framework or related provision of the Withdrawal Agreement.  
 
80. Subsection (3) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make appropriate 
provision related to subsection (2).  
 
Clause 19: Continued application of Articles 5  to 10 of the 
Windsor Framework   
 
81. Clause 19 provides that any democratic consent vote on the continued application of Articles 
5 to 10 of the Windsor Framework requires cross -community consent in the Northern Ireland 
Assembly.   
 
Clause 20: Preparatory expenditure  
 
82. Clause 20 provides that Ministers of the Crown, government departments, or devolved 
authorities may properly incur expenditure in preparation for action undertaken under this 
Bill, for the making of statutory instruments under this Bill, or under other Act s or statutory 
instruments as modified by or under this Bill.  
 
Clause 21: Regulations  
 
13 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). 83. Clause 21 sets out the general scope and nature of the powers contained in the Bill.  
 
84. Subsection (1) confirms that regulations under this Bill can make any provision that can be 
made by an Act of Parliament; this includes amending this Bill or making retrospective 
provision.  
 
85. Subsection (2) gives further non -exhaustive examples of what regulations under this Bill may 
do, including making provision notwithstanding that provision’s incompatibility with the 
Windsor Framework or any other part of the Withdrawal Agreement.  
 
86. Subsection (3) sets out that regulations under this Bill which are considered to be appropriate 
in relation to an exclusion, continue to be exercisable if said exclusion is modified or removed 
using the powers under clause 14(2)(b -d). 
 
87. Subsection (4) provides that regulations brought forward under the powers in this Bill are 
never to be treated as hybrid instruments.  
 
88. Subsection (5) provides that a Minister of the Crown may, by regulations, make the other 
powers under this Bill exercisable exclusively, concurrently or jointly with Devolved 
Administrations, and may provide for Devolved Administration scrutiny of said reg ulations.  
 
Clause 22: Making regulations under this Act: general 
provisions  
 
89. Clause 22 sets out the process and parliamentary procedure for the regulations made under 
the Bill.  
 
90. Subsections (1) and (2) set out that the processes in clause 22 apply to regulations made under 
the Bill, excluding tax or customs regulations.  
 
91. Subsection (3) sets out that regulations under the Bill are to be made by statutory instrument.  
 
92. Subsection (4) sets out that statutory instruments are subject to the negative procedure (i.e. 
subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament) except 
where they amend an Act of Parliament or make retrospective provision.  
 
93. Subsection (5) sets out that where a statutory instrument amends an Act of Parliament or 
makes retrospective provision, it is subject to the draft affirmative procedure unless the 
instrument contains a declaration from the Minister that urgency requires it  be subject to the 
made affirmative procedure.  
 
94. Subsection (6) provides that a draft affirmative statutory instrument can only be made once a 
draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of both Houses of 
Parliament.  
 
95. Subsection (7) provides that once made, a made affirmative statutory instrument must be laid 
before Parliament and it will cease to have effect after 28 days (starting with the day on which 
the instrument is made) unless within those 28 days the instrument is approved by a 
resolution of each House.  
14 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18).  
96. Subsection (8) states that in calculating the above 28 day period, no account is to be taken of 
periods when Parliament is dissolved, prorogued, or when either House is adjourned for 
more than four days.  
 
97. Subsection (9) sets out that, if regulations cease to have effect as a result of not receiving 
approval by a resolution of each House within 28 days under subsection (7)(b), that does not 
affect the validity of anything previously done under the regulation s or prevent the making 
of new regulations.  
 
Clause 23: Regulations relating to tax or customs matters  
 
98. Clause 23 relates to tax or customs regulations under this Bill.  
 
99. Subsection (1) confirms only the Treasury may take forward regulations relating to tax using 
a relevant power in this Bill.  
 
100. Subsection (2) confirms only the Treasury or HMRC may take forward regulations relating to 
customs using a relevant power in this Bill.  
 
101. Subsection (3) confirms that tax or customs regulations are to be made by statutory 
instrument.  
 
102. Subsection (4) sets out that statutory instruments are subject to the negative procedure before 
the House of Commons only (i.e. subject to an annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the 
House of Commons), except where they amend an Act of Parliament or m ake retrospective 
provision.  
 
103. Subsection (5) sets out that where a statutory instrument amends an Act of Parliament or 
makes retrospective provision, it is subject to the draft affirmative procedure before the 
House of Commons only, unless the instrument contains a declaration from the  Minister that 
urgency requires it be subject to the made affirmative procedure.  
 
104. Subsection (6) sets out that where a statutory instrument is subject to the draft affirmative 
procedure before the House of Commons only, it is only to be made once a draft of the 
instrument is laid before, and approved by a resolution of, the House of Com mons.  
 
105. Subsection (7) provides that where a statutory instrument is subject to the made affirmative 
procedure before the House of Commons only, it must, once made, then be laid before the 
House of Commons and it will cease to have effect after 28 days (starting o n the day the 
instrument is made) unless within those 28 days the instrument is approved by a resolution 
of the House of Commons.  
 
106. Subsection (8) states that in calculating the above 28 day period, no account is to be taken of 
periods when Parliament is dissolved, prorogued, or when the House of Commons is 
adjourned for more than four days.  
 
107. Subsection (9) sets out that where regulations cease to have effect as a result of not receiving 
approval by a resolution of the House of Commons within 28 days under subsection (7)(b), 
15 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). this does not affect the validity of anything previously done under the regulations or prevent 
the making of new regulations.  
 
108. Subsection (10) provides that the relevant parts of this clause does not apply to regulations 
made in combination with regulations made using powers under other legislation where that 
legislation requires the statutory instrument containing those regulatio ns to be made under 
the draft affirmative procedure and approved by a resolution of either the House of 
Commons or both Houses of Parliament.  
 
109. Subsection (11) provides that a relevant power is any power in the Bill other than clauses 7 
and 13 which are designed to relate to customs and tax respectively. Subsection (11) also 
defines tax or customs provision and tax or customs regulations.  
 
Clause 24: Interpretation  
 
110. Clause 24 provides the definition of relevant terms in the Bill, including by cross reference to 
their definition in other pieces of legislation.  
 
111. Subsection (1) lists and defines a number of key terms in the Bill.  
 
112. Subsection (2) defines what is meant by references in the Bill to provision of the Windsor 
Framework that does not have effect in the United Kingdom; and to an enactment being 
affected by provision of the Windsor Framework.  
 
Clause 25: Extent, commencement and short title  
 
113. Clause 25 makes a number of final provisions in the Bill.  
 
114. Subsection (1) provides that the Bill extends to the legal jurisdictions of England and Wales, 
Scotland and Northern Ireland.  
 
115. Subsection (2) deals with commencement, outlining that the Bill comes into force at the end of 
the period of three months beginning with the day on which the Bill is passed.  
 
116. Subsection (3) sets out the short title of the Bill (the European Union (Withdrawal 
Arrangements) Act 2024).  
Commencement  
 
117. Clause 25 provides that the provisions of the Bill come into force at the end of the period of 
three months beginning with the day on which the Bill is passed.  
Related documents  
 
118. The following documents are relevant to the Bill and can be read at the stated locations:  
16 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons on 16 October  2024 (Bill 18). ● Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/84
0230/Revised_Protocol_to_the_  
Withdrawal_Agreement.pdf  
 
● Command Paper, Northern Ireland Protocol: The way forward: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/10
08451/CCS207_CCS0721914902 -005_Northern_Ireland_Protocol_Web_Accessible__1_.pd f 
 
● The Windsor Framework   
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/63fccf07e90e0740d3cd6ed6/The_Windsor_Framework_
a_new_way_forward.pdf  
 
 
  
Bill 18-EN  59/1 EUROPEAN  UNION  (WITHDRAWAL  
ARRANGEMENTS)  BILL  2024   
 
EXPLANATORY  NOTES  
These Explanatory Notes relate to the European Union (Withdrawal Arrangements) Bill as introduced 
in the House of Commons on 16 October 2024 (Bill 18).  
  
__________________________________________________________  
 
Ordered by House of Commons to be printed, 2 December 202 4 
__________________________________________________________  
 
© Parliamentary copyright 2024  
 
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence which is 
published at www.parliament.uk/site -information/copyright  
 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE  OF COMMONS



Exemption  from  Value  Added  Tax (Miscellaneous 
Provisions)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to exempt  the supply  of certain  goods  and supplies  from  Value 
Added  Tax 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 115 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  from  Value  Added  Tax goods  or services  which  are beneficial  to the 
environment,  to health  and safety,  to education  or for charitable  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to exempt  the supply  of certain  goods  and supplies  from  Value 
Added  Tax 
(1) The Value  Added  Tax Act 1994  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  31 (exempt  supplies),  insert— 
5 “31A Requirement  to exempt  the supply  of certain  goods  and supplies  from 
Value  Added  Tax 
(1) Where  it appears  to the Secretary  of State  that specified  goods  or 
services  are beneficial— 
(a) to the environment, 
10 (b) to health  and safety, 
(c) to education,  or 
(d) for charitable  purposes, 
the Secretary  of State  must  by order  provide  for the exemption  of the 
supply  of such  goods  or services  by varying  Schedule  9 of this Act. 
15 (2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) may— 
(a) make  different  provision  for different  cases,  and 
(b) consequential  or transitional  provision  (including  provision 
amending  this Act).” 
(3) In section  97 (orders,  rules  and regulations),  after  paragraph  (4)(ca)  insert— 
20 “(zca) an order  under  section  31A;” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
58/4 Bill 115 1 Exemption  from  Value  Added  Tax (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill 
(3) This Act may  be cited  as the Exemption  from  Value  Added  Tax (Miscellaneous 
Provisions)  Act 2024. Exemption  from  Value  Added  Tax (Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Bill 2 
Exemption  from  Value  Added  Tax (Miscellaneous 
Provisions)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exempt  from  Value  Added  Tax goods  or services  which  are beneficial  to the 
environment,  to health  and safety,  to education  or for charitable  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Edward  Leigh . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 115



Public  Bill Committee:  Thursday  30 January  2025 
Finance  Bill 
(Amendment  Paper) 
Except  the clauses  to be considered  in Committee  of the whole  House:  Clauses  7 to 12 and Schedules  1 
and 2 (capital  gains  tax rates  and reliefs);  Clauses  15 to 18 and Schedule  3 (oil and gas);  Clauses  47 to 49 
(value  added  tax on private  school  fees);  Clauses  50 to 53 (stamp  duty  land tax); and any new Clauses  or 
new Schedules  relating  to the subject  matter  of these  Clauses  and Schedules. 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Finance  Bill. Any withdrawn  amendments  are listed  at 
the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which  it is expected  they will be 
decided. 
This document  should  be read  alongside  the Chair’s  provisional  Selection  and Grouping,  which  sets out 
the order  in which  the amendments  will be debated. 
_66 Mr Angus  MacDonald 
. Clause  63, page  68, line 10, leave  out “£32.79”  and insert  “£31.64” 
_67 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. Clause  82, page  95, line 14, at end insert— 
“(2) In doing  so His Majesty’s  Revenue  and Customs  must  have  regard  to the 
desirability  of requiring  a digital  tax stamp  to be applied  to e-cigarette  liquids. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  HMRC  to have  regard  for requiring  a digital  tax stamp  to be applied  to 
e-cigarette  liquids. 

_Gov_NC1 James  Murray 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Rate  of vehicle  excise  duty  for haulage  vehicles  other  than  showman’s  vehicles 
(1) In paragraph  7(3A)  of Schedule  1 to VERA  1994  (which  specifies  the rate of 
vehicle  excise  duty  applicable  to haulage  vehicles  other  than  showman’s 
vehicles),  for £350”  substitute  “£365”. 
(2) The amendment  made  by this section  has effect  in relation  to licences  taken 
out on or after  1 April  2025. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  provides  for an increase  in the rate of vehicle  excise  duty  applicable  to haulage 
vehicles  other  than  showman’s  vehicles. 
_NC2 Mr Angus  MacDonald 
Mr Paul Kohler 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of sections  63 and 64 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this 
Act and every  six months  thereafter,  review  the impact  of the measures 
contained  in sections  63 and 64 of this Act. 
(2) Each  review  must  consider  the impact  of the measures  on— 
(a) Scotch  whisky  distilleries, 
(b) small  spirit  distilleries, 
(c) wine  producers  and wholesalers, 
(d) the hospitality  industry,  and 
(e) those  operating  in the night-time  economy. 
(3) Each  review  must  also examine  the expected  effect  of the measures  on exports 
and the domestic  wine  trade. 
(4) A report  setting  out the findings  of each  review  must  be published  and laid 
before  both  Houses  of Parliament. ” 
_NC3 Gareth  Davies 
James  Wild PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 2 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of impact  of section  1 on recipients  of the full rate of the new state 
pension 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  three  months  of this Act being 
passed,  publish  a review  of the expected  impact  of section  1 of this Act on 
recipients  of the full rate of the new state  pension. 
(2) The review  must  include  analysis  setting  out, for the tax year 2025-26  — 
(a) the total  number  of people  in receipt  of the full rate of the new state 
pension  paying  tax under  section  1 of this Act, and 
(b) the tax liability  of state  pension  income  under  section  1 of this Act of 
those  in subsection  (2)(a). 
(3) For comparative  purposes,  the review  must  take account  of equivalent  projected 
figures  for subsections  (2)(a)  and (2)(b)  for the tax years  2026-27,  2027-28, 
2028-29  and 2029-30. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  a review  of how many  people  receiving  the new state  pension  at the 
full rate are liable  to pay income  tax this year and in the next four tax years,  and specifically  what 
the tax liability  of their  state  pension  income  will be. 
_NC4 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Statements  on increasing  alcohol  duty 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  make  a statement  to Parliament  about  the increase  to alcohol  duty 
introduced  by section  63 of this Act. 
(2) The statement  under  subsection  (1) must  include  details  of the impact  on— 
(a) hospitality  sector, 
(b) pubs,  and 
(c) UK wine  sector. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Secretary  of State  to make  a statement  about  the impact  of increasing 
alcohol  duty. 
_NC5 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 3 PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of effects  of section  65 on illicit  tobacco  market 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  publish  an assessment  of the impact  of the changes  introduced  by 
section  65 of this Act, on the illicit  tobacco  market. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to review  the impact  increased  rates  of tobacco  duty  on the 
illicit  tobacco  market. 
_NC6 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of effects  of £40,000  expensive  car supplement  threshold 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  publish  an assessment  of the impact  of the £40,000  expensive  car 
supplement  threshold  included  in section  66. 
(2) The assessment  in subsection  (1) must  consider  the effects  of the threshold  on 
the proportion  of new cars sold which  are Electric  Vehicles. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to review  the impact  of the £40,000  expensive  car supplement 
threshold. 
_NC7 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Statements  on HGV  Vehicle  Excise  Duty  (VED)  and HGV  Road  User  Levy 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  make  a statement  to Parliament  about  the increase  to HGV  VED 
introduced  by sections  67 to 69 and increase  to the HGV  Road  User Levy under 
section  71 of this Act. 
(2) The statement  under  subsection  (1) must  include  details  of the impact  on— 
(a) the haulage  sector, 
(b) the decarbonisation  of the logistics  industry,  and 
(c) the UK economy. ” PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 4 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to make  a statement  about  the impact  of increasing  Vehicle 
Excise  Duty  on HGVs. 
_NC8 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of bands  and rates  of air passenger  duty 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  eighteen  months  of this Act 
being  passed,  publish  an assessment  of the impact  of the changes  to air 
passenger  duty  introduced  by section  73 of this Act on— 
(a) the public  finances; 
(b) carbon  emissions;  and 
(c) household  finances. 
(2) The assessment  under  subsection  (1)(c)  must  consider  how households  at a 
range  of different  income  levels  are affected  by these  changes. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to publish  an assessment  of this Act’s  changes  to air passenger 
duty  on the public  finances,  carbon  emissions,  and on the finances  of households  at a range  of 
different  income  levels. 
_NC9 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Statements  on soft drinks  industry  levy 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  make  a statement  to Parliament  about  the increase  to the soft drinks 
industry  levy introduced  in section  78 of this Act. 
(2) The statement  under  subsection  (1) must  include  details  of the impact  on— 
(a) encouraging  reformulation  of packaged  soft drinks,  and 
(b) the UK soft drinks  industry. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to make  a statement  about  the impact  of increasing  the soft 
drinks  industry  levy. 5 PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 
_NC10 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of business  taxes 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed— 
(a) conduct  a review  of business  taxes,  and 
(b) lay before  the House  of Commons  a report  setting  out recommendations 
arising  from  the review. 
(2) The review  must  make  recommendations  on how to— 
(a) use business  taxes  to encourage  and increase  the investment  of profits 
and revenue;  and 
(b) ensure  businesses  have  more  certainty  about  the taxes  to which  they 
are subject. 
(3) In this section,  “business  taxes”  includes  any tax in respect  of which  this Act 
makes  provision  that is paid by a business. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Chancellor  to conduct  a review  of business  taxes,  and to make 
recommendations  on how to increase  certainty  and investment,  before  the next Finance  Bill is 
published. 
_NC11 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of impact  of tax changes  in this Act on households 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  publish  an assessment  of the impact  of the changes  in this Act on 
household  finances. 
(2) The assessment  in subsection  (1) must  consider  how households  at a range  of 
different  income  levels  are affected  by these  changes. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Chancellor  to publish  an assessment  of the changes  in this Act on the 
finances  of households  at a range  of different  income  levels. 
_NC12 James  Wild 
Gareth  Davies PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 6 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of effects  of the Act on small  businesses 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of this Act being 
passed,  lay before  the House  of Commons  a report  on the likely  impact  of the 
measures  in this Act on small  businesses. 
(2) The report  must  assess  the effect  on small  businesses  of any taxes  charged 
under  this Act, in the context  of other  financial  pressures  currently  facing  small 
businesses. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Government  to produce  an impact  assessment  of the effect  of 
the Act on small  businesses. 
Order  of the House 
[27 November  2024] 
That  the following  provisions  shall  apply  to the Finance  Bill: 
Committal 
1. The following  shall  be committed  to a Committee  of the whole  House— 
(a) Clauses  7 to 12 and Schedules  1 and 2 (capital  gains  tax rates  and reliefs); 
(b) Clauses  15 to 18 and Schedule  3 (oil and gas); 
(c) Clauses  47 to 49 (value  added  tax on private  school  fees); 
(d) Clauses  50 to 53 (stamp  duty  land tax); and 
(e) any new Clauses  or new Schedules  relating  to the subject  matter  of the Clauses 
and Schedules  mentioned  in paragraphs  (a) to (d). 
2. The remainder  of the Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  in Committee  of the whole  House 
3. Proceedings  in Committee  of the whole  House  shall  be completed  in two days. 
4. The proceedings— 
(a) shall  be taken  on each  of those  days in the order  shown  in the first column 
of the following  Table,  and 
(b) shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought  to a conclusion  at the 
times  specified  in the second  column  of the Table. 
Time  for conclusion  of proceedings Proceedings 
First day 7 PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 
Time  for conclusion  of proceedings Proceedings 
3 hours  after  the commencement 
of proceedings  on the Bill on the 
first day. Clause  7 and Schedule  1; Clauses  8 to 11 and 
Schedule  2; Clause  12; any new Clauses  or 
new Schedules  relating  to the subject 
matter  of those  Clauses  and those  Schedules 
6 hours  after  the commencement 
of proceedings  on the Bill on the 
first day. Clauses  15 to 18 and Schedule  3; any new 
Clauses  or new Schedules  relating  to the 
subject  matter  of those  Clauses  and that 
Schedule 
Second  day 
3 hours  after  the commencement 
of proceedings  on the Bill on the 
second  day. Clauses  47 to 49; any new Clauses  or new 
Schedules  relating  to the subject  matter  of 
those  Clauses 
6 hours  after  the commencement 
of proceedings  on the Bill on the 
second  day. Clauses  50 to 53; any new Clauses  or new 
Schedules  relating  to the subject  matter  of 
those  Clauses 
Proceedings  in Public  Bill Committee  etc 
5. Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded) 
be brought  to a conclusion  on Tuesday  4 February  2025. 
6. The Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it 
meets. 
7. When  the provisions  of the Bill considered,  respectively,  by the Committee  of the 
whole  House  and by the Public  Bill Committee  have  been  reported  to the House, 
the Bill shall  be proceeded  with  as if it had been  reported  as a whole  to the House 
from  the Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  on Consideration  and Third  Reading 
8. Proceedings  on Consideration  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which 
those  proceedings  are commenced. 
9. Proceedings  on Third  Reading  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day. 
Programming  committee 
10. Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings 
in Committee  of the whole  House,  to proceedings  on Consideration  or to 
proceedings  on Third  Reading. PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025 8 
Order  of the Committee 
[28 January  2025] 
That— 
1. the Committee  shall  (in addition  to its first meeting  at 9.25 am on Tuesday  28 
January)  meet— 
(a) at 2.00 pm on Tuesday  28 January; 
(b) at 11:30  am and 2.00 pm on Thursday  30 January; 
(c) at 9.25 am and 2.00 pm on Tuesday  4 February; 
2. the proceedings  shall  be taken  in the following  order:  Clauses  1 to 6; Clauses  13 
and 14; Clause  19; Schedule  4; Clauses  20 to 25; Schedule  5; Clauses  26 to 31; 
Schedule  6; Clauses  32 to 35; Schedule  7; Clauses  36 to 38; Schedule  8; Clauses  39 
and 40; Schedule  9; Clause  41; Schedule  10; Clause  42; Schedule  11; Clause  43; 
Schedule  12; Clauses  44 to 46; Schedule  13; Clauses  54 to 86; any new Clauses  or 
new Schedules  relating  to the subject  matter  of those  Clauses  or those  Schedules; 
remaining  proceedings  on the Bill; 
3. the proceedings  shall (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought  to a conclusion 
at 5.00 pm on Tuesday  4 February. 9 PUBLIC  BILL COMMITTEE Thursday  30 January  2025



Ordered to be printed 8 January 2025 and published 14 January 2025
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 64  11th Report of Session 2024–25
  Regulated and Other Activities 
(Mandatory Reporting of Child 
Sexual Abuse) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate (Wales) Bill [HL]
  National Insurance Contributions 
(Secondary Class 1 Contributions) 
Bill
  Financial Assistance  to Ukraine 
Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power,
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree ofparliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
(b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or(c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
(b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,(c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,(d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or(e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 h
ttp://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 h
ldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Eleventh Report
   PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.   This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to two private 
members’ Bills. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
2
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
   REGULATED AND OTHER ACTIVITIES (MANDATORY 
REPORTING OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE) BILL [HL]
2.   This private member’s Bill, which is expected to have its second reading on 
17 January, imposes a duty (subject to criminal sanction) on the providers 
of a range of education, healthcare and other settings to report to the local 
authority where they know or reasonably suspect a child in their care to be 
subject to sexual abuse. The activities which are the subject of the reporting 
duty are listed in the Schedule to the Bill. Clause 2(9) confers a power on 
the Secretary of State by regulations to amend the Schedule by adding to 
the activities, or varying or deleting an activity set out in the Schedule. 
Despite being a Henry VIII power,1  the Bill does not make provision for the 
regulations to be made by statutory instrument. There is also no parliamentary 
scrutiny attached to the power. Accordingly, we recommend that, if 
the Bill proceeds to its further stages, it should be amended so that 
regulations under clause 2(9) are required to be made by statutory 
instrument subject to the draft affirmative resolution procedure.
1 A Henry VIII power is a power that allows amendment, repeal or other alteration of the effect of 
primary legislation.
3
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    CROWN ESTATE (WALES) BILL [HL]
3.   This private member’s Bill makes provision for the transfer to the 
Welsh Ministers, or a person nominated by them, of the Crown Estate 
Commissioners’ functions in Wales.
4.   Clause 1 of the Bill inserts a new section 52A into the Wales Act 2017 which 
confers a power on the Treasury to make a scheme transferring all the 
existing Welsh functions of the Crown Estate Commissioners to the Welsh 
Ministers or a person nominated by the Welsh Ministers. The Treasury may 
only make a transfer scheme with the agreement of the Welsh Ministers.
5.   The provisions of section 52A are based on section 90B of the Scotland 
Act 1998 which they to a very large extent replicate, although in the latter 
case the power relates to the transfer of the Crown Estate Commissioners’ 
existing Scottish functions to the Scottish Ministers. In both cases, the 
power to make a transfer scheme is subject to parliamentary scrutiny, with 
the draft affirmative resolution procedure applying. There is however one 
significant difference in the scrutiny provisions: whereas section 90B of the 
Scotland Act 1998 provides for scrutiny only by both Houses of Parliament, 
section 52A provides for scrutiny by both Houses and Senedd Cymru.
6.   We do not consider that scrutiny of the power by Senedd Cymru is 
appropriate. The purpose of the transfer scheme is to set out the terms 
on which a reserved matter, namely management of the Crown Estate in 
Wales, should be devolved. In this context, the Bill enables the Treasury to 
include in the transfer scheme such provision as they consider necessary or 
expedient in the interests of defence or national security, and also to include 
such provision as they consider necessary to ensure that the management 
of the Crown Estate in Wales does not conflict with other reserved maters, 
namely the exploitation of oil or gas resources. Decisions relating to reserved 
matters, and the terms on which they should be devolved, are in our view 
appropriately for the UK Government to make subject to scrutiny by the 
UK Parliament, and this is reflected in the fact that the power to make the 
scheme is conferred on the Treasury. It does not seem to us appropriate (or 
consistent with previous practice) to make powers exercisable solely by UK 
Ministers subject to scrutiny by a devolved legislature.
7.    Accordingly, we consider that, consistently with the approach for 
Scotland under section 90B of the Scotland Act 1998, the powers 
conferred by section 52A of the Wales Act 2017 should be subject to 
scrutiny solely by both Houses of Parliament.
4
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    NATIONAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS (SECONDARY 
CLASS 1 CONTRIBUTIONS) BILL
8.   This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO UKRAINE BILL
9.   
This Money Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
5
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
AP PENDIX  1:    MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
   Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
  For the business taken at the meeting on 08 January 2025, Members declared no 
interests. 
  Attendance
  The meeting was attended by Lord McLoughlin, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, 
Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville, Lord Carlile or Berriew, The Earl of Lindsay, Lord Rooker and Baroness Finlay of Llandaff.



Fireworks  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of the Firework  Regulations  2004 
2 Consequential  provision 
3 Review:  online  sale of fireworks 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 29 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the sale of fireworks;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of the Firework  Regulations  2004 
(1) The Firework  Regulations  2004  are amended  as follows. 
(2) In Regulation  3, insert  in the appropriate  places— 
5““low  noise  category  F2 firework”  means  a category  F2 firework  with  a 
maximum  noise  level  of 90db  or lower; 
“high  noise  category  F2 firework”  means  a category  F2 firework  with 
a maximum  noise  level  higher  than  90db; ” 
(3) In Regulation  9, at the beginning  insert— 
10“(A1)  No person  shall  supply  or expose  for supply  any high  noise  category 
F2 firework,  category  F3 firework  or category  F4 firework  other  than  to— 
(a) a person  who  is employed  in, or whose  trade  or business  (or part of 
whose  trade  or business)  is the supply  of fireworks  or assemblies, 
for the purpose  of that person’s  supplying  them  in accordance  with 
the provisions  of the 2015  Regulations; 
15 (b) a person  who  is employed  by, or in business  as, a professional 
organiser  or operator  of firework  displays  for the purpose  of that 
person’s  employment  or business;  or 
(c) a person  who  is employed  in, or whose  trade  or business  (or part of 
20whose  trade  or business)  is, the transport  of fireworks,  for the purpose 
of that person’s  trade,  employment  or business. ” 
(4) In paragraph  (1)— 
(a) omit  “paragraphs  (2) and (2A)”  and insert  “paragraph  (2A)”,  and 
(b) for “adult  firework”  substitute  “low  noise  category  F2 firework  ”. 
(5) Omit  paragraph  (2). 
59/1 Bill 29 1 Fireworks  Bill 
2 Consequential  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  that is consequential 
on section  1. 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
5 (3) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
3 Review:  online  sale of fireworks 
(1) 
10The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, 
appoint  an independent  person  (“the  independent  person”)  to carry  out a 
review  of the regulation  of the online  sale of fireworks  (“the  review”). 
(2) The review  must  consider— 
(a) whether  existing  fireworks  regulations  are suitable  for regulating  the 
online  sale of fireworks, 
15 (b) the effectiveness  of current  provision  for enforcing  the law relating  to 
the online  sale of fireworks,  and 
(c) whether  there  is a need  for specific  regulation  of the sale of fireworks 
on social  media. 
(3) 
20The independent  person  must  prepare  a report  of the review  and provide  a 
copy  of that report  to the Secretary  of State. 
(4) The report  under  subsection  (3) may  contain  recommendations  for such 
changes  to the law or to government  policy  as the independent  reviewer 
considers  appropriate. 
(5) 
25The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a copy  of the report  before 
Parliament  as soon  as is reasonably  practicable  after  receipt. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of six months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
30 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Fireworks  Act 2025. Fireworks  Bill 2 
Fireworks  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the sale of fireworks;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sarah  Owen 
supported  by Jessica  Morden  and Andrew  Pakes . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 29



Football  (Gender  Inequality)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Proposals  to address  gender  inequality  in football 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 67 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to publish  proposals  for measures  to address 
gender  inequality  in football. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Proposals  to address  gender  inequality  in football 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, lay 
before  both  Houses  of Parliament  a report  containing  proposals  for measures 
to address  gender  inequality  in English  football. 
5 (2) The report  laid under  subsection  (1) must  include  proposed  measures  to 
address  inequalities  in— 
(a) the funding  of men’s  and women’s  football  in England, 
(b) the training  facilities  available  to men’s  and women’s  football  teams 
in England, 
10 (c) the payment  of players  in men’s  and women’s  football  teams  in 
England, 
(d) the prize  money  available  to men’s  and women’s  football  teams  in 
England,  and 
(e) 
15any other  matters  affecting  the recognition  given  to men’s  and 
women’s  football  players  or teams  in England. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  consult  the following  before  any proposals  are 
published— 
(a) football  clubs  operating  in England, 
(b) football  fans of English  teams, 
20 (c) any independent  regulator  of football  operating  in England,  and 
(d) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  relevant  to their 
proposed  measures. 
(4) It shall  be the duty  of the Secretary  of State  to take into account  the views 
expressed  by those  consulted  in accordance  with  subsection  (3). 
25 (5) Any  submissions  made  by the consultees  under  subsection  (3) must  be 
published  alongside  the report  laid under  subsection  (1). 
59/1 Bill 67 1 Football  (Gender  Inequality)  Bill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Football  (Gender  Inequality)  Act 2024. Football  (Gender  Inequality)  Bill 2 
Football  (Gender  Inequality)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to publish  proposals  for measures  to address  gender 
inequality  in football. 
Presented  by James  MacCleary 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 67



Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
[AS AMENDED  IN COMMITTEE] 
CONTENTS 
PART 1 
PURPOSE, OVERVIEW AND KEY DEFINITIONS 
1 Purpose  and overview 
2 Key definitions 
3 Meaning  of “owner”  etc 
4 Meanings  of “officer”  and “senior  manager”  etc 
PART 2 
THE INDEPENDENT FOOTBALL REGULATOR 
The Independent  Football  Regulator 
5 Establishment  of the IFR 
6 The IFR’s  objectives 
7 The IFR’s  general  duties  etc 
8 The IFR’s  regulatory  principles 
9 Transfer  schemes 
Reports,  statements  and guidance 
10 State  of the game  report 
11 Football  governance  statement 
12 Guidance  published  by the IFR 
13 Guidance  published  by the Secretary  of State 
14 Annual  report 
PART 3 
OPERATING LICENCES 
Operating  licences 
15 Operating  licences 
16 Application  for provisional  operating  licence 
17 Grant  of provisional  operating  licence 
18 Grant  of full operating  licence 
59/1 HL Bill 59 
19 Revocation  and cessation  of operating  licence 
Licence  conditions 
20 Mandatory  licence  conditions 
21 Discretionary  licence  conditions 
22 Scope  of powers  to attach  or vary  discretionary  licence  conditions 
23 Procedure  for attaching  or varying  financial  discretionary  licence  conditions 
24 Commitments  in lieu of financial  discretionary  licence  conditions 
25 Procedure  for attaching  or varying  other  discretionary  licence  conditions 
PART 4 
OWNERS AND OFFICERS OF REGULATED CLUBS: SUITABILITY ETC 
Introductory 
26 Part 4: overview  and interpretation 
Persons  who become  owners  or officers  of regulated  clubs 
27 Duties  to notify  IFR of prospective  new  owner  or officer 
28 Determination  of suitability  required  for new  owner 
29 Determination  of suitability  required  for new  officer 
30 Becoming  an owner  or officer  without  a determination 
31 Opportunity  to make  representations  about  proposed  negative  determinations 
32 Determinations  under  sections  28 and 29: time  limits 
Determinations  relating  to incumbent  owners  and officers 
33 Duties  to notify  IFR of change  in circumstances  relating  to incumbent  owner 
or officer 
34 Incumbent  owners 
35 Incumbent  officers 
36 Opportunity  to make  representations  about  proposed  negative  findings 
Further  provision  about  determinations 
37 Matters  relevant  to determinations 
Disqualification  orders  and enforcement 
38 Disqualification  orders 
39 Removal  directions:  owners 
40 Removal  directions:  officers 
41 Directions  relating  to unsuitable  owners  and officers 
42 Orders  and directions  effecting  alternative  officer  arrangements 
43 Ownership  removal  orders 
44 Orders  under  section  43: procedure,  costs  and liabilities Football  Governance  Bill [HL] ii 
PART 5 
DUTIES ON CLUBS AND COMPETITION ORGANISERS ETC 
Duties  on regulated  clubs  and formerly  regulated  clubs  etc 
45 Duty  not to operate  a team  in relation  to a prohibited  competition 
46 Duty  not to dispose  etc of home  ground  without  approval 
47 Duty  not to appoint  administrator  without  approval 
Duties  on regulated  clubs 
48 Duty  not to relocate  without  approval 
49 Duty  not to change  crest,  home  shirt  colours  or name  without  approval 
50 Duty  to notify  of changes  in circumstances  relevant  to the IFR’s  functions 
51 Duty  to keep  fans informed  of insolvency  proceedings 
Duties  on licensed  clubs 
52 Duty  to publish  a personnel  statement 
53 Duty  to pay a levy 
54 Section  53: consultation  and publication 
Duties  on specified  competition  organisers 
55 Duties  to notify  and consult  the IFR 
PART 6 
DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUE 
Introduction 
56 Part 6: overview  and interpretation 
Applications  for resolution  process  to be triggered 
57 Applications  for resolution  process  to be triggered 
58 Applications  under  section  57: procedural  and other  requirements 
59 Decisions  by the IFR on applications  under  section  57 
Resolution  process 
60 The mediation  stage 
61 Final  proposal  stage 
62 Distribution  orders 
63 Duration  and revocation  of distribution  orders 
Miscellaneous 
64 Review  of distribution  orders,  payment  of costs,  etc iii Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
PART 7 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS ETC 
Information  gathering 
65 Power  to require  information 
66 Reports  on clubs  by expert  reporters 
Investigations  into relevant  infringements 
67 Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” 
68 Investigations 
69 Outcomes  of investigations 
70 Commitments  in lieu of investigations 
71 Section  70: supplementary 
72 Duty  to preserve  information 
General 
73 Privileged  communications 
74 Requirement  to publish  certain  notices  etc 
PART 8 
ENFORCEMENT 
Sanctions  and offences  etc 
75 Sanctions 
76 Warning  notices 
77 Decision  notices 
78 Offences 
Urgent  directions 
79 Urgent  directions 
Publication 
80 Requirement  to publish  certain  notices  etc 
PART 9 
REVIEWS AND APPEALS 
81 Reviewable  decisions  etc 
82 Request  for internal  review 
83 Internal  reviews 
84 Appeals  to the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal 
85 Proceedings  before  the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal Football  Governance  Bill [HL] iv 
PART 10 
GENERAL 
Disclosure  of information 
86 Disclosure  of information  by the IFR 
87 Disclosure  of information  to the IFR etc 
88 Restrictions  on the disclosure  of information 
89 Information  offences 
Rules  and regulations 
90 Rules 
91 Regulations 
Definitions  etc 
92 Minor  definitions  etc 
93 Index  of defined  terms 
General 
94 Pre-commencement  consultation 
95 Offences  by officers  of clubs  and bodies  corporate 
96 Payments  into the Consolidated  Fund 
97 Minor  and consequential  amendments 
98 Extent 
99 Commencement 
100 Short  title 
Meaning  of “owner” Schedule  1 —  
Conditions  for being  an owner Part 1 —  
Interpretation Part 2 —  
Power  to amend  thresholds  etc Part 3 —  
The Independent  Football  Regulator Schedule  2 —  
Constitution  of the IFR Part 1 —  
The Board Part 2 —  
The Expert  Panel Part 3 —  
Other  matters Part 4 —  
Transfer  schemes Schedule  3 —  
Threshold  requirements Schedule  4 —  
Mandatory  licence  conditions Schedule  5 —  
Commitments  in lieu of financial  discretionary  licence 
conditions Schedule  6 —  
Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” Schedule  7 —  
Investigatory  powers Schedule  8 —  v Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Sanctions Schedule  9 —  
Sanctions  relating  to information  etc Part 1 —  
Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements Part 2 —  
Further  provision  about  financial  penalties Part 3 —  
Reviews Schedule  10 —  
Index  of defined  terms Schedule  11 —  
Minor  and consequential  amendments Schedule  12 —  Football  Governance  Bill [HL] vi 
[AS AMENDED  IN COMMITTEE] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Establish  the Independent  Football  Regulator;  to make  provision  for the 
licensing  of football  clubs;  to make  provision  about  the distribution  of revenue 
received  by organisers  of football  competitions;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
PART 1 
PURPOSE, OVERVIEW AND KEY DEFINITIONS 
1 Purpose  and overview 
(1) 
5The purpose  of this Act is to protect  and promote  the sustainability  of English 
football. 
(2) For that purpose— 
(a) Part 2 establishes  the Independent  Football  Regulator  (referred  to in 
this Act as “the IFR”)  and makes  provision  about  the exercise  of its 
functions; 
10 (b) Part 3 makes  provision  for the IFR to grant  operating  licences  to 
football  clubs; 
(c) Part 4 provides  for the IFR to make  determinations  about  whether 
persons  are suitable  to be owners  or officers  of football  clubs; 
(d) 
15Part 5 imposes  various  duties  on football  clubs,  the owners  and officers 
of football  clubs  and the organisers  of football  competitions; 
(e) Part 6 provides  a mechanism  whereby  the IFR can make  an order 
requiring  the organiser  of a football  competition  to distribute  revenue 
received  by that organiser; 
(f) 
20Parts  7 and 8 make  provision  about  the investigation  and enforcement 
powers  of the IFR; 
(g) Part 9 makes  provision  about  reviews  of and appeals  from  decisions 
of the IFR; 
(h) Part 10 makes  general  provision,  including  about  the disclosure  of 
information  by and to the IFR. 
59/1 HL Bill 59 1 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 1—Purpose,  overview  and key definitions 
(3) For the purposes  of this section,  English  football  is sustainable  if it— 
(a) continues  to serve  the interests  of fans of regulated  clubs,  and 
(b) continues  to contribute  to the economic  or social  well-being  of the 
local  communities  with  which  regulated  clubs  are associated. 
5 (4) For the meanings  of “English  football”,  “regulated  club”  and for other  key 
terms  used  in this Act, see section  2. 
2 Key definitions 
(1) In this Act— 
“club”  or “football  club”  means  a body  that operates  a team; 
10 “competition” , in relation  to football,  means  a league  (or a division  of a 
league),  a cup,  a tournament  or any other  competition; 
“competition  organiser”  means  a body  that organises  a competition; 
“English  football”  means  all regulated  clubs  and all specified  competitions, 
taken  together; 
15 “football”  means  association  football; 
“the IFR”  means  the Independent  Football  Regulator; 
“licensed  club”  means  a club  that holds  an operating  licence; 
“operating  licence”  means  a provisional  operating  licence  or a full 
operating  licence  (see section  15); 
20 “regulated  club”  means  a club  that operates  a relevant  team  (whether  or 
not the club  is a licensed  club); 
“relevant  team”  means  a team  that is entered  into,  is a member  of, or 
participates  in a specified  competition; 
25“specified  competition”  means  a competition  specified  in regulations 
under  subsection  (3); 
“specified  competition  organiser”  means  a body  that organises  a specified 
competition; 
“team”  means  a football  team. 
(2) 
30For the purposes  of this Act, a club  “operates”  a team  if it is responsible  for 
the team’s  entry  into,  membership  of, or participation  in a competition. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  specify  a competition;  but the 
Secretary  of State  may  not specify  a competition  unless  the teams  that are 
entered  into it, or that are members  of it, or that participate  in it are exclusively 
or predominantly  English  teams. 
35 (4) For the purposes  of subsection  (3), a team  is an “English  team”  if the ground 
at which  the team  customarily  plays  its home  matches  is in England. 
(5) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (3) the Secretary  of State— 
(a) must  assess  whether  it would  be appropriate  to exercise  the power 
and,  if so, how, 
40 (b) in carrying  out the assessment,  must  consult— 
(i) the IFR, Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 2 
Part 1—Purpose,  overview  and key definitions 
(ii) the Football  Association,  and 
(iii) any other  persons  the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate, 
and 
(c) 
5must  publish  and lay before  Parliament  a report  on the outcome  of 
the assessment. 
(6) Subsection  (5) does  not apply  in respect  of the first regulations  made  under 
subsection  (3). 
(7) Sections  3, 4, 26, 56, 67 and 92 define  other  terms  used  in this Act. 
3 Meaning  of “owner”  etc 
10 (1) In this Act, references  to an “owner”  of a club  are to be construed  in 
accordance  with  Schedule  1. 
(2) For the purposes  of this Act, a club’s  “ultimate  owner”  is— 
(a) where  the club  has only  one owner,  that owner; 
(b) 
15where  the club  has more  than  one owner  and one owner  exercises  a 
higher  degree  of influence  or control  over  the activities  of the club 
than  any other  owner,  that owner; 
(c) in any other  case,  each  owner  of the club  who  exercises  a degree  of 
influence  or control  over  the activities  of the club  that— 
(i) is the same  as another  owner,  and 
20 (ii) where  there  are other  owners,  is a higher  degree  of influence 
or control  than  any other  owner. 
4 Meanings  of “officer”  and “senior  manager”  etc 
(1) For the purposes  of this Act, a person  is an “officer”  of a club  if— 
(a) the person  is a senior  manager  of the club,  or 
25 (b) in any other  case,  the following  table  identifies  the person  as an officer 
of the club— 
the person  is an officer  of the club  if— 27 Where  the club  is— 
the person  is a director  of the company 28 a company 
30the person  is an officer  of the body  whose 
functions  correspond  to those  of a director 
of a company 29 
30 a body  corporate  other 
than  a company 
a partnership 32 (a) in relation  to a limited  partnership,  the 
person  is a general  partner  as defined 
35by section  3 of the Limited  Partnerships 
Act 1907; 
(b) in relation  to any other  partnership,  the 
person  is a member  of the partnership 3 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 1—Purpose,  overview  and key definitions 
the person  is an officer  of the club  if— 27 Where  the club  is— 
the person  is an officer  of the body  or a 
member  of the body’s  governing  body 2 
3 an unincorporated 
body  other  than  a 
partnership 
5 (2) For the purposes  of this Act, a person  is also an “officer”  of a club  if the 
person— 
(a) purports  to act as an officer  of the club  (within  the meaning  of 
subsection  (1)), or 
(b) 
10is a person  in accordance  with  whose  directions,  instructions,  guidance 
or advice  an officer  of the club  (within  the meaning  of subsection  (1) 
or paragraph  (a)) is accustomed  to act. 
(3) But a person  is not to be regarded  as an officer  of a club  by virtue  of 
subsection  (2)(b) by reason  only  that an officer  of the club (within  the meaning 
of subsection  (1) or (2)(a)) acts— 
15 (a) on advice  given  by that person  in a professional  capacity; 
(b) in accordance  with  instructions,  a direction,  guidance  or advice  given 
by that person  in the exercise  of a function  conferred  by or under  an 
enactment; 
(c) 
20in accordance  with  guidance  or advice  given  by that person  in their 
capacity  as a Minister  of the Crown  (within  the meaning  of the 
Ministers  of the Crown  Act 1975). 
(4) For the purposes  of this Act, a person  is a “senior  manager”  of a club  if, in 
relation  to the carrying  on of the club’s  activities,  the person  carries  out a 
25senior  management  function  specified,  or of a description  specified,  for the 
purposes  of this section. 
(5) For the purposes  of this Act— 
(a) a function  is a “senior  management  function”  in relation  to the carrying 
on of a club’s  activities  if— 
(i) 
30the function  requires  a person  carrying  out the function  to be 
responsible  for managing  one or more  aspects  of the club’s 
affairs,  and 
(ii) those  aspects  are such  that the way  in which  they  are managed 
could  give  rise to serious  consequences  for the club; 
(b) 
35the reference  in paragraph  (a)(i) to managing  one or more  aspects  of 
a club’s  affairs  includes  taking,  or participating  in the taking  of, 
decisions  about  how  one or more  aspects  of those  affairs  should  be 
carried  on. 
(6) In this section,  “specified”  means  specified  by the IFR in rules. 
(7) 
40This  section  is subject  to section  42(9) (persons  appointed  as officers  by the 
IFR not to be treated  as officers  for the purposes  of this Act). Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 4 
Part 1—Purpose,  overview  and key definitions 
PART 2 
THE INDEPENDENT FOOTBALL REGULATOR 
The Independent  Football  Regulator 
5 Establishment  of the IFR 
5 (1) A body  corporate  called  the Independent  Football  Regulator  is established. 
(2) Schedule  2 contains  further  provision  about  the IFR. 
6 The IFR’s  objectives 
The IFR’s  objectives  are— 
(a) 
10to protect  and promote  the financial  soundness  of regulated  clubs 
(referred  to in this Act as “the club  financial  soundness  objective”); 
(b) to protect  and promote  the financial  resilience  of English  football 
(referred  to in this Act as “the systemic  financial  resilience  objective”); 
(c) to safeguard  the heritage  of English  football  (referred  to in this Act 
as “the heritage  objective”). 
15 7 The IFR’s  general  duties  etc 
(1) The IFR must,  so far as reasonably  practicable,  exercise  its functions  under 
this Act in a way  that— 
(a) is compatible  with  the purpose  of this Act (see section  1), and 
(b) advances  one or more  of the IFR’s  objectives  (see section  6). 
20 (2) The IFR must  have  regard  to the desirability  of exercising  those  functions  in 
a way  that avoids  any— 
(a) effects  on the sporting  competitiveness  of any regulated  club  against 
another  regulated  club; 
(b) 
25adverse  effects  on the competitiveness  of regulated  clubs  against  other 
clubs; 
(c) adverse  effects  on financial  investment  in English  football. 
(3) In exercising  those  functions,  the IFR must  also have  regard  to the following 
(so far as they  are relevant  to the exercise  of those  functions)— 
(a) its regulatory  principles  (see section  8); 
30 (b) its most  recent  state  of the game  report  (see section  10); 
(c) the most  recent  football  governance  statement  published  by the 
Secretary  of State  (see section  11); 
(d) any guidance  published  by it (see section  12); 
(e) any guidance  published  by the Secretary  of State  (see section  13). 
35 (4) The IFR must  keep  under  review  the extent  to which  persons  are complying 
with  obligations  imposed  on them  under  or by virtue  of this Act. 5 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
8 The IFR’s  regulatory  principles 
The IFR’s  regulatory  principles  are that— 
(a) it should  use its resources  in the most  efficient,  expedient  and economic 
way; 
5 (b) it should,  so far as reasonably  practicable,  co-operate,  and proactively 
and constructively  engage,  with 
(i) clubs, 
(ii) owners,  senior  managers  and other  officers  of clubs,  and 
(iii) competition  organisers; 
10 (c) any requirement  or restriction  imposed  by it on a person  should  be 
proportionate  to the benefits  which  are expected  to result  from  that 
requirement  or restriction; 
(d) it should  act in a way  that recognises  the specific  context  of football 
15and the fact that clubs  are subject  to rules,  requirements  and restrictions 
imposed  by competition  organisers  by virtue  of teams  operated  by 
those  clubs  being  entered  into,  being  members  of, or participating  in 
competitions  organised  by those  organisers; 
(e) it should  act consistently  (subject  to it recognising  the differences 
20between  clubs  and competitions  and the differences  between  the 
circumstances  affecting  clubs  and competitions); 
(f) it should  act in a way  that recognises  the responsibilities  of owners, 
senior  managers  and other  officers  of clubs  in relation  to the 
requirements  placed  on clubs  under  or by virtue  of this Act; 
(g) it should  act as transparently  as reasonably  practicable. 
25 9 Transfer  schemes 
Schedule  3 contains  provision  about  schemes  for the transfer  of staff  and 
property,  rights  and liabilities  to the IFR. 
Reports,  statements  and guidance 
10 State  of the game  report 
30 (1) The IFR must  prepare  and publish  a report  (a “state  of the game  report”)  on 
the state  of English  football  so far as relevant  to the exercise  of the IFR’s 
functions  under  this Act. 
(2) A state  of the game  report  must  include— 
(a) 
35an overview  of the main  issues  that the IFR considers  to be affecting 
English  football, 
(b) an assessment  of whether  any feature,  or combination  of features,  of 
English  football  jeopardises,  or risks  jeopardising,  the IFR’s  ability  to 
advance  one or more  of its objectives,  and 
(c) 
40information  about  any other  matters  relating  to the state  of English 
football,  so far as relevant  to the exercise  of the IFR’s  functions  under 
this Act, that the IFR considers  appropriate. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 6 
Part 2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
(3) The first state  of the game  report  must  be published  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  and in any event  no later  than  the end of the period  of 18 months 
beginning  with  the day on which  the first regulations  made  under  section 
2(3) come  into force. 
5 (4) Each  subsequent  state  of the game  report  must  be published  before  the end 
of the period  of five years  beginning  with  the day on which  the previous 
report  is published. 
(5) Before  publishing  a state  of the game  report,  the IFR must— 
(a) publish  a notice— 
10 (i) stating  that it intends  to prepare  a report,  and 
(ii) inviting  suggestions  about  matters  to be included  in the report, 
(b) prepare  a draft  report,  having  regard  to any suggestions  made  within 
the period  specified  in the notice,  and 
(c) consult  the following  about  the draft  report— 
15 (i) the Football  Association; 
(ii) each  specified  competition  organiser; 
(iii) such  other  persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate. 
11 Football  governance  statement 
(1) 
20The Secretary  of State  may  prepare  a statement  (“a football  governance 
statement”)  setting  out the policies  of His Majesty’s  Government  in the United 
Kingdom  that relate  to the governance  of football. 
(2) But a football  governance  statement  may  not contain  any policies  that are 
inconsistent  with  the purpose  of this Act or with  the IFR’s  objectives. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  revise  any football  governance  statement. 
25 (4) But the Secretary  of State  may  not revise  any football  governance  statement 
more  frequently  than  every  three  years  unless— 
(a) a Parliamentary  general  election  has taken  place, 
(b) there  has been  a significant  change  in the policy  of His Majesty’s 
Government  in the United  Kingdom  relating  to football,  or 
30 (c) the Secretary  of State  considers  that the statement,  or any part of it, 
is inconsistent  with  the purpose  of this Act or with  the IFR’s  objectives. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  any football  governance  statement,  or 
any revised  statement,  prepared  under  this section. 
(6) 
35The Secretary  of State  must  lay any football  governance  statement,  or any 
revised  statement,  published  under  this section  before  Parliament. 
12 Guidance  published  by the IFR 
(1) The IFR must  prepare  guidance  about  the exercise  of its functions  under 
sections  21 to 25 (discretionary  licence  conditions). 7 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
(2) Guidance  prepared  under  subsection  (1) must  include  a statement  of the 
outcomes  the IFR expects  or seeks  to achieve  in exercising  those  functions. 
(3) The IFR may  prepare  guidance  about  any of its other  functions  under  this 
Act. 
5 (4) The IFR may  revise  any guidance  prepared  under  this section. 
(5) The IFR must  publish  any guidance,  or any revised  guidance,  prepared  under 
this section. 
(6) The IFR must  consult  such  persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate  before 
publishing— 
10 (a) the first guidance  about  any of its functions,  or 
(b) revised  guidance  about  any of its functions,  unless  the revisions  are 
minor. 
13 Guidance  published  by the Secretary  of State 
(1) 
15The Secretary  of State  may  prepare  guidance  about  the exercise  of the IFR’s 
functions  under  this Act. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  revise  any guidance  prepared  under  this section. 
(3) But the Secretary  of State  may  not revise  any guidance  prepared  under  this 
section  more  frequently  than  every  three  years  unless— 
(a) 
20the Secretary  of State  considers  that the guidance  needs  to be revised 
because  of an amendment,  repeal  or modification  of any provision  of 
this Act, or 
(b) the revision  is agreed  between  the Secretary  of State  and the IFR. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  any guidance,  or any revised  guidance, 
prepared  under  this section. 
25 (5) The Secretary  of State  must  consult  the IFR and such  other  persons  as the 
Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate  before  publishing— 
(a) guidance  under  this section,  or 
(b) revised  guidance  under  this section,  unless  the revisions  are minor. 
(6) 
30The Secretary  of State  must  lay any guidance,  or revised  guidance,  published 
under  this section  before  Parliament. 
14 Annual  report 
(1) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the end of each  financial  year,  the IFR 
must  submit  to the Secretary  of State  an annual  report  on the exercise  of its 
functions  during  the year. 
35 (2) The report  must  include— 
(a) a summary  of the activities  undertaken  by the IFR during  that year, 
and Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 8 
Part 2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
(b) such  other  information  as the Secretary  of State  may  direct  the IFR to 
include  in the report. 
(3) The IFR must  arrange  for a copy  of every  report  under  this section  to be laid 
before  Parliament  by the Secretary  of State. 
5 (4) In this section,  “financial  year”  means— 
(a) the period  beginning  with  the day on which  this section  comes  into 
force  and ending  with  31 March  in the following  year,  and 
(b) each  successive  period  of 12 months. 
PART 3 
10 OPERATING LICENCES 
Operating  licences 
15 Operating  licences 
(1) A club  may  not operate  a relevant  team  unless  it holds  either— 
(a) a provisional  operating  licence,  or 
15 (b) a full operating  licence. 
(2) A provisional  operating  licence  authorises  a club  to operate  a relevant  team 
on a provisional  basis  prior  to the grant  of a full operating  licence. 
(3) A full operating  licence  authorises  a club  to operate  a relevant  team  on an 
ongoing  basis. 
20 (4) The IFR may,  in accordance  with  the provisions  of this Part— 
(a) grant  a provisional  operating  licence  to a club  that applies  for one 
under  section  16; 
(b) grant  a full operating  licence  to a club  that holds  a provisional 
operating  licence  (see section  18). 
25 (5) An operating  licence  must  specify— 
(a) the club  to which  it relates, 
(b) each  relevant  team  operated  by the club, 
(c) the conditions  attached  to the licence  by the IFR under  section  20, 
(d) 
30any conditions  attached  to the licence  by the IFR under  section  21, 
and 
(e) such  other  information  as may  be specified  by the IFR in rules. 
(6) The IFR must  specify  the form  of an operating  licence  in rules. 
16 Application  for provisional  operating  licence 
(1) A club  may  apply  to the IFR for a provisional  operating  licence. 
35 (2) The IFR must  specify  in rules— 
(a) the time  by which  an application  must  be made,  and 9 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(b) the manner  and form  in which  an application  must  be made. 
(3) An application  must  be accompanied  by— 
(a) a personnel  statement  (see subsection  (4)) and a statement  explaining 
why  the club  considers  the personnel  statement  to be accurate, 
5 (b) a strategic  business  plan  (see subsection  (5)), and 
(c) such  other  information  and documents  as may  be specified  by the IFR 
in rules. 
(4) A “personnel  statement”  is a statement— 
(a) identifying  each  of the club’s  owners  and officers, 
10 (b) identifying  the club’s  ultimate  owner, 
(c) setting  out the job title of, or a description  of the role performed  by, 
each  of the club’s  officers,  and 
(d) setting  out the specified  senior  management  functions  performed  by 
each  of the club’s  officers  who  is a senior  manager. 
15 (5) A “strategic  business  plan”  is a document  containing— 
(a) information,  in respect  of the relevant  period,  about— 
(i) the proposed  operation  of the club, 
(ii) the estimated  costs  of that operation, 
(iii) how  those  costs  are to be funded,  and 
20 (iv) the source  of such  funding,  and 
(b) such  other  information  as may  be specified  by the IFR in rules. 
(6) For the purposes  of subsection  (5)(a), the “relevant  period”  means  the period— 
(a) beginning  with  the day on which  the application  under  this section 
is made,  and 
25 (b) ending  no earlier  than  the end of the next  football  season  after  the 
application  is made. 
17 Grant  of provisional  operating  licence 
(1) This  section  applies  where  a club  applies  for a provisional  operating  licence 
under  section  16. 
30 (2) The IFR must  grant  the club  a provisional  operating  licence  if it is satisfied 
that the club  would— 
(a) operate  a relevant  team, 
(b) comply  with  the mandatory  licence  conditions  (see section  20), and 
(c) comply  with  sections  45 to 53 (duties  on clubs). 
35 (3) The IFR— 
(a) must  specify  in the provisional  operating  licence  the period  for which 
it has effect,  which  may  be no more  than  three  years; 
(b) must  notify  the club  of the grant  of the licence. 
(4) 
40If the IFR is not satisfied  of the matters  in subsection  (2), it must  give  the 
club  a notice— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 10 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(a) stating  that it proposes  to refuse  to grant  the provisional  operating 
licence, 
(b) explaining  why  it proposes  to refuse  to grant  the licence, 
(c) 
5inviting  the club  to make  representations  about  the proposed  refusal, 
and 
(d) specifying  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
(5) 
10The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a period 
of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(6) After  complying  with  subsection  (4), the IFR must— 
(a) grant  the provisional  operating  licence  and notify  the club of the grant, 
or 
(b) 
15refuse  to grant  the licence  and notify  the club  of the refusal,  giving 
reasons  for it. 
(7) The IFR may  not grant  a club a provisional  operating  licence  under  this section 
except  as mentioned  in subsection  (2). 
(8) Where  the IFR grants  a club  a provisional  operating  licence  under  this section 
20the IFR must  specify  in the notice  under  subsection  (3)(b) or (6)(a) (as the 
case may  be) the day on which  the licence  comes  into force,  which  may  not 
be before  the day on which  the club  operates  a relevant  team. 
(9) The IFR must  specify  in rules— 
(a) the period  within  which  it must  make  the decision  whether  to grant 
the club  a provisional  operating  licence, 
25 (b) any circumstances  in which  it may  extend  that period,  and 
(c) the maximum  period  for which  that period  may  be extended. 
18 Grant  of full operating  licence 
(1) Where  a club  holds  a provisional  operating  licence,  the IFR must  decide 
whether  to grant  the club  a full operating  licence— 
30 (a) before  the end of the period  specified  by virtue  of section  17(3)(a), or 
(b) if applicable,  before  the end of the further  period  specified  by virtue 
of subsection  (6)(b). 
(2) The IFR— 
(a) 
35must  grant  a club  a full operating  licence  if the full licence  test is met 
in relation  to the club; 
(b) must  notify  the club  of the grant  of the licence. 
(3) The “full  licence  test”  is met in relation  to a club  if— 
(a) the IFR is satisfied  that the club— 
(i) is operating  a relevant  team, 
40 (ii) meets  the threshold  requirements  set out in Schedule  4, and 11 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(iii) complies  and would  continue  to comply  with  the mandatory 
licence  conditions  (see section  20) and sections  45 to 53 (duties 
on clubs),  and 
(b) 
5the IFR has not determined,  and is not treated  as having  determined, 
under  Part 4 that any person  who  is an owner  or officer  of the club 
is not suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of the club. 
(4) If the IFR considers  that the full licence  test is not met in relation  to the club, 
the IFR must  give  the club  a notice— 
(a) stating  that it proposes  to— 
10 (i) refuse  to grant  the full operating  licence,  and 
(ii) take action  under  subsection  (6)(b) or section  19, 
(b) explaining  why  it proposes  to take such  action, 
(c) inviting  the club  to make  representations  about  the proposed  action, 
and 
15 (d) specifying  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
(5) The period  specified  by virtue  of subsection  (4)(d) must  be a period  of not 
20less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  under  subsection 
(4) is given. 
(6) Subject  to section  19, after  complying  with  subsection  (4) the IFR must— 
(a) where  the IFR considers  that the full licence  test is met in relation  to 
the club,  grant  the club  a full operating  licence  and notify  the club  of 
the grant,  or 
25 (b) where  the IFR considers  that the full licence  test would  be met in 
relation  to the club  within  a reasonable  period  if more  time  is given 
for the test to be met,  specify  a further  period  for which  the club’s 
provisional  operating  licence  is to have  effect. 
(7) 
30A further  period  specified  by virtue  of subsection  (6)(b) must  be such  period 
as the IFR considers  sufficient  to enable  the full licence  test to be met in 
relation  to the club. 
(8) The IFR may  not grant  a club  a full operating  licence  under  this section  other 
than  where  it considers  that the full licence  test is met in relation  to the club. 
(9) 
35Where  the IFR grants  a club  a full operating  licence  under  this section  the 
IFR must  specify  in the notice  under  subsection  (2)(b) or (6)(a) (as the case 
may  be) the day on which  the licence  comes  into force,  at which  time  the 
club’s  provisional  operating  licence  ceases  to have  effect. 
19 Revocation  and cessation  of operating  licence 
(1) The IFR may  revoke  a club’s  provisional  operating  licence  if— 
40 (a) the full licence  test (as defined  in section  18(3)) is not met in relation 
to the club,  and 
(b) the IFR considers  that— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 12 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(i) the club  has persistently  and without  reasonable  excuse  failed 
to take such  steps  as are reasonable  for that test to be met in 
relation  to the club,  and 
(ii) 
5there  is no reasonable  prospect  of the test being  met in relation 
to the club  within  a reasonable  period  even  if the club  were 
given  more  time  for the test to be met. 
(2) For the purposes  of subsection  (1)(b)(i), a club’s  failure  is persistent  if the 
failure  has occurred  on a sufficient  number  of occasions  for it to be clear  that 
it represents  a pattern  of behaviour  or practice. 
10 (3) Where  the IFR revokes  a club’s  provisional  operating  licence  under  subsection 
(1) the IFR must  give  the club  a notice— 
(a) stating  that it is revoking  the club’s  provisional  operating  licence  from 
a date  specified  in the notice,  and 
(b) explaining  why  it is revoking  the club’s  licence. 
15 (4) Where  a notice  under  subsection  (3) is given  during  a football  season,  the 
date  specified  for the purposes  of subsection  (3)(a) may  not be a date  before 
the end of that season. 
(5) See paragraphs  8 and 9 of Schedule  9 for further  provision  about  the 
circumstances  in which  the IFR can revoke  a club’s  operating  licence. 
20 (6) An operating  licence  ceases  to have  effect  if the club holding  the licence  ceases 
to operate  a relevant  team. 
Licence  conditions 
20 Mandatory  licence  conditions 
Schedule  5— 
25 (a) sets out the licence  conditions  (referred  to in this Act as the “mandatory 
licence  conditions”)  that the IFR must  attach  to each  club’s  operating 
licence,  and 
(b) makes  provision  about  those  conditions. 
21 Discretionary  licence  conditions 
30 (1) The IFR may  attach  licence  conditions  other  than  mandatory  licence  conditions 
to a club’s  operating  licence. 
(2) A condition  attached  under  subsection  (1) is referred  to in this Act as a 
“discretionary  licence  condition”. 
(3) 
35The IFR may  attach  a discretionary  licence  condition  to an operating  licence 
only  if the IFR is satisfied  that compliance  with  the condition  would— 
(a) in the case of a provisional  operating  licence,  ensure  that the club  will 
meet,  or contribute  towards  the club  meeting,  the threshold 
requirements  set out in Schedule  4 before  the end of the period  for 
which  the provisional  operating  licence  has effect; 13 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(b) in the case of a full operating  licence— 
(i) ensure  that the club  will meet,  or will continue  to meet,  or 
(ii) contribute  towards  the club  meeting,  or continuing  to meet, 
the threshold  requirements; 
5 (c) in the case of a provisional  or full operating  licence,  advance  the IFR’s 
systemic  financial  resilience  objective. 
(4) The IFR may  vary  a discretionary  licence  condition  where— 
(a) either— 
(i) the IFR considers  that the condition  is no longer  effective,  or 
10 (ii) there  has been  a material  change  in circumstances  affecting  the 
club  since  the condition  was attached  to the operating  licence 
or previously  varied,  and 
(b) the condition  as varied  meets  a requirement  in subsection  (3). 
(5) Subsections  (3) and (4) are subject  to sections  22 to 25. 
15 (6) The IFR must— 
(a) remove  a discretionary  licence  condition  where  the IFR considers  that 
the condition  is no longer  necessary,  and 
(b) notify  the club  concerned  about  the removal. 
(7) 
20A club  may  apply  to the IFR for the variation  or removal  of a discretionary 
licence  condition. 
(8) An application  under  subsection  (7) must  explain  why  the variation  or removal 
is sought. 
(9) Where  a discretionary  licence  condition  is attached  to an operating  licence, 
25varied  or removed,  the IFR must  specify  in the licence  the time  from  which 
the attached  condition,  variation  or removal  has effect. 
22 Scope  of powers  to attach  or vary  discretionary  licence  conditions 
(1) A discretionary  licence  condition  relating  to the financial  resources  threshold 
requirement  (see paragraph  2 of Schedule  4) may  only— 
(a) relate  to debt  management, 
30 (b) relate  to liquidity  requirements, 
(c) restrict  the club’s  overall  expenditure,  or 
(d) restrict  the club’s  ability  to accept  or receive  funding  which  the IFR 
reasonably  suspects  to be connected  to serious  criminal  conduct. 
(2) 
35A discretionary  licence  condition  relating  to the non-financial  resources 
threshold  requirement  (see paragraph  3 of Schedule  4) may  only  relate  to— 
(a) internal  controls, 
(b) risk management,  or 
(c) financial  reporting. 
(3) 
40A discretionary  licence  condition  relating  to the advancement  of the IFR’s 
systemic  financial  resilience  objective  may  only— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 14 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(a) relate  to debt  management, 
(b) relate  to liquidity  requirements,  or 
(c) restrict  the club’s  overall  expenditure. 
(4) 
5A discretionary  licence  condition  attached  in reliance  on subsection  (1)(c) or 
(3)(c) may  not impose  restrictions  on expenditure  of a particular  kind  or a 
particular  transaction. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  subsection  (1), (2) or (3) to 
add,  vary  or remove  an item. 
(6) 
10The Secretary  of State  may  make  regulations  under  subsection  (5) only  if 
requested  in writing  to do so by the IFR. 
(7) A request  under  subsection  (6) must  explain  why  the IFR considers  that the 
making  of regulations  under  this section  is compatible  with  the purpose  of 
this Act. 
(8) 
15Before  submitting  a request  under  subsection  (6), the IFR must  consult  such 
persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate. 
23 Procedure  for attaching  or varying  financial  discretionary  licence  conditions 
(1) This  section  applies  to a discretionary  licence  condition  relating  to— 
(a) the financial  resources  threshold  requirement,  or 
(b) the advancement  of the IFR’s  systemic  financial  resilience  objective. 
20 (2) Before  attaching  or varying  a discretionary  licence  condition  to which  this 
section  applies,  the IFR must  give  a notice  about  the proposed  condition  or 
variation  to— 
(a) the club,  and 
(b) 
25the specified  competition  organiser  which  organises  a specified 
competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is operated  by the 
club. 
(3) The notice  must— 
(a) give  details  of the proposed  condition  or variation, 
(b) 
30explain  why  the IFR is proposing  to attach  the condition  or make  the 
variation, 
(c) invite— 
(i) the club  and the specified  competition  organiser  to make 
representations  about  the proposed  condition  or variation,  and 
(ii) 
35the specified  competition  organiser  to give  a commitment  to 
take action  in lieu of the proposed  condition  or variation,  and 
(d) specify  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made  or such  a commitment  must  be given. 
(4) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  or giving  a 
40commitment  must  be a period  of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the 
day on which  the notice  is given. 15 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(5) The IFR must— 
(a) have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made,  and 
(b) where  the specified  competition  organiser  gives  a commitment 
5mentioned  in subsection  (3)(c)(ii) within  the period  specified  in the 
notice,  consider  whether  to accept  that commitment. 
(6) This  section  does  not apply  where— 
(a) a club  applies  for a variation  under  section  21(7), or 
(b) the IFR considers  that compliance  with  this section  would  jeopardise, 
10or risk jeopardising,  the IFR’s  ability  to advance  one or more  of its 
objectives. 
24 Commitments  in lieu of financial  discretionary  licence  conditions 
(1) This  section  applies  where  a specified  competition  organiser  gives  a 
commitment  mentioned  in section  23(3)(c)(ii) (commitment  to take action  in 
lieu of the proposed  condition  or variation). 
15 (2) The IFR may  accept  the commitment  if it considers  that— 
(a) compliance  with  the commitment  by the specified  competition  organiser 
would  mean  that it would  not be necessary  to attach  the proposed 
discretionary  licence  condition  or make  the proposed  variation,  and 
(b) 
20accepting  the commitment  would  not jeopardise,  or risk jeopardising, 
the IFR’s  ability  to advance  one or more  of its objectives. 
(3) Where  the IFR accepts  a commitment  under  this section— 
(a) the IFR may  not attach  the proposed  discretionary  licence  condition 
or make  the proposed  variation  while  the commitment  is in force,  and 
(b) 
25the specified  competition  organiser  that gave  the commitment  must 
comply  with  it while  it has effect. 
(4) Where  the IFR does  not accept  the commitment  under  this section,  the IFR— 
(a) must  notify  the specified  competition  organiser  and the club concerned 
and provide  reasons  for its decision,  and 
(b) 
30may  without  further  notice  attach  the proposed  discretionary  licence 
condition  or make  the proposed  variation. 
(5) The IFR may,  from  time  to time,  accept  from  a specified  competition  organiser 
a variation  to a commitment  accepted  under  this section,  provided  that the 
IFR considers  that the commitment  as varied  would  still meet  the requirements 
in subsection  (2). 
35 (6) The IFR may  release  a specified  competition  organiser  from  a commitment 
accepted  under  this section  where  it considers  that— 
(a) the commitment  is no longer  necessary, 
(b) the commitment  is no longer  effective,  or 
(c) 
40the specified  competition  organiser  has failed  to comply  with  the 
commitment. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 16 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(7) Where,  under  subsection  (6)(b) or (c), the IFR releases  a specified  competition 
organiser  from  a commitment  accepted  under  this section,  the IFR may— 
(a) without  further  notice  attach  the proposed  discretionary  licence 
condition  or make  the proposed  variation,  or 
5 (b) attach  an alternative  discretionary  licence  condition  or make  an 
alternative  variation  to a discretionary  licence  condition. 
(8) Before  attaching  an alternative  discretionary  licence  condition  or making  an 
alternative  variation  by virtue  of subsection  (7)(b), the IFR must  give  the club 
a notice  that— 
10 (a) notifies  the club  about  the proposed  alternative  condition  or variation, 
(b) invites  the club to make  representations  about  the proposed  alternative 
condition  or variation,  and 
(c) specifies  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made, 
15 and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
(9) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a period 
of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(10) A commitment  accepted  by the IFR under  this section— 
(a) 
20comes  into force  on the day specified  in the notice  given  to the 
specified  competition  organiser  under  paragraph  3 of Schedule  6, and 
(b) ceases  to have  effect  if the specified  competition  organiser  is released 
from  the commitment  under  subsection  (6). 
(11) The fact that a commitment  accepted  under  this section  ceases  to have  effect 
25does  not affect  the exercise  of any functions  in relation  to a failure,  or possible 
failure,  to comply  with  the commitment. 
(12) The IFR must  keep  under  review— 
(a) the extent  to which  a specified  competition  organiser  which  gave  a 
commitment  accepted  under  this section  is complying  with  it, 
(b) 
30whether  a specified  competition  organiser  should  be released  from  a 
commitment  under  this section  (including  whether  to release  a specified 
competition  organiser  from  a commitment  and attach  or vary  a 
discretionary  licence  condition  to an operating  licence  instead),  and 
(c) whether  to take action  in accordance  with  Part 8 in respect  of a 
35specified  competition  organiser  which  fails to comply  with  a 
commitment. 
(13) Schedule  6 makes  further  provision  about  commitments  mentioned  in section 
23(3)(c)(ii). 
25 Procedure  for attaching  or varying  other  discretionary  licence  conditions 
(1) This  section  applies  to a discretionary  licence  condition  relating  to— 
40 (a) the non-financial  resources  threshold  requirement  (see paragraph  3 of 
Schedule  4), or 17 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Operating  licences 
(b) the fan engagement  threshold  requirement  (see paragraph  4 of Schedule 
4). 
(2) Before  attaching  or varying  a discretionary  licence  condition  to which  this 
section  applies,  the IFR must  give  the club  a notice  that— 
5 (a) notifies  the club  about  the proposed  condition  or variation  (including 
the threshold  requirement  to which  the condition  or variation  relates), 
(b) invites  the club  to make  representations  about  the proposed  condition 
or variation,  and 
(c) 
10specifies  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
(3) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a period 
of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given 
to the club. 
15 (4) This  section  does  not apply  where— 
(a) a club  applies  for a variation  under  section  21(7), or 
(b) the IFR considers  that compliance  with  this section  would  jeopardise, 
or risk jeopardising,  the IFR’s  ability  to advance  one or more  of its 
objectives. 
20 PART 4 
OWNERS AND OFFICERS OF REGULATED CLUBS: SUITABILITY ETC 
Introductory 
26 Part 4: overview  and interpretation 
(1) This  Part makes  provision— 
25 (a) requiring  notices  to be given  to the IFR before  a person  becomes  an 
owner  or officer  of a regulated  club,  or where  there  is a change  of 
circumstances  relating  to a person’s  role as an owner  or officer  of a 
regulated  club, 
(b) 
30for the making  of determinations  by the IFR about  the suitability  of 
a person  to be an owner  or officer  of a regulated  club,  and 
(c) for action  that may  or must  be taken  by the IFR where  it determines 
or is treated  as having  determined  that a person  is not suitable  to be 
an owner  or officer  of a regulated  club. 
(2) 
35Sections  27 to 32 deal  with  notifications  by, and determinations  relating  to, 
prospective  owners  and officers  of clubs. 
(3) Sections  33 to 36— 
(a) deal  with  notifications  by incumbent  owners  and officers,  and 
(b) confer  a power  on the IFR to make  determinations  relating  to the 
suitability  of incumbent  owners  and officers  to continue  in their  role. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 18 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(4) Section  37 contains  provision  about  matters  to which  the IFR must  have  regard 
in making  determinations  under  this Part. 
(5) Sections  38 to 44 make  provision  about  the action  that the IFR may  or must 
5take where  it determines,  or is treated  as having  determined,  that a person 
is not suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of a regulated  club,  which  may 
include— 
(a) making  an order  disqualifying  the person  from  being  an owner  or 
officer  of a club; 
(b) 
10giving  a direction  requiring  the person  to cease  to be an owner  or 
officer  of a club; 
(c) making  an order  removing  the person  as an owner  of a club. 
(6) Subsections  (7) and (8) apply  for the purposes  of this Part. 
(7) An individual  meets  the “individual  ownership  fitness  criteria”  if the 
individual— 
15 (a) has the requisite  honesty  and integrity,  and 
(b) is financially  sound. 
(8) An individual  meets  the “officer  fitness  criteria”  if the individual— 
(a) has the requisite  honesty  and integrity, 
(b) has the requisite  competence,  and 
20 (c) is financially  sound. 
Persons  who become  owners  or officers  of regulated  clubs 
27 Duties  to notify  IFR of prospective  new  owner  or officer 
(1) A person  who— 
(a) is not an owner  of a particular  regulated  club,  but 
25 (b) considers  that there  is a reasonable  prospect  of the person  becoming 
an owner  of that club, 
must  notify  the IFR of that fact. 
(2) An individual  who— 
(a) is not an officer  of a particular  regulated  club,  but 
30 (b) considers  that there  is a reasonable  prospect  of the individual  becoming 
an officer  of that club, 
must  notify  the IFR of that fact. 
(3) A regulated  club  must  notify  the IFR where  it considers  there  is a reasonable 
prospect  of— 
35 (a) a person  becoming  an owner  of the club,  or 
(b) an individual  becoming  an officer  of the club. 
(4) In this section— 
(a) references  to a prospective  owner  are to a person  who  is the subject 
of a notification  under  subsection  (1) or (3)(a); 19 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) references  to a prospective  officer  are to an individual  who  is the 
subject  of a notification  under  subsection  (2) or (3)(b). 
(5) A notification  under  this section  must— 
(a) identify  the prospective  owner  or officer, 
5 (b) explain  why  the person  giving  the notification  considers  there  is a 
reasonable  prospect  of the prospective  owner  becoming  an owner  of 
the club  or (as the case may  be) of the prospective  officer  becoming 
an officer  of the club,  and 
(c) in relation  to a prospective  officer,  state— 
10 (i) their  proposed  job title or a description  of the job proposed  to 
be performed  by them,  and 
(ii) any senior  management  functions  to be carried  out by them. 
(6) A notification  under  subsection  (1), (2) or (3) must  be given— 
(a) 
15as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the duty  under  that subsection 
arises,  and 
(b) before  the prospective  owner  or officer  becomes  an owner  or officer 
of the club. 
(7) Where  a notification  under  this section  is not given  by the time  mentioned 
20in subsection  (6)(b), the person  or individual  who,  or club which,  should  have 
given  the notification  must  notify  the IFR of the fact that (as the case may 
be)— 
(a) the person  has become  an owner  of the club,  or 
(b) the individual  has become  an officer  of the club, 
25and must  do so as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  becoming  aware  of 
that fact. 
28 Determination  of suitability  required  for new  owner 
(1) A person  may  not become  an owner  of a particular  regulated  club  unless,  on 
an application  by the person  to the IFR, the IFR determines  that the person 
is suitable  to be an owner  of the club  (an “affirmative  determination”). 
30 (2) An application  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  in accordance  with  rules 
made  by the IFR, which— 
(a) must  require  information  about  the following  matters  to be provided 
with  an application— 
(i) the proposed  operation  of the club; 
35 (ii) the estimated  costs  of that operation; 
(iii) how  those  costs  are to be funded; 
(iv) the source  of such  funding; 
(b) may  require  information  about  other  matters  specified  in the rules  to 
be provided  with  an application; 
40 (c) may  make  provision  about  the manner  and form  in which  an 
application  is to be made. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 20 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(3) Where  an application  is duly  made  under  subsection  (1) by a registered 
society,  the IFR must  make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the 
applicant  if the IFR considers  that the applicant  has sufficient  financial 
resources. 
5 (4) Where  an application  is duly  made  under  subsection  (1) by an individual, 
the IFR must  make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant 
if— 
(a) the IFR considers  that the applicant— 
(i) meets  the individual  ownership  fitness  criteria,  and 
10 (ii) has sufficient  financial  resources,  and 
(b) the IFR does  not have  grounds  to suspect  that the applicant  has any 
source  of wealth  which  is connected  to serious  criminal  conduct. 
(5) Subsections  (3) and (4) are subject  to subsection  (6)(b). 
(6) The IFR— 
15 (a) may  not make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant 
except  as mentioned  in subsections  (3) and (4); 
(b) must  not make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant 
if an order  under  section  38(1) (disqualification  from  ownership)  has 
effect  in relation  to the applicant. 
20 (7) If the IFR is not able to make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the 
applicant,  it must  determine  that the applicant  is not suitable  to be an owner 
of the club. 
(8) Where  the IFR makes  an affirmative  determination  in relation  to a person, 
the determination  has effect  until— 
25 (a) the person  ceases  to be an owner  of the club,  or 
(b) if earlier,  the IFR gives  the person  a notice  under  section  34(10)(b) in 
relation  to the person’s  suitability  to be an owner  of the club. 
(9) Where  the IFR makes  a determination  under  this section,  the IFR must— 
(a) give  notice  of the determination  to the applicant  and to the club,  and 
30 (b) publish  the determination. 
29 Determination  of suitability  required  for new  officer 
(1) An individual  may  not become  an officer  of a particular  regulated  club unless, 
on an application  by the individual  to the IFR, the IFR determines  that the 
35individual  is suitable  to be an officer  of the club  (an “affirmative 
determination”). 
(2) An application  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  in accordance  with  rules 
made  by the IFR, which  may  in particular  include  provision  about— 
(a) the information  to be provided  with  an application,  and 
(b) the manner  and form  in which  an application  must  be made. 21 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(3) Where  an application  under  subsection  (1) is duly  made,  the IFR must  make 
an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant  if the IFR considers 
that the applicant  meets  the officer  fitness  criteria. 
This  is subject  to subsection  (4)(b). 
5 (4) The IFR— 
(a) may  not make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant 
except  as mentioned  in subsection  (3); 
(b) must  not make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the applicant 
10if an order  under  section  38(2) (disqualification  from  being  an officer) 
has effect  in relation  to the applicant. 
(5) If the IFR is not able to make  an affirmative  determination  in respect  of the 
applicant,  it must  determine  that the applicant  is not suitable  to be an officer 
of the club. 
(6) 
15Where  the IFR makes  an affirmative  determination  in relation  to an individual, 
the determination  has effect  until— 
(a) the individual  ceases  to be an officer  of the club,  or 
(b) if earlier,  the IFR gives  the individual  a notice  under  section  35(5)(b) 
in relation  to the individual’s  suitability  to be an officer  of the club. 
(7) Where  the IFR makes  a determination  under  this section,  the IFR must— 
20 (a) give  notice  of the determination  to the applicant  and to the club,  and 
(b) publish  the determination. 
30 Becoming  an owner  or officer  without  a determination 
(1) Where  the IFR becomes  aware  that a person  has become  an owner  of a 
25particular  regulated  club  without  the IFR having  first determined  under 
section  28 whether  the person  is suitable  to be an owner  of the club,  the IFR 
must  give  the person— 
(a) a notice  requiring  the person  to make  an application  under  section  28 
by the date  specified  in the notice,  or 
(b) 
30a notice  stating  that the person  is not suitable  to be an owner  of the 
club. 
(2) But if the person  is subject  to an order  under  section  38(1) (disqualification 
from  ownership)— 
(a) subsection  (1) does  not apply,  and 
(b) 
35the IFR must  give  the person  a notice  stating  that the person  is not 
suitable  to be an owner  of the club. 
(3) Where  the IFR becomes  aware  that an individual  has become  an officer  of a 
particular  regulated  club  without  the IFR having  first determined  under 
section  29 whether  the individual  is suitable  to be an officer  of the club,  the 
IFR must  give  the individual— 
40 (a) a notice  requiring  the individual  to make  an application  under  section 
29 by the date  specified  in the notice,  or Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 22 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) a notice  stating  that the individual  is not suitable  to be an officer  of 
the club. 
(4) But if the individual  is subject  to an order  under  section  38(2) (disqualification 
from  being  an officer)— 
5 (a) subsection  (3) does  not apply,  and 
(b) the IFR must  give  the person  a notice  stating  that the individual  is 
not suitable  to be an officer  of the club. 
(5) Where  the IFR has given  a notice  under  subsection  (1)(a) or (3)(a) (“the  initial 
10notice”)  to a person,  the IFR may  give the person  a notice  under  this subsection 
(a “further  notice”)  stating  that the initial  notice  is to be treated  as if the date 
specified  in it were  a later  date  specified  in the further  notice. 
(6) The power  conferred  by subsection  (5) may  be exercised  more  than  once. 
(7) Where  a person  to whom  a notice  under  subsection  (1)(a) or (3)(a) was given 
15fails to make  the application  required  by the notice  by the date  specified  (or 
treated  as specified)  in the notice,  the IFR must— 
(a) in a subsection  (1)(a) case,  give  the person  a notice  stating  that the 
person  is not suitable  to be an owner  of the club; 
(b) in a subsection  (3)(a) case,  give  the individual  a notice  stating  that the 
individual  is not suitable  to be an officer  of the club. 
20 (8) Where— 
(a) a notice  under  subsection  (1)(b), (2)(b) or (7)(a) is given  to a person, 
the IFR is to be treated  as having  determined  under  section  28 that 
the person  is not suitable  to be an owner  of the club  in question; 
(b) 
25a notice  under  subsection  (3)(b), (4)(b) or (7)(b) is given  to a person, 
the IFR is to be treated  as having  determined  under  section  29 that 
the person  is not suitable  to be an officer  of the club  in question. 
(9) Where  the IFR gives  a notice  under  this section  to a person,  it must  give  a 
copy  of the notice  to the club  in question. 
(10) 
30The IFR must  publish  notice  of any determination  it is treated  by virtue  of 
subsection  (8) as having  made  under  section  28 or 29. 
31 Opportunity  to make  representations  about  proposed  negative  determinations 
(1) If the IFR is minded  to determine  under  section  28 or 29 that a person  is not 
suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of a particular  regulated  club,  the IFR 
must— 
35 (a) give  notice  of that fact to the person  and to the club,  and 
(b) have  regard  to any representations  made  by the person  or the club  in 
accordance  with  the notice. 
(2) If the IFR is minded  to give  a notice  under  section  30(1)(b) or (3)(b) to a 
person,  the IFR must— 
40 (a) give notice  of that fact to the person  and to the regulated  club of which 
the person  is an owner  or officer,  and 23 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) have  regard  to any representations  made  by the person  or the club  in 
accordance  with  the notice. 
(3) A notice  under  subsection  (1) or (2) must— 
(a) 
5explain  why  the IFR is minded  to make  the determination  or (as the 
case may  be) to give  the notice, 
(b) invite  the person  or the club  to make  representations  about  the 
proposed  determination  or notice,  and 
(c) specify  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made. 
10 (4) The period  for making  representations  must  be a period  of not less than  7 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
32 Determinations  under  sections  28 and 29: time  limits 
(1) Where  a person  makes  an application  to the IFR under  section  28 or 29, the 
15IFR must  make  a determination  under  that section  in respect  of the person 
before  the end of the determination  period. 
(2) The determination  period  is— 
(a) the period  specified  in regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State  for 
the purposes  of this paragraph,  or 
(b) 
20in a case where  the period  mentioned  in paragraph  (a) is extended 
(or further  extended)  under  subsection  (3), the period  as so extended. 
(3) If the IFR considers  that it cannot  make  a determination  under  section  28 or 
29 before  the end of the determination  period,  it may  (before  the end of that 
period)  give  the person  who  made  the application  a notice  extending  the 
determination  period  for the period  specified  in the notice. 
25 (4) The power  under  subsection  (3) may  be exercised  more  than  once;  but the 
determination  period  may  not be extended  so that it exceeds  the period 
specified  in regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State  for the purposes  of 
this subsection . 
(5) 
30If the IFR does  not make  a determination  under  section  28 or 29 in respect 
of a person  before  the end of the determination  period,  the IFR is to be treated 
on the expiry  of that period  as having  determined  under  that section  that the 
person  is not suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of the club  (as the case may 
be). 
(6) 
35Before  making  regulations  under  this section,  the Secretary  of State  must 
consult  such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 24 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
Determinations  relating  to incumbent  owners  and officers 
33 Duties  to notify  IFR of change  in circumstances  relating  to incumbent  owner 
or officer 
(1) 
5An individual  who  is an owner  or officer  of a regulated  club  must  notify  the 
IFR where  the individual  considers  there  has been,  or may  have  been,  a 
material  change  in circumstances  which  is relevant  to whether  the individual 
is suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of the club  (as the case may  be). 
(2) A regulated  club  must  notify  the IFR where  it considers  that there  has been, 
10or may  have  been,  a material  change  in circumstances  which  is relevant  to 
whether  an individual  who  is an owner  or officer  of the club  is suitable  to 
be an owner  or officer  of the club  (as the case may  be). 
(3) A notification  under  this section  must— 
(a) identify  the owner  or officer  in question, 
(b) explain  the material  change  in circumstances,  and 
15 (c) explain  why  the person  giving  the notification  considers  that the 
change  in circumstances  is relevant  to whether  the owner  or officer 
in question  is suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of the club. 
(4) A notification  under  subsection  (1) or (2) must  be given  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the duty  under  that subsection  arises. 
20 34 Incumbent  owners 
(1) The IFR may  determine  whether  an individual  within  subsection  (3) meets 
the individual  ownership  fitness  criteria  if the IFR is in possession  of 
information  that gives  it grounds  for concern  about  whether  the individual 
meets  those  criteria. 
25 (2) The IFR may  determine  whether  an individual  within  subsection  (3) has a 
source  of wealth  which  is connected  to serious  criminal  conduct  if the IFR is 
in possession  of information  that gives  it grounds  to suspect  that the individual 
does  have  such  a source  of wealth. 
(3) 
30An individual  is within  this subsection  if the individual  is an owner  of a 
particular  regulated  club  and either— 
(a) the individual  has been  an owner  of the club  since  immediately 
before— 
(i) the coming  into force  of this section,  or 
(ii) if later,  the time  when  the club  became  a regulated  club,  or 
35 (b) a determination  under  section  28 that the individual  is suitable  to be 
an owner  of the club  has effect  in relation  to the individual. 
(4) Before  making  a determination  under  subsection  (1) or (2) in relation  to an 
individual  (“P”),  the IFR must  give  notice  to P and to the club  of the fact that 
it proposes  to make  such  a determination. 25 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(5) Where  the only  determination  being  made  by the IFR is a determination 
under  subsection  (1), if the IFR finds  that P meets  the individual  ownership 
fitness  criteria— 
(a) the IFR must  give  notice  of that finding  to P and to the club,  and 
5 (b) P may  continue  to be an owner  of the club. 
(6) Where  the only  determination  being  made  by the IFR is a determination 
under  subsection  (2), if the IFR finds  that P does  not have  a source  of wealth 
which  is connected  to serious  criminal  conduct— 
(a) the IFR must  give  notice  of that finding  to P and to the club,  and 
10 (b) P may  continue  to be an owner  of the club. 
(7) The IFR may  make  the finding  referred  to in subsection  (6) only  if the IFR— 
(a) has taken  reasonable  steps  to establish  whether  P has any source  of 
wealth  which  is connected  to serious  criminal  conduct,  and 
(b) 
15is not satisfied,  on the balance  of probabilities,  that P has any such 
source  of wealth. 
(8) Where  determinations  under  both  subsections  (1) and (2) are being  made  by 
the IFR, if the IFR finds  as mentioned  in subsections  (5) and (6)— 
(a) the IFR must  give  notice  of those  findings  to P and to the club,  and 
(b) P may  continue  to be an owner  of the club. 
20 (9) Subsection  (10) applies  if— 
(a) in a case within  subsection  (5), the IFR does  not make  the finding 
mentioned  in that subsection, 
(b) in a case within  subsection  (6), the IFR does  not make  the finding 
mentioned  in that subsection,  or 
25 (c) in a case within  subsection  (8), the IFR does  not make  both  of the 
findings  mentioned  in subsections  (5) and (6). 
(10) If this subsection  applies— 
(a) the IFR is to be treated  as having  determined  that P is not suitable  to 
be an owner  of the club,  and 
30 (b) the IFR must  give  notice  of that fact to P and to the club. 
(11) The IFR must  publish  notice  of— 
(a) any finding  it makes  under  this section; 
(b) any determination  it is treated  as having  made  under  this section. 
35 Incumbent  officers 
35 (1) The IFR may  determine  whether  an individual  within  subsection  (2) meets 
the officer  fitness  criteria  if the IFR is in possession  of information  that gives 
it grounds  for concern  about  whether  the individual  meets  those  criteria. 
(2) An individual  is within  this subsection  if the individual  is an officer  of a 
particular  regulated  club  and either— 
40 (a) the individual  has been  an officer  of the club  since  immediately 
before— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 26 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(i) the coming  into force  of this section,  or 
(ii) if later,  the time  when  the club  became  a regulated  club,  or 
(b) a determination  under  section  29 that the individual  is suitable  to be 
an officer  of the club  has effect  in relation  to the individual. 
5 (3) Before  determining  under  this section  whether  an individual  (“P”)  meets  the 
officer  fitness  criteria,  the IFR must  give  notice  to P and to the club  of the 
fact that it proposes  to make  such  a determination. 
(4) If, on making  a determination  under  this section,  the IFR finds  that P meets 
the officer  fitness  criteria— 
10 (a) the IFR must  give  notice  of that finding  to P and to the club,  and 
(b) P may  continue  to be an officer  of the club. 
(5) If, on making  a determination  under  this section,  the IFR does  not find that 
P meets  the officer  fitness  criteria— 
(a) 
15the IFR is to be treated  as having  determined  that P is not suitable  to 
be an officer  of the club,  and 
(b) the IFR must  give  notice  of that fact to P and to the club. 
(6) The IFR must  publish— 
(a) any finding  it makes  under  this section; 
(b) 
20notice  of any determination  it is treated  as having  made  under  this 
section. 
36 Opportunity  to make  representations  about  proposed  negative  findings 
(1) If the IFR is minded  to make  a negative  finding  under  section  34 or 35 in 
relation  to an individual,  the IFR must— 
(a) give  notice  of that fact to the individual  and to the club,  and 
25 (b) have  regard  to any representations  made  by the individual  or the club 
in accordance  with  the notice. 
(2) In this section,  “negative  finding”  means— 
(a) in relation  to a determination  under  section  34(1), a finding  that the 
individual  does  not meet  the individual  ownership  fitness  criteria; 
30 (b) in relation  to a determination  under  section  34(2), a finding  that the 
individual  does  have  a source  of wealth  which  is connected  to serious 
criminal  conduct; 
(c) in relation  to a determination  under  section  35(1), a finding  that the 
individual  does  not meet  the officer  fitness  criteria. 
35 (3) A notice  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) explain  why  the IFR is minded  to make  the negative  finding, 
(b) invite  the individual  or the club  to make  representations  about  the 
proposed  finding,  and 
(c) 
40specify  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made. 27 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(4) The period  for making  representations  must  be a period  of not less than  14 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
Further  provision  about  determinations 
37 Matters  relevant  to determinations 
5 (1) In making  a determination  under  this Part in relation  to a person,  the IFR 
must  have  regard  to any determination  which— 
(a) has been  made  by a competition  organiser  in relation  to the person, 
and 
(b) the IFR considers  relevant  to its determination. 
10 (2) In determining  for the purposes  of this Part whether  it considers  that an 
individual  has the requisite  honesty  and integrity,  the IFR must  have  regard 
to the following  matters— 
(a) whether  the individual  has been  convicted  of a criminal  offence  or 
15subject  to criminal  proceedings,  whether  or not in England  and Wales 
(in particular  where  the offence  is or proceedings  are in respect  of 
serious  criminal  conduct); 
(b) whether,  on the balance  of probabilities,  the individual  has engaged 
in conduct  outside  England  and Wales  which  would,  if done  in 
England  and Wales,  amount  to the commission  of a serious  offence; 
20 (c) whether  the individual  is or has been  a party  to proceedings  (other 
than  criminal  proceedings)  in any court  or tribunal; 
(d) any action  of a regulatory  or disciplinary  nature  that is being  or has 
been  taken  in relation  to the individual  (whether  or not by the IFR 
and whether  or not in England  and Wales); 
25 (e) whether  the individual  is prohibited  from  entering  the United 
Kingdom; 
(f) whether  the individual  is a designated  person  as defined  by section 
9(2) of the Sanctions  and Anti-Money  Laundering  Act 2018; 
(g) 
30such  other  matters  relating  to honesty  and integrity  as may  be specified 
for the purposes  of this paragraph  in rules  made  by the IFR. 
(3) In determining  for the purposes  of this Part whether  it considers  that an 
individual  is financially  sound,  the IFR must  have  regard  to the following 
matters— 
(a) 
35the individual’s  financial  arrangements,  including  in particular  whether 
the individual  has— 
(i) become  bankrupt  (in relation  to England  and Wales  and 
Northern  Ireland)  or made  an arrangement  with  creditors, 
(ii) had their  estate  sequestrated  (in relation  to Scotland),  or 
(iii) 
40been  subject  to any similar  procedure  (whether  or not in the 
United  Kingdom); 
(b) the financial  situation  of any body  in relation  to which  the individual 
holds,  or has held,  a position  of responsibility  (whether  or not as an 
officer  of the body); Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 28 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(c) such  other  matters  relating  to financial  soundness  as may  be specified 
for the purposes  of this paragraph  in rules  made  by the IFR. 
(4) In determining  for the purposes  of this Part whether  it considers  that an 
5individual  has the requisite  competence,  the IFR must  have  regard  to the 
individual’s  qualifications,  experience  and training. 
(5) In making  a determination  referred  to in subsection  (2), (3) or (4), the IFR 
may  not have  regard  to any matter  which  is not referred  to in that subsection 
(subject  to subsection  (1)). 
(6) 
10Rules  made  under  subsection  (2)(g) or (3)(c) must  not have  the effect  of 
authorising  the IFR to make  a determination  in relation  to any matter  based 
solely  on the individual’s  connection  with  the government  of any country  or 
territory. 
(7) In this section,  “serious  offence”  means  an offence  specified,  or falling  within 
a description  specified,  in Part 1 of Schedule  1 to the Serious  Crime  Act 2007. 
15 Disqualification  orders  and enforcement 
38 Disqualification  orders 
(1) The IFR may  make  an order  disqualifying  a person  from  being  an owner  of 
any regulated  club  if under  any provision  of this Part the IFR determines,  or 
20is treated  as having  determined,  that the person  is not suitable  to be an owner 
of a particular  regulated  club. 
(2) The IFR may  make  an order  disqualifying  a person  from  being  an officer  of 
any regulated  club  if under  any provision  of this Part the IFR determines,  or 
is treated  as having  determined,  that the person  is not suitable  to be an officer 
of a particular  regulated  club. 
25 (3) Before  making  an order  made  under  subsection  (1) or (2), the IFR must  give 
a notice  to the person  to whom  the order  would  relate,  and to the particular 
club  referred  to in that subsection— 
(a) giving  details  of the fact that the IFR proposes  to make  the order, 
(b) stating  the reasons  for the proposed  order, 
30 (c) inviting  the person  and the club  to make  representations  about  the 
proposed  order,  and 
(d) specifying  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  may  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
35 (4) The period  for making  representations  must  be a period  of not less than  14 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  under  subsection  (3) is 
given. 
(5) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the period  for making  representations 
has ended,  the IFR must— 
40 (a) decide  whether  to make  an order  under  subsection  (1) or (2), and 29 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) publish  a notice  of its decision,  giving  reasons  for it. 
(6) An order  under  subsection  (1) or (2) must  set out the period  for which  the 
order  has effect  (which  may  be indefinite). 
(7) The IFR may  revoke  an order  made  under  subsection  (1) or (2). 
5 39 Removal  directions:  owners 
(1) This  section  applies  in relation  to a person  (“P”)  who  is an owner  of a 
particular  regulated  club  where— 
(a) the IFR has determined  under  section  28, or is treated  as having 
10determined  under  that section , that P is not suitable  to be an owner 
of the club,  or 
(b) the IFR is treated  by virtue  of section  34(10)(a) as having  determined 
that P is not suitable  to be an owner  of the club, 
and “deemed  determination”  in this section  means  a determination  that the 
IFR is treated  as having  made  as mentioned  in paragraph  (a) or (b). 
15 (2) The IFR must  give  P a direction  requiring  P to take all reasonable  steps  to 
cease  to be an owner  of the club  before  the end of the removal  period. 
This  is subject  to subsection  (7). 
(3) The removal  period  is— 
(a) the period  specified  in the direction,  or 
20 (b) where  the period  mentioned  in paragraph  (a) is extended  (or further 
extended)  under  subsection  (4), that period  as so extended. 
(4) A direction  given  under  this section  in relation  to P (“the  first direction”)  may 
be varied  by a further  direction  so as to extend  (or further  extend)  the period 
specified  in the first direction. 
25 (5) Before  giving  a direction  under  this section,  the IFR must  consult— 
(a) P, 
(b) the club,  and 
(c) the specified  competition  organiser  which  organises  a specified 
30competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is operated  by the 
club. 
(6) At the same  time  as giving  a direction  under  this section  to P, the IFR must 
give  a notice  to P and to the club  including  information  about  the possible 
consequences  under  this Part and Part 8 of not complying  with  the direction. 
(7) 
35Subsection  (2) does  not apply  in a case within  subsection  (1)(a) if, before  the 
end of the period  of 3 months  beginning  with  the applicable  day,  the IFR 
exercises  its power  to make  an order  under  section  43 in relation  to P 
(ownership  removal  order). 
(8) For the purposes  of subsection  (7), the applicable  day is (subject  to subsections 
(9) and (10)) the day on which  the IFR publishes— 
40 (a) its determination  under  section  28 in relation  to P, or Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 30 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) notice  of its deemed  determination  under  that section  in relation  to 
P, 
as the case may  be. 
(9) 
5Where  the determination  or deemed  determination  is subject  to a review 
requested  under  section  82, the applicable  day is the day on which  the IFR 
publishes— 
(a) the applicable  reviewer’s  decision  under  section  83(3), or 
(b) the decision  that the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having  made 
under  section  82(5) or 83(6), 
10 unless  the determination  or deemed  determination  is then  subject  to an appeal 
under  section  84. 
(10) Where  the determination  or deemed  determination  is subject  to an appeal 
under  section  84 (whether  or not it has been  subject  to a review  requested 
15under  section  82), the applicable  day is the day on which  the appeal  is finally 
determined. 
40 Removal  directions:  officers 
(1) This  section  applies  in relation  to an individual  (“P”)  who  is an officer  of a 
particular  regulated  club  where— 
(a) 
20the IFR has determined  under  section  29, or is treated  as having 
determined  under  that section,  that P is not suitable  to be an officer 
of the club,  or 
(b) the IFR is treated  by virtue  of section  35(5)(a) as having  determined 
that P is not suitable  to be an officer  of the club. 
(2) The IFR must  give  either  or both  of the following— 
25 (a) a direction  to P requiring  P to take all reasonable  steps  to cease  to be 
an officer  of the club  before  the end of the removal  period; 
(b) a direction  to the club  requiring  the club  to take all reasonable  steps 
to secure  that P ceases  to be an officer  of the club  before  the end of 
the removal  period. 
30 (3) The removal  period,  in the case of a direction  under  this section,  is— 
(a) the period  specified  in the direction,  or 
(b) where  the period  mentioned  in paragraph  (a) is extended  under 
subsection  (4), that period  as extended  (or further  extended)  under 
that subsection. 
35 (4) A direction  given  under  this section  in relation  to P (“the  first direction”)  may 
be varied  by a further  direction  so as to extend  (or further  extend)  the period 
specified  in the first direction. 
(5) Before  giving  a direction  under  this section , the IFR must  consult— 
(a) P, 
40 (b) the club,  and 31 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(c) the specified  competition  organiser  which  organises  a specified 
competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is operated  by the 
club. 
(6) At the same  time  as giving  a direction  under  this section,  the IFR must— 
5 (a) in the case of a direction  under  subsection  (2)(a), give  a notice  to P 
and to the club,  and 
(b) in the case of a direction  under  subsection  (2)(b), give  a notice  to the 
club, 
10including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of not 
complying  with  the direction. 
41 Directions  relating  to unsuitable  owners  and officers 
(1) This  section  applies  where,  under  any provision  of this Part,  the IFR 
determines  or is treated  as having  determined— 
(a) 
15that a person  who  is an owner  of a regulated  club  is not suitable  to 
be an owner  of the club,  or 
(b) that a person  who  is an officer  of a regulated  club  is not suitable  to 
be an officer  of the club. 
(2) The IFR may  give  one or both  of the following— 
(a) 
20a direction  to the person  prohibiting  the person  (wholly  or to an extent 
specified  in the direction)  from  carrying  out such  of the person’s 
activities,  or exercising  such  of their  rights,  as an owner  or officer  as 
are specified  or described  in the direction; 
(b) a direction  to the club  requiring  it to secure  that the person  does  not 
25(wholly  or to an extent  specified  in the direction)  carry  out such  of 
those  activities,  or exercise  such  of those  rights,  as are specified  or 
described  in the direction. 
(3) A direction  under  this section  may,  among  other  things,  contain  provision 
prohibiting  or (in the case of a direction  under  subsection  (2)(b)) provision 
aimed  at prohibiting  the person  to whom  it relates  from— 
30 (a) exercising  any right,  whether  or not by virtue  of the holding  of shares, 
stock  or securities,  to vote  on any matter  relating  to the carrying  on 
of the club’s  activities; 
(b) appointing,  terminating  the appointment  of, changing  the terms  of 
35appointment  or the responsibilities  of, any officer  or employee  of the 
club; 
(c) making  changes  to the corporate  structure  of the club; 
(d) doing  anything  specified  or described  in the direction  without  obtaining 
the prior  approval  of the IFR. 
(4) A direction  under  this section— 
40 (a) comes  into force  at the time  specified  by or determined  in accordance 
with  the direction; 
(b) has effect  for the period  specified  in the direction; 
(c) may  be varied  or revoked  by a further  direction. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 32 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(5) At the same  time  as giving  a direction  under  this section,  the IFR must— 
(a) in the case of a direction  under  subsection  (2)(a), give  a notice  to the 
person  and to the club  of which  the person  is an owner  or officer 
5including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  this Part 
and Part 8 of not complying  with  the direction; 
(b) in the case of a direction  under  subsection  (2)(b), give  a notice  to the 
club  including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under 
Part 8 of not complying  with  the direction. 
42 Orders  and directions  effecting  alternative  officer  arrangements 
10 (1) This  section  applies  where— 
(a) a direction  under  section  41 has effect  in relation  to a person  or club, 
and 
(b) the IFR considers  that the ability  of the club  to operate  effectively,  or 
15to comply  with  conditions  attached  to its operating  licence,  is or is 
likely  to be adversely  affected  by compliance  with  the direction. 
(2) The IFR may  do either  or both  of the following  if it considers  that doing  so 
would  mitigate  or avoid  the effect  mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)— 
(a) make  an order  appointing  an individual  identified  in the order  as an 
officer  of the club  for a period  specified  in the order; 
20 (b) give the club a direction  requiring  it to redistribute  amongst  its existing 
officers  functions  specified  or described  in the direction  (whether  of 
the person  concerned  or otherwise). 
(3) An order  under  subsection  (2)(a)— 
(a) 
25must  specify  or describe  the functions  to be exercised  by the individual 
appointed  by the order; 
(b) comes  into force  at the time  specified  by or determined  in accordance 
with  the order; 
(c) may  be varied  or revoked  by a further  order. 
(4) A direction  under  subsection  (2)(b)— 
30 (a) comes  into force  at the time  specified  by or determined  in accordance 
with  the direction; 
(b) has effect  for the period  specified  in the direction; 
(c) may  be varied  or revoked  by a further  direction. 
(5) The IFR may  make  rules  providing  for— 
35 (a) costs  incurred  by it in connection  with  the appointment  of an 
individual  by virtue  of an order  under  subsection  (2)(a), and 
(b) costs  incurred  by an individual  appointed  by virtue  of such  an order, 
to be payable  by the club  to which  the individual  is appointed. 
(6) 
40Where  an individual  is appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  subsection 
(2)(a), the club,  each  owner  of the club  and each  officer  of the club  must— 
(a) co-operate  with  the individual,  and 33 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) give  the individual  such  reasonable  assistance  as the individual 
requests  (including  access  to business  premises,  equipment,  services, 
information  and individuals), 
in connection  with  the exercise  of the individual’s  functions  under  the order. 
5 (7) At the same  time  as making  an order  under  this section,  the IFR must  give 
a notice  to the club,  and to each  owner  and officer  of the club,  including 
information  about  the possible  consequences  under— 
(a) this Part (where  the direction  under  section  41 relates  to a person  who 
is an owner  of the club),  and 
10 (b) Part 8, 
of not complying  with  the duty  imposed  by subsection  (6). 
(8) At the same  time  as giving  a direction  under  this section,  the IFR must  give 
the club  a notice  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of not 
complying  with  the direction. 
15 (9) References  in this Act to an officer  of a club  do not include  references  to an 
individual  appointed  as an officer  of the club  by virtue  of an order  under 
subsection  (2)(a). 
43 Ownership  removal  orders 
(1) 
20The IFR may  make  an order  containing  such  provision  as the IFR considers 
appropriate  to secure  that,  by the end of the period  specified  in the order,  a 
person  who  is an owner  of a regulated  club  (“P”)  has ceased  to be an owner 
of the club. 
(2) But the power  to make  an order  under  subsection  (1) is exercisable  only 
where— 
25 (a) the IFR has determined  under  section  28, or is treated  as having 
determined  under  that section,  that P is not suitable  to be an owner 
of the club, 
(b) P fails without  reasonable  excuse  to comply  with  a direction  given  to 
P under  section  39, 
30 (c) P fails without  reasonable  excuse  to comply  with  a direction  given  to 
P under  section  41, or 
(d) a direction  under  section  41 has effect  in relation  to P and P— 
(i) fails to co-operate  with  or assist  an individual  appointed  by 
35an order  under  section  42 in connection  with  the exercise  of 
the individual’s  functions  under  the order,  or 
(ii) otherwise  obstructs  such  an individual  from  carrying  out those 
functions, 
and P does  not have  a reasonable  excuse  for the failure  or obstruction. 
(3) An order  under  this section  may,  among  other  things,  include  provision— 
40 (a) for the appointment  of trustees; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 34 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) conferring  functions  on trustees  appointed  by virtue  of the order 
(including  functions  of taking  action  on behalf  of P or any other 
person); 
(c) 
5requiring  P or any other  person  to take action  (including  action  directed 
by trustees  appointed  by virtue  of the order). 
(4) The provision  that may  be made  by virtue  of subsection  (3)(b) includes 
provision  authorising  trustees  appointed  by virtue  of the order  to take any 
steps  they  consider  appropriate  to achieve  the purpose  for which  the order 
is made. 
10 (5) A trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  this section— 
(a) must  not have  a conflict  of interest,  and 
(b) must  have  the necessary  skills  to discharge  their  functions  under  the 
order. 
(6) 
15Where  a trustee  is appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  this section,  the 
club,  each  owner  of the club  and each  officer  of the club  must— 
(a) co-operate  with  the trustee,  and 
(b) give  the trustee  such  reasonable  assistance  as the trustee  requests 
(including  access  to business  premises,  equipment,  services,  information 
and individuals), 
20 in connection  with  the exercise  of the trustee’s  functions  under  the order. 
(7) A trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  this section  must— 
(a) provide  the IFR with  regular  reports  on the exercise  of their  functions 
under  the order  and on any co-operation  or assistance  provided  by P 
or the club; 
25 (b) obtain  the IFR’s  approval  before  making  any contractual  or other 
arrangements  that would  result  in P ceasing  to be an owner  of the 
club. 
(8) The IFR may  withhold  approval  for arrangements  described  in subsection 
(7)(b) if— 
30 (a) the IFR considers  that the arrangements  would  result  in any person 
becoming  an owner  of the club without  the IFR having  first determined 
under  section  28 that the person  is suitable  to be an owner  of the club, 
or 
(b) 
35where  the arrangements  would  involve  the disposal  of an interest  in 
the club,  the IFR considers  that any party  to the proposed  disposal  is 
acting  in bad faith. 
44 Orders  under  section  43: procedure,  costs  and liabilities 
(1) Before  making  an order  under  section  43, the IFR must  publish  a notice— 
(a) stating— 
40 (i) that the IFR proposes  to make  the order,  and 
(ii) the reasons  for doing  so, 35 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
(b) summarising  the provision  the IFR proposes  to include  in the proposed 
order, 
(c) inviting  the making  of representations  about  the proposed  order,  and 
(d) 
5specifying  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  may  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  which  are duly  made. 
(2) The period  for making  representations  must  be a period  of not less than  14 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  under  subsection  (1) is 
published. 
10 (3) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the period  for making  representations 
has ended,  the IFR must— 
(a) decide  whether  to make  an order  under  section  43, and 
(b) publish  a notice  of its decision,  giving  reasons  for it. 
(4) At the same  time  as making  an order  under  section  43, the IFR must— 
15 (a) where  the order  imposes  requirements  on P (within  the meaning  of 
section  43), give  a notice  to P and to the club  including  information 
about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of not complying  with 
those  requirements; 
(b) 
20where  the order  imposes  requirements  on the club,  give  a notice  to 
the club  including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under 
Part 8 of not complying  with  those  requirements; 
(c) give  a notice  to the club,  and to each  owner  and officer  of the club, 
including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 
25of not complying  with  the duty  imposed  by subsection  (6) of section 
43. 
(5) An order  under  section  43— 
(a) comes  into force  at the time  specified  by or determined  in accordance 
with  the order, 
(b) 
30has effect  for the period  specified  by or determined  in accordance  with 
the order,  and 
(c) may  be varied  or revoked  by a further  order. 
(6) The IFR may  make  rules  providing  for— 
(a) costs  incurred  by the IFR in exercising  functions  under  section  43 or 
this section , and 
35 (b) costs  incurred  by a trustee  appointed  by virtue  of such  an order, 
to be payable  by P (within  the meaning  of section  43). Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 36 
Part 4—Owners  and officers  of regulated  clubs:  suitability  etc 
PART 5 
DUTIES ON CLUBS AND COMPETITION ORGANISERS ETC 
Duties  on regulated  clubs  and formerly  regulated  clubs  etc 
45 Duty  not to operate  a team  in relation  to a prohibited  competition 
5 (1) A club  to which  subsection  (2) applies  must  not operate  a team  in relation  to 
a prohibited  competition. 
(2) This  subsection  applies  to— 
(a) a regulated  club,  or 
(b) 
10a club  that is not a regulated  club  but has been  a regulated  club  at 
any point  within  the previous  10 years. 
(3) In calculating  the period  of 10 years  mentioned  in subsection  (2)(b), no account 
is to be taken  of any time  before  the coming  into force  of this section . 
(4) A “prohibited  competition”  is a competition  specified  as a prohibited 
competition  for the purposes  of this section  in rules  made  by the IFR. 
15 (5) In considering  whether  to specify  a competition  as a prohibited  competition, 
the IFR must  have  regard  to— 
(a) whether  the competition— 
(i) is, or would  be, merit-based, 
(ii) 
20operates,  or would  operate,  on the basis  of fair and open 
competition, 
(iii) jeopardises,  or would  jeopardise,  the sustainability  of relevant 
competitions, 
(iv) jeopardises,  or would  jeopardise,  the sustainability  of clubs 
operating  teams  in relation  to relevant  competitions,  and 
25 (v) harms,  or would  harm,  the heritage  of English  football,  and 
(b) any other  factors  that the IFR specifies  in rules. 
(6) Before  specifying  a competition  as a prohibited  competition,  the IFR must 
give  the competition  organiser  a notice— 
(a) 
30stating  that it proposes  to specify  the competition  as a prohibited 
competition, 
(b) explaining  why  it proposes  to take such  action, 
(c) inviting  the competition  organiser  to make  representations  about  the 
proposed  action,  and 
(d) 
35specifying  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  may  be made, 
and must  have  regard  to any representations  duly  made. 
(7) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a period 
of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(8) Before  specifying  a competition  as a prohibited  competition,  the IFR must— 37 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(a) take reasonable  steps  to determine  the views  of fans in England  and 
Wales  of regulated  clubs  about  the competition  being  specified  as a 
prohibited  competition,  and 
(b) have  regard  to those  views. 
5 (9) Before  specifying  a competition  as a prohibited  competition,  the IFR must 
consult— 
(a) the Football  Association,  and 
(b) such  other  persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate. 
(10) The IFR may  specify  a competition  as a prohibited  competition— 
10 (a) whether  or not any of the matches  included  in that competition  are 
played,  or are to be played,  in England  or Wales  or in any other  part 
of the United  Kingdom; 
(b) whether  or not the teams  that are entered  into it, or that are members 
15of it, or that participate  in it are, or are to be, exclusively  or 
predominantly  English  teams. 
(11) For the purposes  of this section— 
“English  team”  has the meaning  given  by section  2(4); 
“relevant  competition”  means  any competition  (other  than  a prohibited 
20competition)  where  the teams  that are entered  into it, or that are 
members  of it, or that participate  in it are exclusively  or predominantly 
English  teams. 
46 Duty  not to dispose  etc of home  ground  without  approval 
(1) A body  to which  subsection  (2) applies  must  notify  the IFR where  the body 
considers  that there  is a reasonable  prospect  of the body— 
25 (a) disposing  of any freehold  or leasehold  interest  that the body  holds  in 
its home  ground  or any part of the home  ground,  or 
(b) using  any interest  that the body  holds  in its home  ground,  or any part 
of the home  ground,  as security  in respect  of a loan  or other  liability. 
(2) This  subsection  applies  to— 
30 (a) a body  that is a regulated  club,  or 
(b) a body  that is not a regulated  club  but has been  a regulated  club  at 
any point  within  the previous  5 years  (a “formerly  regulated  club”). 
(3) In calculating  the period  of 5 years  mentioned  in subsection  (2)(b), no account 
is to be taken  of any time  before  the coming  into force  of this section . 
35 (4) A notification  under  subsection  (1) must  be given  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the body  considers  the duty  under  that subsection  to have 
arisen. 
(5) A body  to which  subsection  (2) applies  must  obtain  the approval  of the IFR 
before  it carries  on an activity  mentioned  in subsection  (1). 
40 (6) The IFR must  grant  approval  for the taking  of any step mentioned  in 
subsection  (1) if— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 38 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(a) where  the body  is a regulated  club,  it is satisfied  that the taking  of 
the step would  not undermine  the financial  sustainability  of the club; 
(b) where  the body  is a formerly  regulated  club,  it is satisfied  that the 
5body  has taken  all reasonable  steps  to ensure  that a team  customarily 
plays  its home  matches  at the ground. 
(7) The IFR may  not grant  approval  in any other  circumstances. 
(8) The IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the body  has sought 
approval,  decide  whether  to grant  approval  under  subsection  (6). 
(9) 
10The IFR must  notify  the body  of its decision  to grant,  or not to grant,  that 
approval  and give  reasons  for its decision. 
(10) In this section , “home  ground”— 
(a) in relation  to a body  that is a regulated  club,  means  the ground  at 
which  a relevant  team  operated  by it customarily  plays  its home 
matches; 
15 (b) in relation  to a body  that is a formerly  regulated  club,  means  the 
ground  at which  a relevant  team  operated  by it immediately  before 
it ceased  to be a regulated  club  customarily  played  its home  matches. 
47 Duty  not to appoint  administrator  without  approval 
(1) 
20A body  to which  section  46(2) applies  must  notify  the IFR as soon  as 
reasonably  practicable  after  the body  considers  that there  is a reasonable 
prospect  of an administrator  of the body  being  appointed  under  paragraph 
22 of Schedule  B1 to the Insolvency  Act 1986  (“the  1986  Act”)  (including  that 
paragraph  as applied  in relation  to partnerships  by an order  under  section 
420 of that Act). 
25 (2) An administrator  of a body  to which  section  46(2) applies  may  not be 
appointed  as mentioned  in subsection  (1) without  the approval  of the IFR. 
(3) Approval  under  subsection  (2)— 
(a) must  be in writing,  and 
(b) 
30must  accompany  the notice  of intention  to appoint  filed  under 
paragraph  27 of Schedule  B1 to the 1986  Act. 
(4) But in a case where  the notice  of intention  to appoint  mentioned  in subsection 
(3)(b) is not required— 
(a) subsection  (3)(b) does  not apply,  but 
(b) 
35approval  under  subsection  (2) must  accompany  the notice  of 
appointment  filed  under  paragraph  29 of Schedule  B1 to the 1986  Act. 
Duties  on regulated  clubs 
48 Duty  not to relocate  without  approval 
(1) A regulated  club  must  notify  the IFR where  the club  considers  that there  is 1 
a reasonable  prospect  of the club  entering  into arrangements  whereby  a 39 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
relevant  team  operated  by it would  play  its home  matches  at a ground  other 
than  the club’s  home  ground. 
(2) A notification  under  subsection  (1) must  be given  as soon  as reasonably 
5practicable  after  the club  considers  the duty  under  that subsection  to have 
arisen. 
(3) The club  must  obtain  the approval  of the IFR before  it enters  into the 
arrangements  mentioned  in subsection  (1). 
(4) The IFR must  grant  approval  for the club  entering  into those  arrangements 
if it is satisfied  that — 
10 (a) the arrangements  would  not undermine  the financial  sustainability  of 
the club, 
(b) the arrangements  would  not cause  significant  harm  to the heritage  of 
the club, 
(c) 
15the club  has taken  reasonable  steps  to determine  the views  of its fans 
about  the effect  of the arrangements  on the relevant  matters  set out 
in paragraph  4(2) of Schedule  4, and 
(d) the club has had regard  to those  views  in considering  whether  to enter 
into the arrangements. 
(5) The IFR may  not grant  approval  in any other  circumstances. 
20 (6) The IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the club  has sought 
approval,  decide  whether  to grant  approval  under  subsection  (4). 
(7) The IFR must  notify  the club  of its decision  to grant,  or not to grant,  that 
approval  and give  reasons  for its decision. 
(8) 
25In this section  “home  ground”,  in relation  to a regulated  club,  has the meaning 
given  by section  46(10)(a). 
49 Duty  not to change  crest,  home  shirt  colours  or name  without  approval 
(1) A regulated  club  must  not make  any material  changes  to the crest  or 
predominant  home  shirt  colours  of a relevant  team  operated  by the club 
30unless  the club  has taken  reasonable  steps  to establish  that the changes  are 
supported  by a majority  of the club’s  fans in England  and Wales. 
(2) A regulated  club  must  not change  the name  of a relevant  team  operated  by 
the club  unless  the change  has been  approved  by the Football  Association. 
50 Duty  to notify  of changes  in circumstances  relevant  to the IFR’s  functions 
(1) 
35A regulated  club  must  notify  the IFR where  the club  considers  that there  has 
been,  or may  have  been,  a material  change  in circumstances  affecting  the club 
that is relevant  to the exercise  of the IFR’s  functions  under  this Act. 
(2) A notification  under  subsection  (1) must  be given  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the club  considers  that there  has been,  or may  have  been, 
such  a change  of circumstances. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 40 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(3) A club  is not required  to notify  the IFR under  this section  of any material 
change  in circumstances  that the club  has notified  to the IFR under  or by 
virtue  of any other  provision  of this Act. 
51 Duty  to keep  fans  informed  of insolvency  proceedings 
5 (1) A regulated  club  that is in relevant  insolvency  proceedings  must  take 
reasonable  steps  to keep  its fans informed  about  the progress  of the 
proceedings. 
(2) “Relevant  insolvency  proceedings”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph  13(3) 
of Schedule  1. 
10 Duties  on licensed  clubs 
52 Duty  to publish  a personnel  statement 
(1) A licensed  club  must— 
(a) prepare  a personnel  statement  (within  the meaning  of section  16), and 
(b) submit  it to the IFR for approval. 
15 (2) A statement  submitted  to the IFR for approval  must  be accompanied  by a 
statement  explaining  why  the club  considers  the statement  to be accurate  (but 
this is subject  to subsection  (8)). 
(3) The IFR— 
(a) may  approve  the statement  with  or without  modifications,  and 
20 (b) may  approve  the statement  only  if satisfied  that it is accurate. 
(4) Before  approving  the statement  with  modifications,  the IFR must  consult  the 
club. 
(5) The club  must  publish  the approved  statement  online  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the IFR approves  the statement. 
25 (6) The first statement  must  be submitted  to the IFR as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the club  becomes  a licensed  club,  subject  to subsection  (8). 
(7) A new  statement  must  be submitted  to the IFR as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the most  recent  approved  statement  becomes  inaccurate  in 
a material  particular. 
30 (8) Where  the first personnel  statement  submitted  by a club  to the IFR in 
accordance  with  subsection  (6) would  be the same  as the personnel  statement 
submitted  by the club  to the IFR under  section  16, the club  may  require  the 
IFR to treat  the statement  submitted  under  that section  as its first personnel 
statement  for the purposes  of this section. 
35 53 Duty  to pay a levy 
(1) The IFR may  require  a club  to pay to the IFR a levy  in respect  of a chargeable 
period  during  which  the club  is a licensed  club. 41 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(2) The amount  of the levy  is to be calculated  in accordance  with  rules  made  by 
the IFR (“levy  rules”). 
(3) Levy  rules  must  secure  that the aggregate  amount  payable  by virtue  of this 
section  in respect  of a chargeable  period  does  not exceed  the sum  of— 
5 (a) the costs  which  the IFR estimates  it will incur  in exercising  its leviable 
functions  during  that period,  which  may  include  an amount  in respect 
of contingencies  in relation  to that period, 
(b) the amount  of any financial  reserves  which  the IFR considers  it 
10appropriate  to raise  in that period  for the purpose  of meeting  any 
costs  of exercising  its leviable  functions  in future  periods, 
(c) where  the IFR’s  actual  costs  incurred  in exercising  its leviable  functions 
in the previous  chargeable  period  exceed  the IFR’s  estimate  of those 
costs,  the amount  by which  the IFR’s  actual  costs  in the previous 
period  exceeded  the IFR’s  estimate, 
15 (d) where  the IFR’s  estimate  of the costs  it would  incur  in exercising  its 
leviable  functions  in the previous  chargeable  period  exceeds  the IFR’s 
actual  costs  incurred,  the amount  (expressed  as a negative  figure)  by 
which  the IFR’s  estimated  costs  in the previous  period  exceeded  the 
IFR’s  actual  costs,  and 
20 (e) an amount  in respect  of any of the IFR’s  initial  costs,  and any of the 
Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs,  that have  not been  recovered 
before  the beginning  of the chargeable  period. 
(4) The IFR’s  “leviable  functions”  are its functions  under  this Act other  than  its 
functions  under— 
25 (a) section  42(2)(a) (orders  and directions  effecting  alternative  officer 
arrangements); 
(b) section  43 (ownership  removal  orders); 
(c) Part 6 (distribution  of revenue); 
(d) section  66 (reports  on clubs  by expert  reporters). 
30 (5) “The  IFR’s  initial  costs”  are the costs  incurred  by the IFR before  the first 
chargeable  period— 
(a) in preparing  for the exercise  of any of its functions  under  this Act, 
and 
(b) in exercising  any of those  functions. 
35 (6) “The  Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs”  are such  costs  as are— 
(a) incurred  by the Secretary  of State  in relation  to the establishment  of 
the IFR before  the coming  into force  of section  5, and 
(b) notified  by the Secretary  of State  to the IFR before  the first chargeable 
period. 
40 (7) Levy  rules  must  make  provision  about— 
(a) how  the IFR is to estimate  the costs  which  it expects  to incur  in 
exercising  its leviable  functions  during  a chargeable  period; 
(b) how  the IFR is to calculate  the costs  which  it actually  incurs  in 
exercising  its leviable  functions  during  a chargeable  period; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 42 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(c) how  the IFR is to calculate  an appropriate  financial  reserve  to raise  in 
a chargeable  period; 
(d) how  the IFR is to calculate  the IFR’s  initial  costs; 
(e) 
5the number  of chargeable  periods  over  which  the IFR’s  initial  costs 
and the Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs  will be recovered 
(“recovery  periods”); 
(f) the maximum  percentage  of the IFR’s  initial  costs  and of the Secretary 
of State’s  establishment  costs  that may  be recovered  in each  recovery 
period; 
10 (g) how  the aggregate  amount  payable  in respect  of a chargeable  period 
is to be divided  between  clubs  that are licensed  clubs  during  that 
period; 
(h) the administration  and payment  of the levy. 
(8) Levy  rules  may  make  provision— 
15 (a) for a club  that would  otherwise  be required  to pay the levy  to not be 
required  to pay it where  conditions  specified  in levy  rules  are met; 
(b) for interest  to be charged,  at a rate specified  in or calculated  in 
accordance  with  the rules,  on any amount  of levy  not paid  by the day 
on which  it is due. 
20 (9) In making  the provision  mentioned  in subsection  (7)(g) the IFR must  (among 
other  things)  have  regard  to— 
(a) the financial  resources  of each  licensed  club,  and 
(b) the specified  competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is 
operated  by each  licensed  club. 
25 (10) An amount  payable  by a club  in accordance  with  this section  and levy  rules 
is recoverable  as a civil  debt  due to the IFR. 
(11) For the purposes  of this section  and section  54 a “chargeable  period”  means— 
(a) the period  of 12 months  beginning  with  such  day as may  be specified 
30by the IFR by notice  for the purposes  of this subsection  (which  is the 
first chargeable  period),  and 
(b) each  subsequent  period  of 12 months. 
54 Section  53: consultation  and publication 
(1) Before  making,  amending  or replacing  levy  rules  the IFR must  consult— 
(a) the Secretary  of State, 
35 (b) the Treasury, 
(c) all regulated  clubs,  and 
(d) such  other  persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate. 
(2) Subsection  (1) does  not apply  in relation  to amendments  to or replacements 
of levy  rules  if the IFR considers  the changes  to be minor. 
40 (3) The consultation  must  include  a draft  of the proposed  levy  rules. 43 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
(4) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  before  the start  of a chargeable  period 
(“period  A”) the IFR must  publish— 
(a) an estimate  of the costs  which  it expects  to incur  in exercising  its 
leviable  functions  during  period  A; 
5 (b) the actual  costs  of exercising  its leviable  functions  during  the 
chargeable  period  immediately  before  period  A (unless  period  A is 
the first chargeable  period); 
(c) the amount  of financial  reserves  which  it considers  it appropriate  to 
raise  in period  A (if any); 
10 (d) the amount  to be recovered  in period  A in respect  of the IFR’s  initial 
costs  and the Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs  (if any); 
(e) the amount  of the IFR’s  initial  costs  and the Secretary  of State’s 
establishment  costs  that it has not recovered  before  the start  of period 
A (if any); 
15 (f) the amount  payable  by each  licensed  club  in respect  of period  A; 
(g) such  information  as it considers  appropriate  to explain  how  those 
costs  and amounts  are determined. 
(5) Where  the IFR by notice  specifies  a day for the purposes  of section  53(11) the 
20IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  specifying  the day,  publish 
that notice. 
(6) In this section  “the IFR’s  initial  costs”  and “the Secretary  of State’s 
establishment  costs”  have  the same  meanings  as in section  53. 
Duties  on specified  competition  organisers 
55 Duties  to notify  and consult  the IFR 
25 (1) A specified  competition  organiser  must  notify  the IFR where— 
(a) the organiser  considers  that there  is a risk of the IFR’s  ability  to 
advance  its club  financial  soundness  objective  or its systemic  financial 
resilience  objective  being  jeopardised, 
(b) 
30the organiser  has failed  to comply  with  a commitment  accepted  by 
the IFR under  section  24 or the organiser  considers  that there  is an 
immediate  risk of it failing  to so comply,  or 
(c) the organiser  considers  or suspects  that a club  has breached  a relevant 
rule of a specified  competition. 
(2) A notice  under  subsection  (1) must— 
35 (a) explain  why  the specified  competition  organiser  considers  the duty 
under  that subsection  to have  arisen,  and 
(b) be given  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the specified 
competition  organiser  considers  the duty  under  that subsection  to 
have  arisen. 
40 (3) A specified  competition  organiser  must  also notify  the IFR before  a penalty, 1 
sanction  or other  requirement  (whether  financial  or otherwise)  is imposed, Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 44 
Part 5—Duties  on clubs  and competition  organisers  etc 
whether  by the organiser  or another  person,  on a club  that breaches  or is 
suspected  to have  breached  a relevant  rule of a specified  competition. 
(4) Where  a notice  under  subsection  (3) is not given  before  a penalty,  sanction 
5or other  requirement  is imposed,  the specified  competition  organiser  must 
notify  the IFR of the fact that a penalty,  sanction  or other  requirement  has 
been  imposed  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  becoming  aware  of that 
fact. 
(5) A notice  under  subsection  (3) or (4) must  explain  why  the penalty,  sanction 
or other  requirement  is being  or has been  imposed. 
10 (6) A specified  competition  organiser  must  consult  the IFR before— 
(a) adding  or removing  a relevant  rule of a specified  competition,  or 
(b) varying  a relevant  rule of a specified  competition,  unless  the variation 
is not material. 
(7) A consultation  under  subsection  (6) must— 
15 (a) explain  why  the specified  competition  organiser  is proposing  to add, 
remove  or vary  the relevant  rule of a specified  competition; 
(b) include  a draft  of the additional  or varied  rule. 
(8) In this section,  “relevant  rule of a specified  competition”  means  a rule of the 
20specified  competition  organised  by the specified  competition  organiser  that 
is relevant  to the exercise  of any of the IFR’s  functions  under  this Act. 
PART 6 
DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUE 
Introduction 
56 Part 6: overview  and interpretation 
25 (1) This  Part makes  provision  for a specified  competition  organiser  to apply  to 
the IFR for the triggering  of a process  under  which— 
(a) specified  competition  organisers  are required  to enter  into mediation 
in connection  with  the distribution  of relevant  revenue  received  by 
one of the organisers,  and 
30 (b) if those  organisers  do not reach  agreement  during  that process,  the 
IFR may  make  an order  as to the distribution  of that revenue. 
(2) In this Part, “relevant  revenue”  means  revenue  received  by a specified 
competition  organiser— 
(a) 
35as a result  of the sale or acquisition  of rights  to exploit  the broadcasting 
of football  matches  included  in a competition  organised  by the specified 
competition  organiser,  or 
(b) from  any other  source  specified,  or of a description  specified,  in 
regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State. 45 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(3) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (2)(b), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult— 
(a) the IFR, 
(b) the Football  Association,  and 
5 (c) each  specified  competition  organiser. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  not make  regulations  under  subsection  (2)(b) unless 
there  has been  a material  change  in circumstances  relating  to the sources  of 
relevant  revenue  received  by a specified  competition  organiser  since— 
(a) the day on which  this section  came  into force,  or 
10 (b) where  regulations  under  subsection  (2)(b) have  been  made,  the day 
on which  such  regulations  were  last made. 
(5) For the purposes  of this Part— 
“distribution  agreement”  means  an agreement  between  two specified 
15competition  organisers  that provides  for the distribution  of relevant 
revenue  received  by one or both  of those  organisers  (and  includes  an 
agreement  entered  into before  the coming  into force  of any provision 
of this Part); 
“distribution  order”  means  an order  under  section  62(1) or (3); 
20“qualifying  football  season” , in relation  to an application  under  section 
57, means— 
(a) either— 
(i) the football  season  during  which  the application  is 
made,  or 
(ii) 
25where  the application  is not made  during  a football 
season,  the next  football  season  after  the application  is 
made,  and 
(b) any subsequent  football  season  up to and including  the fifth 
subsequent  season; 
“the resolution  process”  means  the process  set out in sections  60 to 62. 
30 (6) For the purposes  of this Part, a distribution  agreement  or a distribution  order 
relates  to a qualifying  football  season  if the agreement  or order  provides  for 
the distribution  of relevant  revenue  in or in respect  of that season. 
(7) In this Part references  to “the question  or questions  for resolution”  are to be 
construed  in accordance  with  section  57(1). 
35 Applications  for resolution  process  to be triggered 
57 Applications  for resolution  process  to be triggered 
(1) A specified  competition  organiser  may  apply  to the IFR for the resolution 
process  to be triggered  where— 
(a) 
40one or more  questions  have  arisen  between  that organiser  and another 
specified  competition  organiser,  and Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 46 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(b) the question  or questions  relate  to the distribution,  in or in respect  of 
one or more  qualifying  football  seasons,  of relevant  revenue  received 
by one of those  organisers. 
(2) 
5But a specified  competition  organiser  may  apply  to the IFR under  subsection 
(1) only  if one or more  of the following  conditions  are met in relation  to the 
qualifying  football  season  or seasons  to which  the application  relates. 
(3) Condition  1 is met in relation  to a qualifying  football  season  if— 
(a) no distribution  agreement  is in force  between  the two specified 
competition  organisers  in relation  to the season,  and 
10 (b) no distribution  order  has effect  in respect  of the two specified 
competition  organisers  in relation  to the season. 
(4) Condition  2 is met in relation  to a qualifying  football  season  if there  has been, 
or will be, a material  reduction  in the relevant  revenue  received  by one 
15specified  competition  organiser  in or in respect  of that season  compared  to 
the relevant  revenue  received  by that specified  competition  organiser  in or 
in respect  of any preceding  season  in relation  to which  (as the case may  be)— 
(a) the last distribution  agreement  entered  into between  the two specified 
competition  organisers  had effect,  or 
(b) 
20the last distribution  order  made  in relation  to those  organisers  had 
effect. 
(5) Condition  3 is met in relation  to a qualifying  football  season  if, in relation  to 
the relevant  revenue  received  or to be received  by either  or both  of the 
specified  competition  organisers  in or in respect  of that season,  there  has been 
or will be a material  change  in circumstances  since  (as the case may  be)— 
25 (a) the day on which  the last distribution  agreement  was entered  into 
between  those  organisers,  or 
(b) the day on which  the last distribution  order  was made  in relation  to 
those  organisers. 
(6) Condition  4 is met in relation  to a qualifying  football  season  if— 
30 (a) a distribution  agreement  is in force  between  the two specified 
competition  organisers  in relation  to the season, 
(b) the distribution  agreement  has been  in force  for at least  five years, 
and 
(c) 
35no distribution  order  has effect  in respect  of the specified  competition 
organisers  in relation  to the season. 
58 Applications  under  section  57: procedural  and other  requirements 
(1) Before  making  an application  under  section  57, a specified  competition 
organiser  (“the  notifier”)  must— 
(a) 
40notify  the other  specified  competition  organiser  (“the  respondent”) 
that the notifier  intends  to make  the application,  and 
(b) send  a copy  of the notification  to the IFR. 
(2) A notification  under  subsection  (1)(a) must— 47 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(a) specify  the qualifying  football  season  or seasons  to which  the 
application  relates, 
(b) explain  why  the notifier  considers  that at least  one of the conditions 
in section  57 is met in relation  to that season  or those  seasons, 
5 (c) set out details  of the question  or questions  for resolution, 
(d) invite  the respondent  to make  representations  about  the content  of 
the notification,  and 
(e) specify  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made. 
10 (3) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a period 
of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(4) An application  under  section  57 must  not be made  before  the end of the 
period  of five days  beginning  with  the last day on which  representations  may 
be made. 
15 (5) An application  under  section  57 must— 
(a) specify  the qualifying  football  season  or seasons  to which  the 
application  relates, 
(b) explain  why  the notifier  considers  that at least  one of the conditions 
in section  57 is met in relation  to that season  or those  seasons, 
20 (c) set out details  of the question  or questions  for resolution,  and 
(d) be accompanied  by copies  of any representations  made  by the 
respondent  about  the content  of the notification  under  subsection 
(1)(a). 
59 Decisions  by the IFR on applications  under  section  57 
25 (1) Where  an application  is made  under  section  57, the IFR must  decide  whether 
the resolution  process  should  be triggered  in relation  to the qualifying  football 
season  or seasons  to which  the application  relates. 
(2) The IFR may  decide  that the resolution  process  should  be triggered  in relation 
to a qualifying  football  season  only  if the IFR— 
30 (a) is satisfied  that at least  one of the conditions  in section  57 is met in 
relation  to that season,  and 
(b) has reasonable  grounds  to suspect  that its ability  to advance  at least 
one of its objectives  would  be jeopardised  if the resolution  process 
were  not triggered. 
35 (3) In deciding  whether  the resolution  process  should  be triggered,  the IFR may 
have  regard  to the purposes  for which  the distributed  revenue  would  be used. 
(4) In deciding  whether  the resolution  process  should  be triggered  in reliance  on 
the condition  in section  57(3), the IFR may  have  regard  to whether  the situation 
40described  in section  57(3)(a) (no distribution  agreement  in force)  has arisen 
as a result  of bad faith  on the part of either  of the specified  competition 
organisers. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 48 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(5) If the IFR decides  that the resolution  process  should  be triggered,  the IFR 
must— 
(a) notify  the two specified  competition  organisers  and give  reasons  for 
its decision,  and 
5 (b) set out in the notice— 
(i) the qualifying  football  season  or seasons  to which  the resolution 
process  relates,  and 
(ii) the question  or questions  for resolution. 
(6) 
10If the IFR decides  that the resolution  process  should  not be triggered,  the IFR 
must  notify  the two specified  competition  organisers  and give  reasons  for its 
decision. 
(7) The IFR must  make  the decision  under  subsection  (1) within  the period  of 28 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the application  is made. 
(8) 
15The IFR may  extend  the period  in subsection  (7) by up to a further  28 days 
if it considers  there  are special  reasons  for doing  so. 
Resolution  process 
60 The mediation  stage 
(1) This  section  applies  where  the IFR gives  a notice  under  section  59(5). 
(2) 
20The two specified  competition  organisers  to which  the notice  was given  must 
appoint  a mediator  before  the end of the period  of 14 days  beginning  with 
the day on which  the notice  was given. 
(3) If the period  mentioned  in subsection  (2) ends  without  an appointment  having 
been  made  by the specified  competition  organisers,  the IFR must  appoint  a 
mediator  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  that period  has ended. 
25 (4) The IFR may  extend  the period  in subsection  (2) by up to a further  28 days 
if it considers  there  are special  reasons  for doing  so. 
(5) A person  appointed  as a mediator  under  subsection  (3) must  be a person 
who  the IFR considers  to have  appropriate  skills  and experience. 
(6) 
30A mediator  appointed  under  this section  must  mediate  negotiations  between 
the specified  competition  organisers  on the question  or questions  for resolution 
until  whichever  of the following  events  occurs  first— 
(a) the specified  competition  organisers  resolve  the question  or questions 
for resolution  (whether  by entering  into a distribution  agreement  or 
otherwise); 
35 (b) the end of the period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
mediator  is appointed; 
(c) the specified  competition  organisers  agree  to terminate  the mediation; 
(d) the mediator  notifies  the specified  competition  organisers  that the 
mediator  considers— 49 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(i) that there  is no reasonable  prospect  of the specified  competition 
organisers  resolving  the question  or questions  for resolution 
(whether  by entering  into a distribution  agreement  or otherwise) 
within  the period  mentioned  in paragraph  (b), or 
5 (ii) either  of the specified  competition  organisers  is acting  in bad 
faith. 
(7) A notification  under  subsection  (6)(d) must  include  reasons  for the decision. 
61 Final  proposal  stage 
(1) 
10This  section  applies  where  mediation  under  section  60 comes  to an end by 
virtue  of the occurrence  of an event  within  section  60(6)(b), (c) or (d). 
(2) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the occurrence  of the event,  the Chief 
Executive  Officer  must  establish  a committee  of the Expert  Panel  (see 
paragraph  26 of Schedule  2). 
(3) 
15Once  established,  the committee  must  give  notice  to the two specified 
competition  organisers. 
(4) A notice  under  subsection  (3) must— 
(a) specify  the qualifying  football  season  or seasons  in question, 
(b) set out the question  or questions  for resolution, 
(c) 
20invite  each  of the two specified  competition  organisers  to submit  to 
the committee  a final  proposal  as to how  that question  or those 
questions  should  be resolved, 
(d) require  any final  proposal  to be accompanied  by supporting  evidence, 
(e) specify  the day on or before  which  final  proposals  are to be submitted 
to the committee,  and 
25 (f) state  the period  by the end of which  the committee  must  make  a 
decision  (see section  62(6)). 
(5) A notice  under  subsection  (3) may,  where  the committee  considers  it relevant 
to the question  or questions  for resolution,  require  the specified  competition 
30organisers  to explain  in a final  proposal  how  the final  proposal  will promote 
the financial  sustainability  of clubs  which  operate  teams  relegated  from  a 
competition  organised  by the specified  competition  organiser. 
(6) The committee  may  specify  in the notice  the form  and manner  in which  final 
proposals  and supporting  evidence  must  be submitted. 
(7) 
35Subsection  (8) applies  if, on or before  the day specified  by virtue  of subsection 
(4)(e), a specified  competition  organiser  submits  to the committee  a final 
proposal  which  the committee  considers  does  not explain  how  the question 
or questions  for resolution  should  be resolved  or does  not comply  with  a 
requirement  imposed  by virtue  of subsection  (4)(d) or (5) (if applicable). 
(8) 
40The committee  may  give  both  specified  competition  organisers  a notice 1 
specifying  a later  day (falling  not more  than  seven  days  after  the end of the Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 50 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
day specified  by virtue  of subsection  (4)(e)) on or before  which  final  proposals 
are to be submitted  to the committee. 
62 Distribution  orders 
(1) 
5Where,  on or before  the final  proposal  deadline,  the committee  of the Expert 
Panel  receives  final  proposals  from  both  specified  competition  organisers 
under  section  61— 
(a) if the committee  considers  that both  final  proposals  are consistent  with 
the principles  in subsection  (2), the committee  must  make  an order 
10requiring  the relevant  revenue  to be distributed  in accordance  with 
whichever  proposal  the committee  considers  to be more  consistent 
with  those  principles; 
(b) if the committee  considers  that one final  proposal  is consistent  with 
the principles  in subsection  (2) but the other  is not, the committee 
15must  make  an order  requiring  the relevant  revenue  to be distributed 
in accordance  with  the proposal  that is consistent; 
(c) if the committee  considers  that neither  final  proposal  is consistent  with 
the principles  in subsection  (2), the committee  must— 
(i) terminate  the resolution  process,  and 
(ii) notify  the specified  competition  organisers  that it has done  so. 
20 (2) The principles  in this subsection  are that the final  proposal— 
(a) should  advance  the IFR’s  objectives, 
(b) should  not place  an undue  burden  on the commercial  interests  of 
either  specified  competition  organiser,  and 
(c) 
25should  not, if a distribution  order  were  made  in accordance  with  the 
final  proposal,  result  in a lower  amount  of relegation  revenue  being 
distributed  to a club  during  the relevant  period  than  would  have  been 
distributed  to the club during  that period  had such  a distribution  order 
not been  made. 
(3) For the purposes  of subsection  (2)— 
30 “relegation  revenue”  means  revenue  distributed  by a specified  competition 
organiser  to a club  in consequence  of a team  operated  by the club 
being  relegated  from  a specified  competition  organised  by the specified 
competition  organiser; 
35“relevant  period” , in relation  to a final  proposal,  means  the period  of 
one year  beginning  with  the final  day of the first football  season  in 
respect  of which  relegation  revenue  would  be distributed  in pursuance 
of any distribution  order  made  in accordance  with  the final  proposal. 
(4) Where  the final  proposal  deadline  has passed  and the committee  has received 
a completed  final  proposal  from  only  one specified  competition  organiser— 
40 (a) if the committee  considers  that the proposal  is consistent  with  the 
principles  in subsection  (2), the committee  must  make  an order 
requiring  the relevant  revenue  to be distributed  in accordance  with 
that proposal; 51 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
(b) if the committee  considers  that the proposal  is not consistent  with  the 
principles  in subsection  (2), the committee  must— 
(i) terminate  the resolution  process,  and 
(ii) notify  the specified  competition  organisers  that it has done  so. 
5 (5) Where  the final  proposal  deadline  has passed  without  the committee  receiving 
a completed  final  proposal  from  either  specified  competition  organiser,  the 
committee  must— 
(a) terminate  the resolution  process,  and 
(b) notify  the specified  competition  organisers  that it has done  so. 
10 (6) Where  subsection  (1)(a) or (b) or (4)(a) applies,  the committee  must  make  the 
order  on or before  the last day of the period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the 
final  proposal  deadline. 
(7) The committee  may  extend  the period  in subsection  (6) by up to a further  28 
days  if it considers  there  are special  reasons  for doing  so. 
15 (8) A distribution  order— 
(a) must  impose  on the specified  competition  organisers  such  obligations 
as the committee  considers  appropriate  for the purpose  of securing 
compliance  with  the requirement  imposed  by virtue  of subsection 
(1)(a) or (b) or (4)(a), and 
20 (b) may,  where  a distribution  agreement  is in force  between  the specified 
competition  organisers  in relation  to the same  qualifying  football 
season  or seasons  to which  the order  relates,  provide  for that agreement 
to have  effect  subject  to provision  contained  in the order. 
(9) 
25The committee  must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  making  a 
distribution  order,  publish  the order  or a summary  of the order. 
(10) At the same  time  as making  a distribution  order,  the committee  must  give 
the specified  competition  organisers  a notice— 
(a) summarising  the question  or questions  for resolution, 
(b) including  a copy  of the order, 
30 (c) giving  reasons  for the order,  and 
(d) including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 
of not complying  with  the order. 
(11) For the purposes  of this section — 
(a) “the final  proposal  deadline”  means— 
35 (i) the day referred  to in section  61(4)(e), or 
(ii) where  the committee  gives  a notice  under  section  61(8), the 
day referred  to in the notice; 
(b) references  to a “completed”  final  proposal  are to a final  proposal  which 
the committee  considers— 
40 (i) explains  how  the question  or questions  for resolution  should 
be resolved,  and 
(ii) complies  with  the requirements  imposed  by virtue  of section 
61(4)(d) and (5) (if applicable). Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 52 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
63 Duration  and revocation  of distribution  orders 
(1) A distribution  order  comes  into force  at such  time  as the order  may  specify. 
(2) A distribution  order  ceases  to have  effect— 
(a) on such  day as may  be specified  in the order,  or 
5 (b) if revoked  under  subsection  (3) or (4). 
(3) The IFR may  revoke  a distribution  order  if it considers  that there  are 
exceptional  circumstances  that make  it appropriate  to do so. 
(4) The IFR must  revoke  a distribution  order  where  it is satisfied  that the two 
10specified  competition  organisers  have,  after  the making  of the order,  entered 
into a distribution  agreement  relating  to the same  qualifying  football  season 
or seasons  to which  the distribution  order  relates. 
(5) Where  the IFR revokes  a distribution  order,  it must  give  a notice  to that effect 
to the specified  competition  organisers. 
(6) The notice  must  include  the reasons  for the IFR’s  decision. 
15 (7) The notice  may  include  transitional,  transitory  or saving  provision  in relation 
to the revocation  of the distribution  order. 
Miscellaneous 
64 Review  of distribution  orders,  payment  of costs,  etc 
(1) The IFR must  keep  under  review— 
20 (a) the extent  to which  specified  competition  organisers  are complying 
with  a distribution  order  which  has effect  in respect  of them, 
(b) whether  to take enforcement  action  under  Part 8 in respect  of a 
specified  competition  organiser  which  does  not comply  with  a 
distribution  order,  and 
25 (c) whether  to revoke  a distribution  order. 
(2) The IFR may  by rules  make  provision  about  the payment  of costs  incurred 
by it or any other  person  under  or by virtue  of this Part. 
(3) Nothing  in this Part— 
(a) 
30affects  the capacity  of one or more  specified  competition  organisers 
to agree,  at any time,  how  relevant  revenue  received  by a specified 
competition  organiser  is to be distributed  (whether  by entering  into 
a distribution  agreement  or otherwise),  or 
(b) prevents  such  an agreement  from  having  effect  or being  enforced 
(subject  to section  62(8)(b)). 53 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 6—Distribution  of revenue 
PART 7 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS ETC 
Information  gathering 
65 Power  to require  information 
5 (1) The IFR may  give  a person  a notice  (an “information  notice”)  requiring  the 
person  to give  specified  information  to the IFR where  the IFR considers  that 
the information  is necessary  for the purpose  of exercising  the IFR’s  functions 
under  this Act. 
(2) An information  notice  must— 
10 (a) explain  why  the IFR requires  the information; 
(b) state  the time  by which,  or the frequency  with  which,  the information 
must  be given  to the IFR; 
(c) state  the place  at which,  or the manner  (which  may  be remote)  in 
which,  the information  must  be given  to the IFR; 
15 (d) state  the form  in which  the information  must  be given  to the IFR; 
(e) include  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of 
not complying  with  the notice. 
(3) The power  under  this section  to require  a person  to give  information  to the 
IFR includes  the power  to— 
20 (a) take copies  of or extracts  from  the information  given  to the IFR; 
(b) require  the person  to obtain  or generate  information  for the purpose 
of giving  that information  to the IFR; 
(c) require  the person  to collect  or retain  information  that they  would  not 
25otherwise  collect  or retain  for the purpose  of giving  that information 
to the IFR; 
(d) if any specified  information  is not given  to the IFR, require  the person 
to state,  to the best of their  knowledge  and belief,  both  where  that 
information  is and why  it has not been  given  to the IFR. 
(4) In this section,  “specified”  means— 
30 (a) specified,  or described,  in the information  notice,  or 
(b) falling  within  a category  which  is specified,  or described,  in the 
information  notice. 
66 Reports  on clubs  by expert  reporters 
Appointment  of an expert  reporter 
35 (1) The IFR may  appoint  a person  (“an expert  reporter”)  to prepare,  and provide 
the IFR with,  a report  in relation  to a regulated  club  on any matter  where 
the IFR considers  that a report  on the matter  is necessary  for the purpose  of 
exercising  the IFR’s  functions  under  this Act. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 54 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(2) Where  the IFR appoints  an expert  reporter  the IFR must  give  the club 
concerned  a notice— 
(a) stating  the name  of the expert  reporter; 
(b) giving  details  of the matter  on which  the report  is to be prepared; 
5 (c) including  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 
of failing  to co-operate  with  or assist,  or otherwise  obstructing,  the 
expert  reporter  in the preparation  of the report. 
(3) An expert  reporter  must  be a person  appearing  to the IFR— 
(a) 
10to have  the skills  necessary  to provide  a report  on the matter 
concerned,  and 
(b) not to have  a conflict  of interest. 
Exercise  of powers  by an expert  reporter 
(4) An expert  reporter  may  by notice  require  a person  to give  specified 
15information  to the expert  reporter  where  the expert  reporter  considers  that 
the information  is necessary  for the purpose  of preparing  a report  under  this 
section. 
(5) A notice  under  subsection  (4) must— 
(a) explain  why  the expert  reporter  requires  the information; 
(b) 
20state  the time  by which,  or the frequency  with  which,  the specified 
information  must  be given  to the expert  reporter; 
(c) state  the place  at which,  or the manner  (which  may  be remote)  in 
which,  the information  must  be given  to the expert  reporter; 
(d) state  the form  in which  the information  must  be given  to the expert 
reporter; 
25 (e) include  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of— 
(i) not complying  with  the notice,  or 
(ii) failing  to co-operate  with  or assist,  or otherwise  obstructing, 
the expert  reporter  in the preparation  of the report. 
(6) 
30The power  under  subsection  (4) to require  a person  to give  information  to 
an expert  reporter  includes  the power  to— 
(a) take copies  of or extracts  from  the information  given  to the expert 
reporter; 
(b) require  the person  to obtain  or generate  information  for the purpose 
of giving  that information  to the expert  reporter; 
35 (c) require  the person  to collect  or retain  information  that they  would  not 
otherwise  collect  or retain  for the purpose  of giving  that information 
to the expert  reporter; 
(d) if any specified  information  is not given  to the expert  reporter,  require 
40the other  person  to state,  to the best of their  knowledge  and belief, 
both  where  that information  is and why  it has not been  given  to the 
expert  reporter. 
Supplementary 55 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(7) A person  to whom  an expert  reporter  gives  a notice  under  subsection  (4) and 
the club  to which  a report  under  this section  relates— 
(a) must  co-operate  with  the expert  reporter  in connection  with  the 
preparation  of the report,  and 
5 (b) must  give  the expert  reporter  such  reasonable  assistance  as the expert 
reporter  requests  (including  access  to business  premises,  equipment, 
services,  information  and individuals)  in connection  with  the 
preparation  of the report. 
(8) In this section  “specified”  means— 
10 (a) specified  or described  in the notice  under  subsection  (4), or 
(b) falling  within  a category  which  is specified  or described  in the notice. 
(9) The IFR may  by rules  make  provision  for— 
(a) costs  incurred  by it in relation  to the appointment  of a person  under 
this section,  or 
15 (b) expenses  incurred  by a person  appointed  under  this section  in 
connection  with  the preparation  of a report  under  this section, 
to be payable  by the club  concerned. 
Investigations  into relevant  infringements 
67 Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” 
20 In this Act, references  to a “relevant  infringement”  are to be construed  in 
accordance  with  Schedule  7. 
68 Investigations 
(1) The IFR may  conduct  an investigation  where  it has reasonable  grounds  for 
suspecting  that a person  has committed  a relevant  infringement. 
25 (2) Schedule  8 sets out the powers  available  to the IFR where  it decides  to conduct 
an investigation. 
(3) Where  the IFR decides  to conduct  an investigation  it must,  as soon  as 
reasonably  practicable  after  making  the decision,  give  a notice  (an 
30“investigation  notice”)  to the person  it has reasonable  grounds  for suspecting 
to have  committed  a relevant  infringement. 
(4) An investigation  notice  is a notice— 
(a) stating  that the IFR has decided  to conduct  an investigation; 
(b) indicating  the relevant  infringement  the IFR has reasonable  grounds 
for suspecting  to have  been  committed; 
35 (c) explaining  the matter  being  investigated. 
(5) The IFR may  delay  giving  an investigation  notice  if it considers  that giving 
the notice  would  prejudice  the investigation. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 56 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(6) Where  the IFR delays  giving  an investigation  notice  in accordance  with 
subsection  (5), it must  give  the investigation  notice  to the person  concerned 
as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the IFR no longer  considers  that giving 
the notice  would  prejudice  the investigation. 
5 69 Outcomes  of investigations 
(1) When  the IFR conducts  an investigation  under  section  68 into whether  a 
person  has committed  a relevant  infringement,  the IFR must  determine— 
(a) whether  the person  committed  the infringement,  and 
(b) 
10if so, whether  the person  had a reasonable  excuse  for committing  the 
infringement. 
(2) The IFR must  give  a person  a closure  notice  where— 
(a) the IFR determines  that the person  has not committed  the infringement, 
or 
(b) 
15the IFR determines  that the person  has committed  the infringement 
but is not minded  to take any action  as a result  of that determination 
(whether  because  the person  had a reasonable  excuse  for committing 
the infringement,  or otherwise). 
(3) A closure  notice  is a notice— 
(a) stating  the IFR’s  determination,  and 
20 (b) explaining  the IFR’s  determination. 
(4) Where  the IFR has accepted  a commitment  from  the person  to whom  an 
investigation  relates  (see section  70), this section  does  not apply  in relation 
to the behaviour  to which  the commitment  relates. 
(5) 
25Part 8 contains  provision  about  cases  where  the IFR determines  that a person 
has committed  a relevant  infringement  and is minded  to take action  as a 
result  of that determination. 
70 Commitments  in lieu of investigations 
(1) Where  an investigation  under  section  68 relates  to a relevant  infringement  to 
30which  this section  applies,  the IFR may  accept  an appropriate  commitment 
from  the person  to whom  the investigation  relates  as to their  behaviour  in 
respect  of the relevant  infringement. 
(2) A commitment  is “appropriate”  if the IFR considers  that the person’s 
compliance  with  the commitment  would  mean  that it would  not be necessary 
35to carry  out an investigation  so far as relating  to the behaviour  to which  the 
commitment  relates. 
(3) Where  the IFR accepts  a commitment  under  this section — 
(a) subject  to subsection  (4), the IFR may  not take action  under  Part 8 in 
respect  of the relevant  infringement,  so far as relating  to the behaviour, 
and 
40 (b) the person  that gave  the commitment  must  comply  with  it while  it 
has effect. 57 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(4) But the acceptance  of a commitment— 
(a) does  not prevent  an investigation  from  continuing  so far as it relates 
to other  behaviour  in relation  to the same  or a different  relevant 
infringement; 
5 (b) does  not prevent  the IFR beginning  a new  investigation  in relation  to 
the behaviour  to which  the commitment  relates  where  the IFR has 
reasonable  grounds  to suspect  that— 
(i) there  has been  a material  change  of circumstances  since  the 
commitment  was accepted, 
10 (ii) the person  has not complied  with  the commitment  in any 
respect,  or 
(iii) information  which  led it to accept  the commitment  was 
incomplete,  false  or misleading  in a material  particular. 
(5) 
15This  section  applies  to relevant  infringements  that are relevant  infringements 
by virtue  of any of the following  provisions  of Schedule  7— 
(a) paragraph  2(2)(a), (b), (e) or (h); 
(b) paragraph  2(3)(c) or (d); 
(c) paragraph  3(a) or (f); 
(d) paragraph  4(a) or (f); 
20 (e) paragraph  5, but only  so far as the relevant  infringement  mentioned 
in sub-paragraph  (1)(a) of that paragraph  is a relevant  infringement 
mentioned  in paragraph  (a) or (b) of this subsection ; 
(f) paragraph  6(b), (c) or (f). 
(6) 
25This  section  is without  prejudice  to the power  of the IFR to attach  or vary  a 
discretionary  licence  condition  to an operating  licence  that relates  to behaviour 
in respect  of a relevant  infringement. 
71 Section  70: supplementary 
(1) Where  the IFR decides  to accept,  or not to accept,  a commitment  from  a 
30person  under  section  70 the IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after 
so deciding,  give  the person  a notice— 
(a) including  the commitment, 
(b) stating  the relevant  infringement  to which  the commitment  relates, 
(c) stating  that the IFR has accepted,  or not accepted,  the commitment, 
and 
35 (d) explaining  why  the IFR has accepted,  or not accepted,  the commitment. 
(2) A commitment  accepted  under  section  70— 
(a) comes  into force  when  notice  of the IFR’s  acceptance  of it is given 
under  subsection  (1), and 
(b) 
40ceases  to have  effect  if under  subsection  (4) the person  is released 
from  the commitment. 
(3) The IFR may,  from  time  to time,  accept  a variation  to a commitment  accepted 1 
under  section  70 provided  the commitment  as varied  would  still be appropriate Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 58 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(and  for that purpose  subsections  (1) and (2) apply  in relation  to a variation 
to a commitment  as they  apply  in relation  to the acceptance  of a commitment). 
(4) The IFR may  release  a person  from  a commitment  accepted  under  section  70 
where  it considers  that it would  be appropriate  to do so. 
5 (5) Where  the IFR decides  to release  a person  from  a commitment  accepted  under 
section  70 the IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  so deciding, 
give  the person  a notice— 
(a) stating  that the IFR has released  the person  from  the commitment, 
and 
10 (b) explaining  why  the IFR is releasing  the person  from  the commitment. 
(6) The fact that a commitment  under  accepted  section  70 ceases  to have  effect 
does  not affect  the exercise  of any functions  in relation  to a failure,  or possible 
failure,  to comply  with  that commitment. 
(7) The IFR must  keep  under  review— 
15 (a) the extent  to which  a person  which  gave  a commitment  accepted  under 
section  70 is complying  with  it, 
(b) the appropriateness  of such  a commitment, 
(c) whether  a person  should  be released  from  such  a commitment  (and 
20whether  a discretionary  licence  condition  should  be attached  to an 
operating  licence,  or varied,  instead),  and 
(d) the appropriateness  of taking  action  in accordance  with  Part 8 in 
respect  of a person  who  fails to comply  with  such  a commitment. 
(8) Where  the IFR gives  a person  a notice  under  this section  it may  also publish 
that notice. 
25 72 Duty  to preserve  information 
(1) A person  who  knows  or suspects  that an investigation  under  section  68 is 
being,  or is likely  to be, conducted  must  not, without  reasonable  excuse— 
(a) destroy  or otherwise  dispose  of relevant  information, 
(b) falsify  or conceal  relevant  information,  or 
30 (c) cause  or permit  the destruction,  disposal,  falsification  or concealment 
of relevant  information. 
(2) In subsection  (1), “relevant  information”  means  any information  which  the 
person  knows  or suspects  is or would  be relevant  to the investigation. 
General 
35 73 Privileged  communications 
(1) Nothing  in this Part authorises  the IFR, an officer  of the IFR or an expert 
reporter  to require  a person  to produce,  generate  or give  to the IFR, an officer 
of the IFR or an expert  reporter  a privileged  communication. 59 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 7—Investigatory  powers  etc 
(2) Nothing  in this Part authorises  the IFR, an officer  of the IFR or an expert 
reporter  to produce  or take possession  of, or take copies  of or extracts  from, 
a privileged  communication  (but see Part 2 of the Criminal  Justice  and Police 
Act 2001  for additional  powers  of seizure). 
5 (3) For the purposes  of this section— 
(a) “privileged  communication”  means  a communication— 
(i) between  a professional  legal  adviser  and their  client,  or 
(ii) made  in connection  with,  or in contemplation  of, legal 
proceedings  and for the purposes  of those  proceedings, 
10 which  in proceedings  in the High  Court  would  be protected  from 
disclosure  on grounds  of legal  professional  privilege; 
(b) “expert  reporter”  means  a person  appointed  under  section  66. 
74 Requirement  to publish  certain  notices  etc 
Where  the IFR gives  a person— 
15 (a) an investigation  notice  under  section  68, or 
(b) a closure  notice  under  section  69, 
it must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  giving  the notice,  publish  the 
notice. 
PART 8 
20 ENFORCEMENT 
Sanctions  and offences  etc 
75 Sanctions 
(1) Part 1 of Schedule  9 sets out the action  the IFR may  take in relation  to a 
person  where— 
25 (a) the IFR determines  that the person  has, without  reasonable  excuse, 
failed  to comply  with  an information  requirement,  or 
(b) the IFR is satisfied  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that the person  has 
committed  an offence  under  section  78. 
(2) 
30In subsection  (1) and in Part 1 of Schedule  9, “information  requirement”  means 
a requirement  imposed  by or under  section  65, 66 or 72 or Schedule  8. 
(3) Part 2 of Schedule  9 sets out the action  the IFR may  take where  (whether  as 
a result  of an investigation  or otherwise)  the IFR determines  that a person 
has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed  a relevant  infringement  (but this 
is subject  to subsection  (6)). 
35 (4) Part 3 of Schedule  9 makes  provision  in connection  with  financial  penalties 
under  paragraphs  3 and 6 of that Schedule. 
(5) The IFR may  not take action  in relation  to a person  under  Schedule  9 in 1 
respect  of an act or omission  which  constitutes  an offence  under  section  78 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 60 
Part 8—Enforcement 
if the person  has, in relation  to that act or omission,  been  found  guilty  of that 
offence. 
(6) The IFR may  not take action  in relation  to a club  where  it determines  that 
5the club  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed  a relevant  infringement 
by virtue  of paragraph  2(4)(a)(ii) of Schedule  7 (but it may,  in respect  of such 
an infringement,  take action  in relation  to a senior  manager  by virtue  of 
paragraph  5 of that Schedule). 
76 Warning  notices 
(1) 
10Where  the IFR is minded  to take action  in relation  to a person  in accordance 
with  section  75 and Schedule  9, the IFR must  first give  the person  a warning 
notice. 
(2) A warning  notice  is a notice  that— 
(a) gives  details  of the action  the IFR is minded  to take, 
(b) explains  why  the IFR is minded  to take the action, 
15 (c) invites  the person  concerned  to make  representations  about  the 
proposed  action, 
(d) specifies  the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  such 
representations  must  be made,  and 
(e) 
20states  whether  the decision  whether  to take action  is to be taken  by 
the Board  or delegated  under  paragraph  17 of Schedule  2, and if it is 
to be delegated,  to which  person  or committee  listed  in that paragraph 
it is to be delegated. 
(3) The period  for making  representations  must  be a period  of not less than  14 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the warning  notice  is given. 
25 (4) The IFR must  have  regard  to any representations  received  in accordance  with 
a warning  notice  before  giving  a decision  notice  under  section  77 (and, 
accordingly,  may  not take action  in accordance  with  section  75 and Schedule 
9 until  the period  allowed  for representations  has expired). 
77 Decision  notices 
30 (1) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the period  allowed  for representations 
under  section  76 has expired,  the IFR must— 
(a) determine  whether  to take action  in relation  to the person  in accordance 
with  section  75 and Schedule  9, and 
(b) give  the person  a decision  notice. 
35 (2) A decision  notice  is a notice  that— 
(a) states— 
(i) the action  that the IFR is taking  (which,  subject  to subsection 
(3), does  not need  to be the same  action  detailed  in the warning 
notice),  or 
40 (ii) that the IFR is not taking  action, 
(b) explains  why  the IFR is taking  that action  or is not taking  action, 61 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 8—Enforcement 
(c) where  the IFR is taking  action,  states— 
(i) what  action  (if any)  the person  is required  to take as a result, 
and 
(ii) 
5the day or days  by which  the person  is required  to take that 
action,  and 
(d) states  whether  the decision  to take action,  or not to take action,  was 
made  by the Board  or delegated  under  paragraph  17 of Schedule  2, 
and if it was delegated,  to which  person  or committee  listed  in that 
paragraph  it was delegated. 
10 (3) The IFR may  not take action  under  paragraph  9 of Schedule  9 (suspension 
or revocation  of operating  licence)  unless  action  under  that paragraph  was 
detailed  in the warning  notice. 
(4) Subsection  (5) applies  where  the IFR— 
(a) 
15has given  a person  a decision  notice  and has taken  the action  stated 
in it, but 
(b) considers  that the action  has been  ineffective. 
(5) The IFR may  take further  action  in accordance  with  section  75 and Schedule 
9 (and  section  76 and this section  apply  in relation  to any such  further  action). 
78 Offences 
20 Destroying  or falsifying  information 
(1) A person  commits  an offence  if the person— 
(a) intentionally  or recklessly  destroys  or otherwise  disposes  of relevant 
information, 
(b) falsifies  or conceals  relevant  information,  or 
25 (c) causes  or permits  the destruction,  disposal,  falsification  or concealment 
of relevant  information. 
(2) In subsection  (1), “relevant  information”  means  information  the person  is 
required,  under  or by virtue  of this Act, to give  to— 
(a) the IFR, or 
30 (b) an expert  reporter  appointed  under  section  66. 
False  or misleading  information 
(3) A person  commits  an offence  if— 
(a) the person  gives  information  to— 
(i) 
35the IFR in connection  with  any of its functions  under  this Act, 
or 
(ii) an expert  reporter  appointed  under  section  66 in connection 
with  the preparation  of a report  under  that section, 
(b) the information  is false  or misleading  in a material  particular,  and 
(c) the person  knows  or is reckless  as to whether  that is the case. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 62 
Part 8—Enforcement 
(4) A person  commits  an offence  if the person  gives  information  to another  person 
which  is false  or misleading  in a material  particular  and the person— 
(a) knows  that the information  is false  or misleading  in a material 
particular  or is reckless  as to whether  that is the case,  and 
5 (b) knows  that the information  will be given  to— 
(i) the IFR in connection  with  any of its functions  under  this Act, 
or 
(ii) an expert  reporter  appointed  under  section  66 in connection 
with  the preparation  of a report  under  that section. 
10 Obstruction 
(5) A person  commits  an offence  if the person  intentionally  obstructs  an officer 
of the IFR acting  in the exercise  of the officer’s  powers  under  a warrant  issued 
under  paragraph  3 of Schedule  8. 
Penalties 
15 (6) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  this section  is liable— 
(a) on summary  conviction,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
the general  limit  in a magistrates’  court,  to a fine or to both; 
(b) on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
2 years,  to a fine,  or to both. 
20 Interaction  with sanctions  under  section  75 
(7) A person  may  not be found  guilty  of an offence  under  this section  by virtue 
of an act or omission  if the IFR has taken  action  under  Schedule  9 in relation 
to the person  in relation  to that act or omission. 
Urgent  directions 
25 79 Urgent  directions 
(1) This  section  applies  where— 
(a) the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of an investigation  or 
otherwise)  that a person  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed 
a relevant  infringement, 
30 (b) the relevant  infringement  is continuing,  and 
(c) the relevant  infringement  jeopardises,  or immediately  risks 
jeopardising,  the IFR’s  ability  to advance  one or more  of its objectives. 
(2) The IFR may  give  the person  such  direction  as the IFR considers  appropriate 
to bring  the relevant  infringement  to an end (an “urgent  direction”). 
35 (3) An urgent  direction  must— 
(a) explain  why  the IFR is giving  a direction; 
(b) state  the action  the direction  requires  the person  to take or the action 
the direction  prohibits  the person  from  taking; 63 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 8—Enforcement 
(c) state  the period  during  which  the action  must  be taken  or the 
prohibited  action  must  not be taken  (as the case may  be); 
(d) include  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 of 
not complying  with  the direction; 
5 (e) if the IFR did not give  the person  concerned  an opportunity  to make 
representations  before  giving  the direction,  explain  why; 
(f) include  any other  information  the IFR considers  relevant. 
(4) A period  specified  in an urgent  direction  may  be indefinite. 
(5) An urgent  direction  may  be varied  or revoked  by a further  urgent  direction. 
10 (6) Where  the IFR is minded  to vary  an urgent  direction  so as to extend  a time 
period,  the IFR must  invite  the person  concerned  to make  representations 
before  giving  a further  urgent  direction. 
(7) Before  giving  a further  urgent  direction  the IFR must  have  regard  to any 
15representations  received  (whether  in response  to an invitation  under  subsection 
(6) or otherwise). 
Publication 
80 Requirement  to publish  certain  notices  etc 
Where  the IFR gives  a person— 
(a) a warning  notice  under  section  76, 
20 (b) a decision  notice  under  section  77, or 
(c) an urgent  direction  under  section  79, 
it must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  giving  the notice  or direction, 
publish  that notice  or direction. 
PART 9 
25 REVIEWS AND APPEALS 
81 Reviewable  decisions  etc 
(1) Where  the IFR makes  a reviewable  decision,  the IFR must,  as soon  as 
reasonably  practicable  after  making  the decision,  notify  each  concerned  person 
of— 
30 (a) the person’s  right  to request  a review  by the applicable  reviewer  under 
section  82, and 
(b) the person’s  right  to appeal  to the Tribunal  under  section  84. 
(2) In this Part— 
35“applicable  reviewer” , in relation  to a reviewable  decision,  means  the 
person  mentioned  in the corresponding  entry  in the second  column 
of the Table  in Schedule  10; 
“concerned  person” , in relation  to a reviewable  decision,  means  a person 
who  appears  to the IFR to be directly  affected  by the decision; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 64 
Part 9—Reviews  and appeals 
“reviewable  decision”  means  a decision  listed  in the first column  of the 
Table  in Schedule  10. 
82 Request  for internal  review 
(1) 
5Where  the IFR makes  a reviewable  decision,  a concerned  person  may  request 
a review  of that decision  by the applicable  reviewer. 
(2) A concerned  person  may  request  a review  by notifying  the IFR within  the 
period  of seven  days  beginning  with  the day on which  the person  is notified 
of their  right  to request  a review  under  section  81(1)(a). 
(3) 
10Where  a review  of a reviewable  decision  is requested  under  this section , the 
IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the request  is made,  decide 
whether  or not to carry  out a review. 
(4) The IFR may  only  decide  not to carry  out a review  if— 
(a) an appeal  has been  made  against  the reviewable  decision  under  section 
1584(1) (whether  by a concerned  person  or any other  person  with  a 
sufficient  interest  in the decision), 
(b) the request  is for a review  of a decision  that is not a reviewable 
decision,  or 
(c) the IFR considers  that— 
(i) the person  requesting  the review  is not a concerned  person, 
20 (ii) the request  for a review  is vexatious,  or 
(iii) there  is no reasonable  prospect  of a review  resulting  in the 
decision  being  varied  or cancelled. 
(5) Where  the IFR decides  not to carry  out a review  of a reviewable  decision— 
(a) 
25the IFR must  notify  each  concerned  person  of its decision  and the 
reasons  for that decision, 
(b) the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having  decided  to uphold  the 
reviewable  decision,  and 
(c) the IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  giving  the notice 
30required  under  paragraph  (a), publish  notice  of the fact that the 
applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having  decided  to uphold  the 
reviewable  decision. 
(6) Where  the IFR decides  to carry  out a review  of a reviewable  decision,  it must 
notify  each  concerned  person  of its decision. 
(7) 
35A request  for a review  under  this section  does  not suspend  the effect  of the 
decision  to which  the review  relates  except  so far as a direction  suspending 
the effect  of the decision  is given  by the applicable  reviewer. 
(8) But the applicable  reviewer  may  not give  a direction  suspending  the effect 
of a decision  of the IFR to— 
(a) 
40attach  a discretionary  licence  condition  to, or vary  a discretionary 
licence  condition  attached  to, an operating  licence  in a case where  the 
IFR was not required  to give  notice  of attaching  or varying  the 
condition  by virtue  of section  23(6); 65 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 9—Reviews  and appeals 
(b) give  a direction  under  section  41 (directions  relating  to unsuitable 
owners  and officers); 
(c) specify  a competition  as a prohibited  competition  under  section  45; 
(d) give  an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
5 (e) suspend  or revoke  an operating  licence  under  paragraph  9 of Schedule 
9 by virtue  of the third  aggravating  condition  in paragraph  8 of that 
Schedule  being  met. 
(9) In the case of a reviewable  decision  in relation  to which  the applicable 
10reviewer  is a committee  of the Expert  Panel,  the Chief  Executive  Officer  must, 
as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the IFR has given  notice  under 
subsection  (6), establish  a committee  of the Expert  Panel  to carry  out the 
review  (see paragraph  26 of Schedule  2). 
(10) In a case where— 
(a) 
15the reviewable  decision  was made  by a committee  of the Expert  Panel 
(“the  deciding  committee”),  and 
(b) the applicable  reviewer  in relation  to that decision  is also a committee 
of the Expert  Panel  (“the  reviewing  committee”), 
the Chief  Executive  Officer  may  not appoint  to the reviewing  committee  a 
member  of the Expert  Panel  who  was a member  of the deciding  committee. 
20 (11) In a case where  the reviewable  decision  was made  by the Board  and the 
applicable  reviewer  in relation  to that decision  is also the Board,  any member 
of the Board  who  took  part in the decision  may  not take part in the review. 
83 Internal  reviews 
(1) Where  the IFR decides  to carry  out a review  of a reviewable  decision— 
25 (a) the applicable  reviewer  may  determine  the nature  and extent  of the 
review,  and 
(b) the applicable  reviewer  must  have  regard  to any representations  made 
by the concerned  person  in accordance  with  that determination. 
(2) The applicable  reviewer  may,  after  carrying  out a review,  decide  to— 
30 (a) uphold  the decision, 
(b) vary  the decision,  or 
(c) cancel  the decision. 
(3) The IFR must— 
(a) 
35notify  each  concerned  person  in relation  to the reviewable  decision  of 
the applicable  reviewer’s  decision  on a review  and the reasons  for 
that decision,  and 
(b) as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  giving  the notice  required  under 
paragraph  (a), publish  the decision. 
(4) The IFR must  give  the notice  required  under  subsection  (3)(a)— 
40 (a) where  the reviewer  is the Board,  before  the end of the period  of 14 
days  beginning  with  the day on which  the IFR gave  notice  under 
section  82(6); Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 66 
Part 9—Reviews  and appeals 
(b) where  the reviewer  is a committee  of the Expert  Panel,  before  the end 
of the period  of 14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
committee  is established. 
(5) 
5The IFR may,  if it considers  that there  are special  reasons  for doing  so, extend 
by up to a further  14 days  the period  within  which  it is to give  notice  of the 
decision  of the applicable  reviewer. 
(6) If the IFR does  not give  the notice  required  under  subsection  (3)(a) to each 
concerned  person  before  the end of the period  given  by subsection  (4) or 
(5)— 
10 (a) the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having  decided  to uphold  the 
reviewable  decision,  and 
(b) the IFR must— 
(i) as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the end of the period 
15given  by subsection  (4) or (5), notify  each  concerned  person  of 
the fact that the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having 
decided  to uphold  the reviewable  decision,  and 
(ii) as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  giving  the notice 
required  by sub-paragraph  (i), publish  notice  of that fact. 
(7) 
20The IFR may  make  rules  providing  for costs  incurred  by the IFR in exercising 
functions  under  this section  to be payable  by a concerned  person  who 
requested  a review  of a reviewable  decision  where— 
(a) the applicable  reviewer  has decided  to uphold  the reviewable  decision 
(but excluding  where  the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having 
upheld  the reviewable  decision  under  subsection  (6)(a)), and 
25 (b) both  the reviewable  decision  and the applicable  reviewer’s  decision 
to uphold  it have  become  final. 
(8) A decision  becomes  final— 
(a) when  the time  specified  in Part 5B of the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules 
30for appealing  against  it expires  without  an appeal  having  been  brought, 
or 
(b) where  an appeal  has been  brought  against  the decision,  when— 
(i) the appeal  and any further  appeal  are dismissed,  withdrawn 
or abandoned,  and 
(ii) 
35the time  for appealing  against  the result  of the appeal  or further 
appeal  has expired  without  another  appeal  having  been 
brought. 
(9) Rules  made  under  subsection  (7) must  require  the IFR, in deciding  whether 
to require  payment  of costs  or determining  the amount  of those  costs,  to have 
40regard  to the financial  resources  of the concerned  person  who  requested  the 
review. 
84 Appeals  to the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal 
(1) This  section  applies  to— 
(a) a reviewable  decision  of the IFR listed  in subsection  (3), 67 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 9—Reviews  and appeals 
(b) a decision  made  by an applicable  reviewer  under  section  83(2), and 
(c) a decision  treated  as having  been  made  by an applicable  reviewer  by 
virtue  of section  82(5)(b) or 83(6)(a) (a “deemed  decision”). 
(2) 
5A concerned  person,  or any other  person  with  a sufficient  interest,  may  appeal 
to the Tribunal  against  a decision  to which  this section  applies. 
(3) The reviewable  decisions  specified  for the purposes  of subsection  (1)(a) are— 
(a) the revocation  of an operating  licence  under  section  19; 
(b) a deemed  determination  under  section  32(5) that a person  is not 
suitable  to be an owner  or officer  of a club; 
10 (c) a deemed  determination  under  section  34 that an individual  is not 
suitable  to be an owner  of a club; 
(d) a deemed  determination  under  section  35 that an individual  is not 
suitable  to be an officer  of a club; 
(e) 
15the making  of an order  under  section  38 (disqualification)  in respect 
of a person; 
(f) the suspension  or revocation  of an operating  licence  under  paragraph 
9 of Schedule  9. 
(4) But a person  may  not appeal  to the Tribunal  against  a reviewable  decision 
listed  in subsection  (3) if— 
20 (a) an applicable  reviewer  has been  requested  to review  that decision 
under  section  82 (whether  or not by the person),  and 
(b) the applicable  reviewer  has not made  a decision  or deemed  decision 
on that review. 
(5) 
25A person  appeals  to the Tribunal  under  subsection  (2) by sending  the Tribunal 
a notice  of appeal  in accordance  with  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules. 
(6) The notice  of appeal  must  be sent within  the period  specified,  in relation  to 
the decision  appealed  against,  in Part 5B of the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules. 
(7) An appeal  under  subsection  (2) does  not suspend  the effect  of the decision 
30to which  the appeal  relates  except  so far as a direction  suspending  the effect 
of the decision  is given  by the Tribunal. 
(8) But the Tribunal  may  not give a direction  suspending  the effect  of the decision 
in relation  to— 
(a) a decision  of the IFR listed  in section  82(8), or 
(b) 
35a decision  or deemed  decision  of an applicable  reviewer  in respect  of 
a reviewable  decision  listed  in section  82(8). 
(9) An appeal  lies to the Court  of Appeal  on any point  of law arising  from  a 
decision  of the Tribunal  on an appeal  under  this section . 
(10) An appeal  under  subsection  (9) requires  the permission  of the Tribunal  or 
the Court  of Appeal. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 68 
Part 9—Reviews  and appeals 
85 Proceedings  before  the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal 
(1) The Tribunal  must  determine  any appeal  under  section  84(1) in relation  to— 
(a) a reviewable  decision  listed  in section  84(3), or 
(b) 
5a decision  or deemed  decision  of an applicable  reviewer  under  section 
83(2) in respect  of a reviewable  decision  listed  in section  84(3), 
on the merits  by reference  to the grounds  of appeal  set out in the notice  of 
appeal. 
(2) The Tribunal  must  determine  any other  appeal  under  section  84(1) by applying 
10the same  principles  as would  be applied  by the High  Court  in determining 
proceedings  on judicial  review. 
(3) Where  subsection  (1) applies  in relation  to an appeal,  the Tribunal  may  confirm 
or set aside  the decision  which  is the subject  of the appeal,  or any part of it, 
and may— 
(a) 
15remit  the matter  to the IFR or the applicable  reviewer  (as the case may 
be), 
(b) take such  other  steps  as the IFR or the applicable  reviewer  could  have 
taken,  or 
(c) make  any other  decision  which  the IFR or the applicable  reviewer 
could  have  made. 
20 (4) Where  subsection  (2) applies  in relation  to an appeal,  the Tribunal— 
(a) may  dismiss  the appeal  or quash  the whole  or part of the decision  to 
which  it relates,  and 
(b) may,  where  it quashes  the whole  or part of that decision,  remit  the 
25matter  to the IFR with  a direction  to reconsider  and make  a new 
decision  in accordance  with  the ruling  of the Tribunal. 
(5) In subsection  (1), the reference  to a deemed  decision  of an applicable  reviewer 
is to a decision  that the applicable  reviewer  is treated  as having  made  by 
virtue  of section  82(5)(b) or 83(6)(a). 
PART 10 
30 GENERAL 
Disclosure  of information 
86 Disclosure  of information  by the IFR 
(1) The IFR may  disclose  information  held  in connection  with  its functions  under 
this Act to— 
35 (a) a person  specified  in subsection  (2), for the purpose  of facilitating  the 
exercise  of that person’s  functions; 
(b) a person  specified  in subsection  (3), for a purpose  connected  with  the 
exercise  of the IFR’s  functions  under  this Act. 
(2) The persons  specified  for the purposes  of subsection  (1)(a) are— 69 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 10—General 
(a) HMRC; 
(b) the Secretary  of State; 
(c) the Welsh  Ministers; 
(d) the Financial  Conduct  Authority; 
5 (e) the National  Crime  Agency; 
(f) the Serious  Fraud  Office; 
(g) the Sports  Grounds  Safety  Authority. 
(3) The persons  specified  for the purposes  of subsection  (1)(b) are— 
(a) the Football  Association; 
10 (b) the Football  Association  Premier  League  Limited,  a company 
incorporated  in England  and Wales  (company  number  02719699); 
(c) the Football  Association  of Wales  Limited,  a company  incorporated 
in England  and Wales  (company  number  00213349); 
(d) 
15the Football  Conference  Limited,  a company  incorporated  in England 
and Wales  (company  number  03364308); 
(e) the Football  League  Limited,  a company  incorporated  in England  and 
Wales  (company  number  00080612); 
(f) the Women’s  Professional  Leagues  Limited,  a company  incorporated 
in England  and Wales  (company  number  15675947). 
20 (4) A disclosure  of information  under  this section— 
(a) does  not breach  any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the IFR, and 
(b) does  not breach  any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information 
(however  imposed)  (but see section  88(2)). 
(5) Information  disclosed  under  subsection  (1) must  not be— 
25 (a) used  for a purpose  other  than  the purpose  mentioned  in subsection 
(1)(a) or (b) (as the case may  be), or 
(b) further  disclosed, 
except  where  the use or disclosure  is required  by another  enactment  or is 
made  in pursuance  of a court  order. 
30 (6) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  subsection  (2) or (3) to add, 
remove  or vary  a reference  to a person. 
87 Disclosure  of information  to the IFR etc 
(1) HMRC  may  disclose  information  to a person  to whom  subsection  (2) applies 
35for the purpose  of facilitating  the exercise  of the functions  that person  has 
under,  or by virtue  of, this Act. 
(2) This  subsection  applies  to— 
(a) the IFR; 
(b) a trustee  appointed  by an order  under  section  43; 
(c) an expert  reporter  appointed  under  section  66. 
40 (3) The disclosure  of information  to a person  to whom  subsection  (2) applies  in 
accordance  with  any provision  made  by or under  this Act— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 70 
Part 10—General 
(a) does  not breach  any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person 
making  the disclosure,  and 
(b) does  not breach  any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information 
(however  imposed)  (but see section  88(2)). 
5 (4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  for, and in 
connection  with,  conferring  functions  on a public  authority  relating  to the 
disclosure  of information  by that authority  to a person  to whom  subsection 
(2) applies  for the purpose  of facilitating  the exercise  of the functions  that 
person  has under,  or virtue  of, this Act. 
10 (5) In subsection  (4), “public  authority”  has the same  meaning  as in section  6 of 
the Human  Rights  Act 1998. 
(6) Regulations  under  subsection  (4) may  amend,  repeal  or revoke  provision 
made  by or under  an Act whenever  passed  or made  (including  provision 
made  by or under  this Act). 
15 88 Restrictions  on the disclosure  of information 
(1) Subsection  (2) applies  to a duty  or power  to process  information  imposed  or 
conferred  by or under  this Act. 
(2) A duty  or power  to which  this subsection  applies  does  not operate  to require 
20or authorise  the processing  of information  which  would  contravene  the data 
protection  legislation  (but the duty  or power  is to be taken  into account  in 
determining  whether  the processing  would  contravene  that legislation). 
(3) Subsections  (4) and (5) apply  to a duty  or power  to publish,  or otherwise 
disclose,  information  imposed  or conferred  by or under  this Act. 
(4) 
25A person  to whom  section  87(2) applies  must  exclude  information  from 
disclosure  under  a duty  or power  to which  this subsection  applies  if it is— 
(a) information  the disclosure  of which  might  prejudice  the prevention 
or detection  of crime  or the investigation  or prosecution  of an offence, 
or 
(b) 
30information  received  (directly  or indirectly)  from,  or that relates  to, 
the National  Crime  Agency,  unless  the National  Crime  Agency  consents 
to that disclosure. 
(5) A person  to whom  section  87(2) applies  may  exclude  from  disclosure  under 
a duty  or power  to which  this subsection  applies  information  the disclosure 
35of which  the person  considers  might  significantly  harm  the legitimate  personal 
or business  interests  of the person  to whom  the information  relates. 
(6) HMRC  information  may  not be disclosed  by a person  to whom  section  87(2) 
applies  unless  HMRC  consents  to the disclosure. 
(7) If a person  to whom  section  87(2) applies  discloses  HMRC  information,  the 
40information  must  not be disclosed  by the recipient,  or by any person  obtaining 
the information  directly  or indirectly  from  the recipient,  unless  HMRC  consents 
to the disclosure. 71 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 10—General 
(8) In this section— 
“the data  protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the Data 
Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act); 
5“HMRC  information”  means  information  disclosed  under  section  87(1) 
or information  that is otherwise  received  by a person  to whom  section 
87(2) applies  (directly  or indirectly)  from,  or that relates  to, HMRC. 
89 Information  offences 
Wrongful  disclosure 
(1) 
10A person  commits  an offence  if the person  discloses  information  in 
contravention  of section  86(5)(b). 
Wrongful  disclosure  of revenue  and customs  information 
(2) A person  commits  an offence  if the person,  in contravention  of section  88(6) 
or (7), discloses  any revenue  and customs  information  relating  to a person 
whose  identity— 
15 (a) is specified  in the disclosure,  or 
(b) can be deduced  from  it. 
Supplementary 
(3) It is a defence  for a person  charged  with  an offence  under  subsection  (1) or 
(2) to prove  that the person  reasonably  believed— 
20 (a) that the disclosure  was lawful,  or 
(b) that the information  had already  and lawfully  been  made  available  to 
the public. 
(4) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  subsection  (1) is liable— 
(a) 
25on summary  conviction,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
the general  limit  in a magistrates’  court,  to a fine or to both; 
(b) on conviction  on indictment,  to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding 
2 years,  to a fine or to both. 
(5) Subsections  (4) and (5) of section  19 of the Commissioners  for Revenue  and 
30Customs  Act 2005  apply  to an offence  under  subsection  (2) as they  apply  to 
an offence  under  that section. 
(6) In this section,  “revenue  and customs  information  relating  to a person”  has 
the same  meaning  as in section  19 of the Commissioners  for Revenue  and 
Customs  Act 2005. 
Rules  and regulations 
35 90 Rules 
(1) The IFR may  make  rules  containing  provision  that supplements,  or that gives 
effect  to, any provision  made  by this Act (except  provision  in Schedule  4). Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 72 
Part 10—General 
(2) Subsections  (3) to (7) apply  in relation  to rules  made  by the IFR under  any 
provision  of this Act. 
(3) Rules  made  by the IFR may— 
(a) confer  a discretion  on a person; 
5 (b) make  different  provision  for different  purposes  (including  in relation 
to different  clubs  or different  persons); 
(c) make  consequential,  supplementary,  incidental,  transitional  or saving 
provision. 
(4) The IFR may  amend,  replace  or revoke  any rule made  by the IFR. 
10 (5) Before  making,  amending  or replacing  rules,  the IFR must  consult— 
(a) each  specified  competition  organiser,  and 
(b) such  other  persons  as the IFR considers  appropriate. 
(6) Subsection  (5) does  not apply  in relation  to— 
(a) 
15amendments  to or replacements  of rules,  if the IFR considers  the 
changes  to be minor; 
(b) levy  rules,  or to amendments  to or replacements  of levy  rules  (see 
section  54(1) to (3) for provision  about  consultation  before  the making 
of levy  rules); 
(c) 
20revenue  rules,  or to amendments  to or replacements  of revenue  rules 
(see paragraph  12(3) and (5) of Schedule  9 for provision  about 
consultation  before  the making  of revenue  rules). 
(7) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  making,  amending  or replacing  rules, 
the IFR must— 
(a) publish  the rules,  and 
25 (b) notify  the Secretary  of State. 
(8) Any  provision  in this Act that permits  or requires  the IFR to make  provision 
in rules  is without  prejudice  to the generality  of subsection  (1). 
91 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  under  this Act may— 
30 (a) confer  a discretion  on a person; 
(b) make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
(c) make  consequential,  supplementary,  incidental,  transitional  or saving 
provision. 
(2) Regulations  under  this Act are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
35 (3) A statutory  instrument  containing  any of the following  (whether  alone  or 
with  other  provision)  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has 
been  laid before  and approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament— 
(a) regulations  under— 
(i) section  2(3); 
40 (ii) section  22(5); 73 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 10—General 
(iii) section  56(2)(b); 
(iv) section  86(6); 
(v) section  87(4); 
(vi) section  92(3); 
5 (vii) paragraph  16 of Schedule  1; 
(viii) paragraph  22(3) of Schedule  2; 
(ix) paragraph  15 of Schedule  9; 
(b) regulations  under  any other  provision  of this Act that amend  or repeal 
provision  made  by an Act. 
10 (4) Any  other  statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act is subject 
to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
(5) If a draft  of an instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act would,  apart 
from  this subsection , be treated  for the purposes  of the Standing  Orders  of 
15either  House  of Parliament  as a hybrid  instrument,  it is to proceed  in that 
House  as if it were  not a hybrid  instrument. 
(6) This  section  does  not apply  to regulations  under  section  99. 
Definitions  etc 
92 Minor  definitions  etc 
(1) In this Act— 
20 “business  premises”  means  premises  (or any part of premises)  not used 
as a dwelling; 
“conflict  of interest” , in relation  to a person,  means  a financial  or other 
interest  which  is likely  to prejudicially  affect  the discharge  by the 
person  of the person’s  functions; 
25 “the financial  resources  threshold  requirement”  means  the threshold 
requirement  in paragraph  2 of Schedule  4; 
“the Football  Association”  means  the Football  Association  Limited,  a 
company  incorporated  in England  and Wales  (company  number 
00077797); 
30 “football  season”  means  a period— 
(a) beginning  with  the day in a particular  year  on which  the first 
match  of any specified  competition  is played,  and 
(b) ending  with  the day in the following  year  on which  the final 
match  of any specified  competition  is played; 
35 “HMRC”  means  the Commissioners  for His Majesty’s  Revenue  and 
Customs; 
“information”  includes— 
(a) information  in the form  of a document,  whether  in draft  or in 
final  form; 
40 (b) information  in any other  form; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 74 
Part 10—General 
“the non-financial  resources  threshold  requirement”  means  the threshold 
requirement  in paragraph  3 of Schedule  4; 
“registered  society”  means  a registered  society  as defined  by section  1 
of the Co-operative  and Community  Benefit  Societies  Act 2014; 
5 “the Tribunal”  means  the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal; 
“Tribunal  Procedure  Rules”  means  rules  made  under  section  15 of the 
Enterprise  Act 2002 . 
(2) In this Act, “serious  criminal  conduct”  means  conduct  which— 
(a) 
10amounts  to the commission  of an offence  specified,  or falling  within 
a description  specified,  in Part 1 of Schedule  1 to the Serious  Crime 
Act 2007,  or 
(b) would  amount  to the commission  of such  an offence  if done  in England 
and Wales. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  this section  so as to change— 
15 (a) the definition  of “football  season”  in subsection  (1); 
(b) the definition  of “serious  criminal  conduct”  in subsection  (2). 
(4) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (3)(b), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult  such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(5) 
20Any  notification  required  to be given  by or under  this Act must  be given  in 
writing. 
93 Index  of defined  terms 
Schedule  11 sets out terms  defined  by this Act for the purposes  of more  than 
one provision. 
General 
25 94 Pre-commencement  consultation 
(1) This  section  applies  in relation  to a provision  of this Act which  requires  the 
IFR to consult  another  person. 
(2) If, before  the provision  came  into force  (and  whether  before  or after  the 
30passing  of this Act),  the Secretary  of State  or the IFR (as the case may  be) 
carried  out consultation  which  would  have  satisfied  the requirements  of the 
provision  to any extent  if— 
(a) in the case of consultation  carried  out by the Secretary  of State,  the 
provision  had been  in force  and the consultation  had been  carried  out 
by the IFR, or 
35 (b) in the case of consultation  carried  out by the IFR, the provision  had 
been  in force, 
the IFR may  elect  for subsection  (3) to apply. 
(3) Where  this subsection  applies,  requirements  on the IFR under  the provision 
must  be treated  as satisfied  to that extent. 75 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 10—General 
95 Offences  by officers  of clubs  and bodies  corporate 
(1) If an offence  under  this Act committed  by a club,  or a body  corporate  other 
than  a club,  is proved— 
(a) 
5to have  been  committed  with  the consent  or connivance  of an officer 
of the club  or of the body  corporate,  or 
(b) to be attributable  to neglect  on the part of an officer  of the club  or of 
the body  corporate, 
the officer  (as well  as the club  or the body  corporate)  is guilty  of the offence 
and is liable  to be proceeded  against  and punished  accordingly. 
10 (2) If the affairs  of a body  corporate  other  than  a club  are managed  by its 
members,  subsection  (1) applies  in relation  to the acts and defaults  of a 
member  in connection  with  the member’s  functions  of management  as if the 
member  were  an officer  of the body  corporate. 
(3) 
15In this section,  “officer”,  in relation  to a body  corporate  other  than  a club, 
means— 
(a) where  the body  is a company,  a director  of the body; 
(b) in any other  case,  an officer  of the body  whose  functions  correspond 
to those  of a director  of a company. 
96 Payments  into the Consolidated  Fund 
20 (1) The IFR must  pay into the Consolidated  Fund  any amounts  received  by it 
under  section  53 (levy)  that are attributable  to— 
(a) the recovery  of the IFR’s  initial  costs,  or 
(b) the Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs. 
(2) 
25The IFR must,  in respect  of each  financial  year,  pay to the Secretary  of State 
its relevant  receipts  after  deducting  its litigation  costs  in respect  of that year. 
(3) The IFR’s  “relevant  receipts”,  in respect  of a financial  year,  are any amounts 
received  by it during  the year  that are attributable  to— 
(a) any interest  payable  on an amount  of levy  by virtue  of section  53(8), 
(b) any penalty  imposed  under  paragraph  3 or 6 of Schedule  9, or 
30 (c) any interest  payable  on any such  penalty  under  paragraph  13 of that 
Schedule. 
(4) The IFR’s  “litigation  costs”  in respect  of a financial  year  are the costs  incurred 
by it during  the year  in connection  with  litigation. 
(5) 
35The Secretary  of State  may  give  a direction  to the IFR as to how  the IFR is 
to comply  with  its duty  under  subsection  (2). 
(6) A direction  under  subsection  (5) may  in particular— 
(a) specify  descriptions  of costs  that are, or are not, to be regarded  as 
incurred  in connection  with  litigation  for the purposes  of subsection 
(4), 
40 (b) relate  to the calculation  and timing  of the deduction  in respect  of the 
IFR’s  litigation  costs,  and Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 76 
Part 10—General 
(c) specify  the time  when  any payment  is required  to be made  to the 
Secretary  of State. 
(7) A direction  under  subsection  (5) may  also require  the IFR, at times  specified 
5in the direction,  to provide  the Secretary  of State  with  information  specified 
in the direction  relating  to costs  incurred  by the IFR in connection  with 
litigation. 
(8) The Secretary  of State  must  pay into the Consolidated  Fund  any amounts 
received  under  subsection  (2). 
(9) In this section— 
10 “financial  year”  means— 
(a) the period  beginning  with  the day on which  this section  comes 
into force  and ending  with  31 March  in the following  year,  and 
(b) each  successive  period  of 12 months; 
15“the IFR’s  initial  costs”  and “the Secretary  of State’s  establishment  costs” 
have  the same  meaning  as in section  53. 
97 Minor  and consequential  amendments 
(1) Schedule  12 makes  minor  and consequential  amendments. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  that is consequential 
on this Act. 
20 (3) Regulations  under  this section  may  amend,  repeal  or revoke  provision  made 
by or under  an Act passed— 
(a) before  this Act, or 
(b) later  in the same  session  of Parliament  as this Act. 
98 Extent 
25 (1) Subject  to subsections  (2) and (3), this Act extends  to England  and Wales 
only. 
(2) Any  amendment,  repeal  or revocation  made  by this Act has the same  extent 
as the provision  amended,  repealed  or revoked. 
(3) 
30His Majesty  may  by Order  in Council  provide  for any of the provisions  of 
this Act to extend,  with  or without  modifications,  to any of the Channel 
Islands  or to the Isle of Man. 
99 Commencement 
(1) Subject  to subsection  (2), this Act comes  into force  on such  day or days  as 
the Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  appoint. 
35 (2) This  section  and the following  provisions  come  into force  on the day on which 
this Act is passed— 
(a) Part 1 (and  Schedule  1); 77 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Part 10—General 
(b) Part 2 (and  Schedules  2 and 3); 
(c) paragraph  7 of Schedule  5 (and  section  20 so far as relating  to that 
paragraph); 
(d) sections  88 and 90 to 94 (and  Schedule  11); 
5 (e) paragraphs  1 to 4 and 9 of Schedule  12 (and  section  97(1) so far as 
relating  to those  paragraphs); 
(f) sections  98 and 100; 
(g) any other  provision  of this Act so far as it— 
(i) confers  power  to make  regulations, 
10 (ii) imposes  a duty  or confers  power  to make  rules,  or 
(iii) is otherwise  necessary  for enabling  the exercise  of a duty  or 
power  within  sub-paragraph  (i) or (ii) on or after  the day on 
which  this Act is passed. 
(3) 
15Regulations  under  subsection  (1) may  appoint  different  days  for different 
purposes. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  transitional,  transitory  or 
saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of any provision 
of this Act. 
(5) 
20Regulations  under  subsection  (4) may  make  different  provision  for different 
purposes 
(6) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
100 Short  title 
This  Act may  be cited  as the Football  Governance  Act 2025. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 78 
Part 10—General 
SCHEDULES 
Section  3 SCHEDULE  1 
MEANING OF “OWNER” 
PART 1 
5 CONDITIONS FOR BEING AN OWNER 
Conditions  for being  an owner 
1 For the purposes  of this Act, a person  is an “owner”  of a club  if— (1) 
(a) the person  is an individual  or a registered  society,  and 
(b) 
10one or more  of the conditions  in paragraph  2 are met in relation  to 
the person. 
(2) In the case of a club  that is a registered  society,  if there  is no individual  in 
relation  to whom  one or more  of the conditions  in paragraph  2 are met, 
the registered  society  itself  is the owner  of the club. 
2 
15Condition  1 is that the person  has the right  to exercise,  or actually  exercises, 
significant  influence  or control  over  the activities  of the club  (in whole  or 
in part). (1) 
(2) Condition  2 is that the person  holds,  directly  or indirectly,  more  than  25% 
of the shares  in the club. 
(3) 
20Condition  3 is that the person  holds,  directly  or indirectly,  more  than  25% 
of the voting  rights  in the club. 
(4) Condition  4 is that the person  holds  the right,  directly  or indirectly,  to 
appoint  or remove  an officer  of the club. 
(5) Condition  5 is that— 
(a) 
25the trustees  of a trust,  or the members  of a partnership, 
unincorporated  association  or other  body,  that is not a legal  person 
under  the law by which  it is governed  would  meet  one or more  of 
conditions  1 to 4 (in their  capacity  as such)  in relation  to the club 
if the references  in those  conditions  to a “person”  were  to the 
trustees  or members,  and 
30 (b) the person  has the right  to exercise,  or actually  exercises,  significant 
influence  or control  over  the activities  of that trust  or body  (in whole 
or in part). 79 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  1—Meaning  of “owner” 
Part 1—Conditions  for being  an owner 
PART 2 
INTERPRETATION 
Interpretation 
3 This  Part makes  provision  about  the interpretation  of this Schedule . 
5 Joint  interests 
4 If a person  holds  a share  or right  jointly  with  another  person  (whether  or 
not the other  person  is an individual  or a registered  society),  each  of those 
persons  is to be taken  to hold  that share  or right. 
Joint  arrangements 
10 5 If shares  or rights  held  by a person  and shares  or rights  held  by another 
person  (whether  or not the other  person  is an individual  or a registered (1) 
society)  are the subject  of a joint  arrangement  between  those  persons,  each 
of those  persons  is to be taken  to hold  the combined  shares  or rights  of 
both  persons. 
15 (2) A “joint  arrangement”  is an arrangement  between  the holders  of shares  (or 
rights)  that they  will exercise  all or substantially  all the rights  conferred 
by their  respective  shares  (or rights)  jointly  in a way  that is pre-determined 
by the arrangement. 
(3) For the meaning  of “arrangement”,  see paragraph  12. 
20 Calculating  shareholdings 
6 In relation  to a club  that has a share  capital,  a reference  to holding  more 
than  25% of the shares  in the club  is to holding  shares  comprised  in the (1) 
issued  share  capital  of the club  of a nominal  value  exceeding  (in aggregate) 
25% of that share  capital. 
25 (2) In relation  to a club  that does  not have  a share  capital— 
(a) a reference  to holding  shares  in the club  is to be read  as a reference 
to holding  a right  to share  in the capital  or, as the case may  be, 
profits  of the club; 
(b) 
30a reference  to holding  more  than  25% of the shares  in the club  is 
to be read  as a reference  to holding  a right  or rights  to share  in 
more  than  25% of the capital  or, as the case may  be, profits  of the 
club. 
Voting  rights 
7 
35A reference  to the voting  rights  in a person  is to the rights  conferred  on 
shareholders  in respect  of their  shares  (or, in the case of a person  not having (1) 
a share  capital,  on members)  to vote  at general  meetings  of the person  on 
all or substantially  all matters. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 80 
Schedule  1—Meaning  of “owner” 
Part 2—Interpretation 
(2) In relation  to a person  that does  not have  general  meetings  at which  matters 
are decided  by the exercise  of voting  rights— 
(a) a reference  to holding  voting  rights  in the person  is to be read  as 
5a reference  to holding  rights  in relation  to the person  that are 
equivalent  to those  of a person  entitled  to exercise  voting  rights  in 
a company; 
(b) a reference  to holding  more  than  25% of the voting  rights  in the 
person  is to be read  as a reference  to holding  the rights  under  the 
10constitution  of the person  to block  changes  to the overall  policy  of 
the person  or to the terms  of its constitution. 
8 In applying  this Schedule , voting  rights  in a person  held  by the person 
itself  are to be disregarded. 
Shares  or rights  held “indirectly” 
9 
15A person  (“A”)  holds  a share  “indirectly”  if A has a majority  stake  in a 
person  (“B”)  and B— (1) 
(a) holds  the share,  or 
(b) is part of a chain  of persons— 
(i) each  of which  (other  than  the last) has a majority  stake  in 
the person  immediately  below  it in the chain,  and 
20 (ii) the last of which  holds  the share. 
(2) A person  (“A”)  holds  a right  “indirectly”  if A has a majority  stake  in a 
person  (“B”)  and B— 
(a) holds  that right,  or 
(b) is part of a chain  of persons— 
25 (i) each  of which  (other  than  the last) has a majority  stake  in 
the person  immediately  below  it in the chain,  and 
(ii) the last of which  holds  that right. 
(3) For the purposes  of sub-paragraphs  (1) and (2), A has a “majority  stake” 
in B if A— 
30 (a) holds  a majority  of the voting  rights  in B, 
(b) is a member  of B and has the right  to appoint  or remove  an officer 
of B, 
(c) is a member  of B and controls  alone,  or pursuant  to an agreement 
35with  other  shareholders  or members,  a majority  of the voting  rights 
in B, or 
(d) has the right  to exercise,  or actually  exercises,  dominant  influence 
or control  over  B. 
Shares  held by nominees 
10 
40A share  held  by a person  as a nominee  for another  is to be treated  as held 
by the other  (and  not by the nominee). 81 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  1—Meaning  of “owner” 
Part 2—Interpretation 
Rights  treated  as held by person  who controls  their  exercise 
11 Where  a person  controls  a right,  the right  is to be treated  as held  by that 
person  (and  not by the person  who  in fact holds  the right,  unless  that 
person  also controls  it). (1) 
5 (2) A person  “controls”  a right  if, by virtue  of any arrangement  between  that 
person  and others,  the right  is exercisable  only— 
(a) by that person, 
(b) in accordance  with  that person’s  directions  or instructions,  or 
(c) with  that person’s  consent  or concurrence. 
10 12 For the purposes  of this Schedule  “arrangement”  includes— (1) 
(a) any scheme,  agreement  or understanding,  whether  or not it is legally 
enforceable,  and 
(b) any convention,  custom  or practice  of any kind. 
(2) 
15But something  does  not count  as an arrangement  unless  there  is at least 
some  degree  of stability  about  it (whether  by its nature  or terms,  the time 
it has been  in existence  or otherwise). 
Rights  exercisable  only in certain  circumstances  etc 
13 Rights  that are exercisable  only  in certain  circumstances  are to be taken 
into account  only— (1) 
20 (a) where  the circumstances  have  arisen,  and for so long  as they 
continue  to obtain,  or 
(b) when  the circumstances  are within  the control  of the person  having 
the rights. 
(2) 
25But rights  that are exercisable  by an administrator  or by creditors  while  a 
person  is in relevant  insolvency  proceedings  are not to be taken  into account 
even  while  the person  is in those  proceedings. 
(3) In this paragraph,  “relevant  insolvency  proceedings”  means— 
(a) administration  within  the meaning  of the Insolvency  Act 1986, 
(b) 
30administration  within  the meaning  of the Insolvency  (Northern 
Ireland)  Order  1989  (S.I. 1989/2405  (N.I.  19)),  or 
(c) proceedings  under  the insolvency  law of another  country  or territory 
during  which  a person’s  assets  and affairs  are subject  to the control 
or supervision  of a third  party  or creditor. 
(4) 
35Rights  that are normally  exercisable  but are temporarily  incapable  of exercise 
are to continue  to be taken  into account. 
Rights  attached  to shares  held by way of security 
14 Rights  attached  to shares  held  by way  of security  provided  by a person 
are to be treated  for the purposes  of this Schedule  as held  by that person— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 82 
Schedule  1—Meaning  of “owner” 
Part 2—Interpretation 
(a) where  apart  from  the right  to exercise  them  for the purpose  of 
preserving  the value  of the security,  or of realising  it, the rights  are 
exercisable  only  in accordance  with  that person’s  instructions,  and 
(b) 
5where  the shares  are held  in connection  with  the granting  of loans 
as part of normal  business  activities  and apart  from  the right  to 
exercise  them  for the purpose  of preserving  the value  of the security, 
or of realising  it, the rights  are exercisable  only  in that person’s 
interests. 
Significant  influence  or control  over the activities  of a club,  trust  or other  body 
10 15 The Secretary  of State  must  prepare  and publish  guidance  about  the 
meaning  of significant  influence  or control  for the purposes  of this Schedule . (1) 
(2) Regard  must  be had to that guidance  in interpreting  references  in this 
Schedule  to that phrase. 
(3) 
15Before  publishing  guidance  under  this paragraph  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay a draft  of it before  Parliament. 
(4) If, within  the 40-day  period,  either  House  of Parliament  resolves  not to 
approve  the draft  guidance,  the Secretary  of State  must  take no further 
steps  in relation  to it. 
(5) 
20If no such  resolution  is made  within  that period,  the Secretary  of State  must 
publish  the guidance  in the form  of the draft. 
(6) Sub-paragraph  (4) does  not prevent  a new  draft  of proposed  guidance  from 
being  laid before  Parliament. 
(7) In this paragraph  “the 40-day  period”,  in relation  to draft  guidance,  means 
25the period  of 40 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the draft  is laid 
before  Parliament  (or, if it is not laid before  each  House  on the same  day, 
the later  of the days  on which  it is laid). 
(8) In calculating  the 40-day  period,  no account  is to be taken  of any period 
during  which— 
(a) Parliament  is dissolved  or prorogued,  or 
30 (b) both  Houses  are adjourned  for more  than  4 days. 
(9) The Secretary  of State  may  revise  guidance  published  under  this paragraph , 
and a reference  in this paragraph  to guidance  includes  a reference  to revised 
guidance. 
PART 3 
35 POWER TO AMEND THRESHOLDS ETC 
16 The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  this Schedule  for a 
permitted  purpose. (1) 
(2) The permitted  purposes  are— 83 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  1—Meaning  of “owner” 
Part 3—Power  to amend  thresholds  etc 
(a) to replace  any reference  in this Schedule  to a percentage  figure  with 
a reference  to some  other  (larger  or smaller)  percentage  figure; 
(b) to amend  Part 1 of this Schedule  so as to include  circumstances  (for 
5example,  circumstances  involving  more  complex  structures)  that 
give  a person  a level  of influence  or control  over  a club  broadly 
similar  to the level  of influence  or control  given  by the conditions 
in paragraph  2; 
(c) in consequence  of any provision  made  by virtue  of paragraph  (b), 
10to amend  Part 2 of this Schedule  so that circumstances  specified  in 
that Part in which  a person  is to be regarded  as holding  an interest 
in another  person  correspond  to any of the conditions  in paragraph 
2, or would  do so but for the extent  of the interest. 
(3) Before  making  regulations  under  this paragraph  the Secretary  of State  must 
consult  the IFR. 
Section  5 15 SCHEDULE  2 
THE INDEPENDENT FOOTBALL REGULATOR 
PART 1 
CONSTITUTION OF THE IFR 
Constitution  of the IFR 
20 1 Until  the end of the initial  period,  the IFR is to consist  only  of the Board. (1) 
(2) After  the initial  period  ends,  the IFR is to consist  of— 
(a) the Board,  and 
(b) the Expert  Panel. 
(3) In this paragraph  the “initial  period”  means  the period  which— 
25 (a) begins  with  the commencement  of this Act, and 
(b) ends  with  the time  when  an appointment  of a member  of the Expert 
Panel  takes  effect  that brings  the number  of members  of the Expert 
Panel  up to the number  that the Chief  Executive  Officer  has 
determined  in accordance  with  paragraph  22. 
30 PART 2 
THE BOARD 
Membership 
2 The Board  is to consist  of— (1) 
(a) the non-executive  members,  and 
35 (b) the executive  members. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 84 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 1—Constitution  of the IFR 
(2) The non-executive  members  are— 
(a) a chair,  and 
(b) up to seven  other  members. 
(3) The executive  members  are— 
5 (a) the Chief  Executive  Officer, 
(b) the Chief  Finance  Officer,  and 
(c) one other  member. 
(4) The executive  members  are to be members  of the IFR’s  staff. 
Appointments  to the Board 
10 3 The non-executive  members  are to be appointed  by the Secretary  of State. (1) 
(2) A person  may  not be appointed  as a non-executive  member  if the person 
is a member  of the IFR’s  staff. 
4 The chair  may  appoint  any other  non-executive  member  to be the deputy 
chair. (1) 
15 (2) Before  appointing  a person  as the deputy  chair,  the chair  must  consult  the 
Secretary  of State. 
(3) The deputy  chair  may  carry  out the functions  of the chair  in such  cases 
and in such  manner  as may  be determined  by or in accordance  with  any 
directions  given  by the chair. 
20 5 The Chief  Executive  Officer  is to be appointed  by the chair. (1) 
(2) The other  executive  members  are to be appointed  by the Chief  Executive 
Officer. 
(3) Before  appointing  a person  as the Chief  Executive  Officer,  the chair  must 
consult— 
25 (a) the Secretary  of State,  and 
(b) the non-executive  members. 
6 A person  (“A”)  may  not be appointed  as a member  of the Board  unless  the 
person  appointing  A is satisfied  that A does  not have  a conflict  of interest. (1) 
(2) 
30A person  who  appointed  a member  of the Board  must,  from  time  to time, 
check  that none  of the members  appointed  by them  has a conflict  of interest. 
(3) A person  who  appointed  a member  of the Board  may  require  a member 
appointed  by them  to provide  whatever  information  the person  considers 
necessary  for the purpose  of checking  that the member  does  not have  a 
conflict  of interest. 
35 (4) A member  of the Board  who  is required  to provide  information  under 
sub-paragraph  (3) must  provide  it within  such  period  as may  be specified 
by the person  who  appointed  them. 85 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 2—The  Board 
Tenure  and remuneration  of non-executive  members 
7 A non-executive  member  of the Board  holds  and vacates  office  in accordance 
with  that person’s  terms  of appointment,  subject  to this paragraph  and 
paragraph  8. (1) 
5 (2) Any  appointment  of a non-executive  member  must  be for a fixed  term  of 
not more  than  five years. 
(3) But a person  may  be appointed  as a non-executive  member  more  than 
once. 
(4) 
10A person  may  resign  as a non-executive  member  by notifying  the Secretary 
of State. 
(5) A person  ceases  to be a non-executive  member  upon  becoming  a member 
of the IFR’s  staff. 
8 A non-executive  member  of the Board  may  be removed  from  office  as a 
member  of the Board  if the Secretary  of State  is satisfied  that the person— 
15 (a) is guilty  of serious  misconduct; 
(b) has a conflict  of interest; 
(c) has failed  to comply  with  paragraph  6(4); 
(d) is unable,  unfit  or unwilling  to carry  out their  functions  as a member 
of the Board. 
20 9 The IFR must  pay its non-executive  members  such  remuneration  as the 
Secretary  of State  may  determine. (1) 
(2) The IFR must  pay,  or make  provision  for paying,  to or in respect  of a 
person  who  is or has been  a non-executive  member  of the Board,  such 
25sums  as the Secretary  of State  may  determine  in respect  of allowances  or 
expenses. 
Tenure  etc and remuneration  of members  of the IFR’s  staff (including  executive  members) 
10 The Board  may— (1) 
(a) appoint  employees,  and 
(b) 
30make  such  other  arrangements  for the staffing  of the IFR as it 
considers  appropriate,  including  arrangements  for persons  to be 
seconded  to the IFR. 
(2) This  paragraph  is subject  to paragraph  11. 
11 The terms  on which  executive  members  are, by virtue  of paragraph  2(4), 
to become,  or continue  to be— (1) 
35 (a) persons  seconded  to the IFR under  paragraph  10(1)(b), or 
(b) employees  of the IFR, 
are to be determined  by the non-executive  members,  subject  to paragraph 
12. 
(2) 
40The terms  of employment  of employees  are to be determined  by the 
non-executive  members. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 86 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 2—The  Board 
(3) The IFR must  pay its employees  such  remuneration  as may  be determined 
by the non-executive  members. 
(4) The IFR must  pay,  or make  provision  for paying,  to or in respect  of an 
executive  member  of the IFR, or a member  of the IFR’s  staff— 
5 (a) such  sums  in respect  of pensions,  allowances  or gratuities  relating 
to service  as an executive  member,  or member  of staff,  as may  be 
determined  by the non-executive  members,  and 
(b) such  sums  in respect  of allowances  or expenses  as may  be 
determined  by the non-executive  members. 
10 12 A person  may  resign  as an executive  member  by notifying  the chair. (1) 
(2) A person  ceases  to be an executive  member  upon  ceasing  to be a member 
of the IFR’s  staff. 
(3) An executive  member  may  be removed  from  office  as a member  of the 
Board  if the person  who  appointed  them  is satisfied  that the person— 
15 (a) is guilty  of serious  misconduct; 
(b) has a conflict  of interest; 
(c) has failed  to comply  with  paragraph  6(4); 
(d) is unable,  unfit  or unwilling  to carry  out their  functions  as an 
executive  member. 
20 Exercise  of functions  by the Board 
13 Except  where  otherwise  provided  by this Act (see sections  61 and 82 and 
paragraphs  17 to 20), the functions  of the IFR are exercisable  by the Board 
on behalf  of the IFR. 
Committees  and procedure  of the Board 
25 14 The Board  may  establish  committees. (1) 
(2) A committee  established  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  establish 
sub-committees. 
(3) A committee  or sub-committee  of the Board  may  include  or consist  of 
persons  who  are neither  non-executive  members  nor executive  members. 
30 15 The Board  may  determine  its own  procedure  and the procedure  of any 
committee  or sub-committee,  subject  to this paragraph . (1) 
(2) The quorum  for a meeting  of the Board  is to be determined  by the chair 
but a meeting  of the Board  is not quorate  unless— 
(a) the chair  or deputy  chair  is in attendance,  and 
35 (b) (including  the chair  or deputy  chair)  at least  half of the Board’s 
members  are in attendance. 
(3) A member  of the Board  may  at any time  resign  from  a committee  of the 
Board  by giving  written  notice  to the chair. 87 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 2—The  Board 
(4) The chair  may  remove  a person  from  membership  of a committee  of the 
Board  if the chair  considers  that— 
(a) the person  will be unable,  for a substantial  period,  to perform  their 
duties  as a member  of the committee,  or 
5 (b) because  of a particular  interest  of the member  of the committee,  it 
is inappropriate  for them  to remain  a member  of the committee. 
(5) Where  a person  ceases  to be a member  of a committee  of the Board,  the 
chair  may  select  a replacement  member  of the committee  from  the Board. 
(6) 
10The validity  of proceedings  of the Board,  or a committee  or sub-committee 
of the Board,  is not affected  by a vacancy  or defective  appointment. 
Disqualification  from  acting  in relation  to certain  matters 
16 This  paragraph  applies  if— (1) 
(a) a member  of the Board  has a direct  or indirect  interest  in a matter 
falling  to be considered  at a meeting  of the Board,  or 
15 (b) a member  of a committee  of the Board  has a direct  or indirect 
interest  in a matter  falling  to be considered  at a meeting  of the 
committee  of the Board. 
(2) The member  with  the interest  must  declare  it. 
(3) The declaration  must  be recorded  in the minutes  of the meeting. 
20 (4) The member  with  the interest  may  not take part in a discussion  or decision 
at the meeting  relating  to the matter,  unless— 
(a) in the case of a meeting  of the Board,  the other  members  of the 
Board  who  are present  have  resolved  unanimously  that the interest 
is to be disregarded,  or 
25 (b) in the case of a meeting  of a committee  of the Board,  the other 
members  of the committee  who  are present  have  resolved  in the 
manner  authorised  by the Board  that the interest  is to be 
disregarded. 
(5) 
30For the purposes  of this paragraph , a notification  given  at or sent to a 
meeting  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (1) that a person— 
(a) is a member  of a company  or firm,  and 
(b) is to be regarded  as interested  in any matter  involving  that company 
or firm, 
35is to be regarded  as compliance  with  sub-paragraph  (2) in relation  to any 
such  matter  for the purposes  of that meeting  and subsequent  meetings  of 
the Board  or the committee  of the Board. 
(6) A notification  described  in sub-paragraph  (5) remains  in force  until  it is 
withdrawn. 
(7) 
40A person  required  to make  a declaration  for the purposes  of this paragraph 
in relation  to any meeting— 
(a) is not required  to attend  the meeting,  but Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 88 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 2—The  Board 
(b) is to be taken  to have  complied  with  the requirements  of this 
paragraph  if the person  takes  reasonable  steps  to secure  that notice 
of the person’s  interest  is read  out, and taken  into consideration,  at 
the meeting  in question. 
5 (8) See section  82(10) and (11) for related  provision  (persons  who  can carry 
out internal  reviews). 
Delegation  by the Board  etc 
17 Subject  to paragraph  19, the Board  may  delegate  any of its functions  to— (1) 
(a) a member  of the Board, 
10 (b) a member  of the IFR’s  staff, 
(c) a committee  established  by the Board,  or 
(d) the Expert  Panel. 
(2) A function  is delegated  under  this paragraph  to the extent  and on the terms 
that the Board  determines. 
15 18 Subject  to paragraph  19, a committee  established  by the Board  may  delegate 
any of its functions  to— (1) 
(a) a member  of the committee,  or 
(b) a sub-committee  established  by it. 
(2) 
20A function  is delegated  under  this paragraph  to the extent  and on the terms 
that the committee  of the Board  determines. 
(3) The power  of a committee  established  by the Board  to delegate  a function 
under  this paragraph , and to determine  the extent  and terms  of the 
delegation,  is subject  to the Board’s  power  to direct  what  a committee 
established  by it may  and may  not do. 
25 19 The following  functions  of the Board  may  be delegated  by it only  to a 
committee  established  by it— (1) 
(a) the function  of revoking  a provisional  operating  licence  under  section 
19; 
(b) 
30the function  of making  a determination  under  Part 4 in relation  to 
a person; 
(c) the function  of making  an order  under  section  38 or 43; 
(d) the function  of specifying  a competition  as a prohibited  competition 
under  section  45; 
(e) 
35the function  of suspending  or revoking  an operating  licence  under 
paragraph  9 of Schedule  9; 
(f) the function  of carrying  out a review  requested  under  section  82 of 
any decision  made  by virtue  of the exercise  of a function  mentioned 
in paragraphs  (a) to (e). 
(2) 
40A committee  of the Board  to which  a function  is delegated  under  this 
paragraph  may  not further  delegate  the function. 89 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 2—The  Board 
20 The delegation  of a function  by the Board  under  paragraph  17 or 19, or by 
a committee  of the Board  under  paragraph  18, does  not prevent  the Board 
or a committee  of the Board  (as the case may  be) from  exercising  the 
function. 
5 Records  of proceedings 
21 The Board  must  make  arrangements  for the keeping  of proper  records  of— 
(a) its proceedings, 
(b) the proceedings  of a committee  of the Board,  and 
(c) 
10anything  done  by a person  or committee  to which  the Board  has 
delegated  functions  under  paragraph  17(1). 
PART 3 
THE EXPERT PANEL 
Number  of members 
22 
15The number  of members  of the Expert  Panel  is to be determined  by the 
Chief  Executive  Officer. (1) 
(2) The number  must  not be less than  six. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  the number  for the time 
being  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (2). 
Appointments  to the Expert  Panel 
20 23 The members  of the Expert  Panel  are to be appointed  by the Chief  Executive 
Officer. (1) 
(2) The Chief  Executive  Officer  must  exercise  the power  in sub-paragraph  (1) 
so as to secure  that the range  of skills,  knowledge  and experience  of the 
25members  of the Expert  Panel  (taken  together)  includes  skills,  knowledge 
and experience  in relation  to— 
(a) the operation,  organisation  or governance  of clubs  or competitions, 
and 
(b) financial  or other  regulation. 
(3) 
30A person  (“A”)  may  not be appointed  as a member  of the Expert  Panel 
unless  the Chief  Executive  Officer  is satisfied  that A does  not have  a conflict 
of interest. 
(4) The Chief  Executive  Officer  must,  from  time  to time,  check  that none  of 
the members  of the Expert  Panel  has a conflict  of interest. 
(5) 
35The Chief  Executive  Officer  may  require  a member  of the Expert  Panel  to 
provide  whatever  information  the Chief  Executive  Officer  considers 
necessary  for the purpose  of checking  that the member  does  not have  a 
conflict  of interest. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 90 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 3—The  Expert  Panel 
(6) A member  of the Expert  Panel  who  is required  to provide  information 
under  sub-paragraph  (5) must  provide  it within  such  period  as may  be 
specified  by the Chief  Executive  Officer. 
Tenure  and remuneration  of Expert  Panel  members 
5 24 A member  of the Expert  Panel  holds  and vacates  their  membership  in 
accordance  with  that person’s  terms  of appointment,  subject  to 
sub-paragraph  (2). (1) 
(2) A member  of the Expert  Panel  may  be removed  from  office  as such  a 
member  if the Chief  Executive  Officer  is satisfied  that the person— 
10 (a) is guilty  of serious  misconduct; 
(b) has a conflict  of interest; 
(c) has failed  to comply  with  paragraph  23(6); 
(d) is unable,  unfit  or unwilling  to carry  out their  functions  as a member 
of the Expert  Panel. 
15 (3) The IFR may  pay such  remuneration  or allowances  to persons  appointed 
to the Expert  Panel  as the Chief  Executive  Officer  may  determine. 
Committees  and procedure  of the Expert  Panel 
25 Where  the Board  delegates  a function  to the Expert  Panel  (see paragraph 
2017), the Chief  Executive  Officer  must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable 
after  the Board  delegates  the function,  establish  a committee  of the Expert 
Panel  to carry  out the function. 
26 The Chief  Executive  Officer  must  establish  committees  of the Expert  Panel 
where  required  to so by this Act (see sections  61 and 82 and paragraph 
25). (1) 
25 (2) The Chief  Executive  Officer  may  establish  other  committees  of the Expert 
Panel. 
(3) Each  committee  of the Expert  Panel  must  consist  of at least  three  members 
of the Expert  Panel  appearing  to the Chief  Executive  Officer  to have  skills, 
30knowledge  or experience  relating  to the function  which  is to be exercised 
by the committee. 
(4) The Chief  Executive  Officer  must  appoint  one of the members  of the 
committee  of the Expert  Panel  to chair  the committee. 
(5) A committee  of the Expert  Panel  may  only  consist  of persons  who  are 
members  of the Expert  Panel. 
35 27 The Expert  Panel  may  determine  its own  procedure  and the procedure  of 
any committee. (1) 
(2) A member  of the Expert  Panel  may  at any time  resign  from  a committee 
of the Expert  Panel  by giving  notice  to the Chief  Executive  Officer. 
(3) 
40The Chief  Executive  Officer  may  remove  a person  from  membership  of a 
committee  of the Expert  Panel  if the Chief  Executive  Officer  considers  that— 91 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 3—The  Expert  Panel 
(a) the person  will be unable,  for a substantial  period,  to perform  their 
duties  as a member  of the committee,  or 
(b) because  of a particular  interest  of the member  of the committee,  it 
is inappropriate  for them  to remain  a member  of the committee. 
5 (4) Where  a person  ceases  to be a member  of a committee  of the Expert  Panel, 
the Chief  Executive  Officer  may  select  a replacement  member  of the 
committee  from  the Expert  Panel. 
(5) A person’s  ceasing  to be a member  of a committee  of the Expert  Panel  does 
not— 
10 (a) prevent  the committee  from  continuing  with  anything  begun  before 
the person  ceased  to be a member  of it, or 
(b) affect  anything  done  by the person  or the committee  before  the 
person  ceased  to be a member  of it (unless  the Chief  Executive 
Officer  directs  otherwise). 
15 28 In exercising  its functions,  the Expert  Panel  must  act independently  of the 
Board. (1) 
(2) But sub-paragraph  (1) does  not prevent— 
(a) the Board  giving  information  in its possession  to the Expert  Panel 
(and  the Expert  Panel  having  regard  to that information),  or 
20 (b) the Expert  Panel  giving  information  in its possession  to the Board. 
Disqualification  from  acting  in relation  to certain  matters 
29 This  paragraph  applies  if a member  of a committee  of the Expert  Panel  has 
a direct  or indirect  interest  in a matter  falling  to be considered  at a meeting 
of that committee. (1) 
25 (2) The member  with  the interest  must  declare  it. 
(3) The declaration  must  be recorded  in the minutes  of the meeting. 
(4) The member  with  the interest  may  not take part in a discussion  or decision 
at the meeting  relating  to the matter,  unless  the other  members  of the 
30committee  who  are present  have  resolved  in the manner  authorised  by the 
Chief  Executive  Officer  that the interest  is to be disregarded. 
(5) For the purposes  of this paragraph , a notification  given  at or sent to a 
meeting  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (1) that a person— 
(a) is a member  of a company  or firm,  and 
(b) 
35is to be regarded  as interested  in any matter  involving  that company 
or firm, 
is to be regarded  as compliance  with  sub-paragraph  (2) in relation  to any 
such  matter  for the purposes  of that meeting  and subsequent  meetings  of 
the committee  of the Expert  Panel. 
(6) 
40A notification  described  in sub-paragraph  (5) remains  in force  until  it is 
withdrawn. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 92 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 3—The  Expert  Panel 
(7) A person  required  to make  a declaration  for the purposes  of this paragraph 
in relation  to any meeting— 
(a) is not required  to attend  the meeting,  but 
(b) 
5is to be taken  to have  complied  with  the requirements  of this 
paragraph  if the person  takes  reasonable  steps  to secure  that notice 
of the person’s  interest  is read  out, and taken  into consideration,  at 
the meeting  in question. 
(8) See section  82(10) and (11) for related  provision  (persons  who  can carry 
out internal  reviews). 
10 Records  of Expert  Panel  committee  proceedings 
30 The Chief  Executive  Officer  must  make  arrangements  for the keeping  of 
proper  records  of the proceedings  of a committee  of the Expert  Panel. 
PART 4 
OTHER MATTERS 
15 Appointment  of observer 
31 The Secretary  of State  must  appoint  a representative  of the Football 
Association  as an independent  observer  of the IFR’s  proceedings. 
Accounts  and audit 
32 The IFR must— (1) 
20 (a) keep  proper  accounts  and proper  records  in relation  to them,  and 
(b) prepare  a statement  of accounts  in respect  of each  financial  year. 
(2) Each  statement  of accounts  must  comply  with  any directions  given  by the 
Secretary  of State  as to— 
(a) its content  and form; 
25 (b) the methods  and principles  to be applied  in preparing  it; 
(c) the additional  information  (if any)  which  is to be provided  for the 
information  of Parliament. 
(3) The IFR must  send  a copy  of each  statement  of accounts  to the Secretary 
30of State  and the Comptroller  and Auditor  General  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  the end of the financial  year  to which  the statement  relates. 
(4) The Comptroller  and Auditor  General  must— 
(a) examine,  certify  and report  on each  statement  of accounts,  and 
(b) send  a copy  of each  report  and certified  statement  to the Secretary 
of State. 
35 (5) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a copy  of each  document 
mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (4)(b). 
(6) In this paragraph , “financial  year”  means— 93 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 4—Other  matters 
(a) the period  beginning  with  the day on which  this Schedule  comes 
into force  and ending  with  31 March  in the following  year,  and 
(b) each  successive  period  of 12 months. 
Seal and evidence 
5 33 The application  of the IFR’s  seal must  be authenticated  by the signature 
of— (1) 
(a) a member,  or 
(b) another  person  authorised  for that purpose  by the Board. 
(2) 
10A document  purporting  to be duly  executed  under  the IFR’s  seal or signed 
on its behalf— 
(a) is to be received  in evidence,  and 
(b) is to be taken  to be executed  or signed  in that way,  unless  the 
contrary  is shown. 
Status 
15 34 The IFR is not to be regarded— (1) 
(a) as the servant  or agent  of the Crown,  or 
(b) as enjoying  any status,  immunity  or privilege  of the Crown. 
(2) The IFR’s  property  is not to be regarded— 
(a) as the property  of the Crown,  or 
20 (b) as property  held  on behalf  of the Crown. 
Supplementary  powers 
35 The IFR may  do anything  which  it considers  will facilitate,  or is incidental 
or conducive  to, the carrying  out of its functions  under  this Act. (1) 
(2) But (subject  to paragraph  36) the IFR may  not borrow  money. 
25 Financial  assistance 
36 The Secretary  of State  may  provide  to the IFR such  financial  assistance  as 
the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. (1) 
(2) Financial  assistance  under  this paragraph  may  be provided  subject  to such 
conditions  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 94 
Schedule  2—The  Independent  Football  Regulator 
Part 4—Other  matters 
Section  9 SCHEDULE  3 
TRANSFER SCHEMES 
Transfer  schemes 
1 
5The Secretary  of State  may  make  one or more  property  transfer  schemes 
or staff  transfer  schemes. (1) 
(2) A “property  transfer  scheme”  is a scheme  for the transfer  to the IFR from 
the Secretary  of State  of any property,  rights  or liabilities,  other  than  rights 
or liabilities  under  or in connection  with  a contract  of employment. 
(3) 
10A “staff  transfer  scheme”  is a scheme  for the transfer  to the IFR from  the 
Secretary  of State  of any rights  or liabilities  under  or in connection  with  a 
contract  of employment. 
Supplementary 
2 The things  that may  be transferred  under  a property  transfer  scheme  or a 
staff  transfer  scheme  include— (1) 
15 (a) property,  rights  and liabilities  that could  not otherwise  be 
transferred; 
(b) property  acquired,  and rights  and liabilities  arising,  after  the making 
of the scheme; 
(c) criminal  liabilities. 
20 (2) A property  transfer  scheme  or a staff  transfer  scheme  may  make 
supplementary,  incidental,  transitional  or consequential  provision  and may, 
in particular— 
(a) create  rights,  or impose  liabilities,  in relation  to property  or rights 
transferred; 
25 (b) make  provision  about  the continuing  effect  of things  done  by the 
Secretary  of State  in respect  of anything  transferred; 
(c) make  provision  about  the continuation  of things  (including  legal 
proceedings)  in the process  of being  done  by, on behalf  of, or in 
relation  to, the Secretary  of State  in respect  of anything  transferred; 
30 (d) make  provision  for references  to the Secretary  of State  in an 
instrument  or other  document  in respect  of anything  transferred  to 
be treated  as references  to the IFR. 
(3) A property  transfer  scheme  may  make  provision  for the shared  ownership 
or use of property. 
35 (4) A staff  transfer  scheme  may  make  provision  which  is the same  as or similar 
to the Transfer  of Undertakings  (Protection  of Employment)  Regulations 
2006  (S.I. 2006/246). 
Interpretation 
3 For the purposes  of this Schedule— 95 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Transfer  schemes 
(a) an individual  who  holds  employment  in the civil service  of the State 
is to be treated  as employed  by virtue  of a contract  of employment, 
and 
(b) 
5the terms  of the individual’s  employment  in the civil  service  are to 
be regarded  as constituting  the terms  of the contract  of employment. 
Section  18 SCHEDULE  4 
THRESHOLD REQUIREMENTS 
Threshold  requirements 
1 The threshold  requirements  are— 
10 (a) the financial  resources  threshold  requirement  (see paragraph  2), 
(b) the non-financial  resources  threshold  requirement  (see paragraph 
3), and 
(c) the fan engagement  threshold  requirement  (see paragraph  4). 
Financial  resources 
15 2 The financial  resources  threshold  requirement  is met,  in relation  to a club, 
if the financial  resources  of the club  are appropriate  in relation  to the 
activities  the club  carries  on or seeks  to carry  on. (1) 
(2) In considering  whether  a club  has appropriate  financial  resources,  the IFR 
may  have  regard  to (among  other  things)— 
20 (a) the corporate  structure  of the club  and,  where  the club  is part of a 
group,  the group; 
(b) the club’s  latest  financial  plan  (see paragraph  2 of Schedule  5), 
including  in particular— 
(i) any financial  risks  identified  in the plan,  and 
25 (ii) any plans  described  in the plan  for managing  those  risks; 
(c) the club’s  strategic  business  plan  (see section  16(5)); 
(d) the specified  competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is 
operated  by the club; 
(e) 
30any other  competitions  in relation  to which  a team  is operated  by 
the club; 
(f) the club’s  non-financial  resources. 
Non-financial  resources 
3 The non-financial  resources  threshold  requirement  is met,  in relation  to a 
35club,  if the non-financial  resources  of the club  are appropriate  in relation 
to the activities  the club  carries  on or seeks  to carry  on. (1) 
(2) In considering  whether  a club  has appropriate  non-financial  resources,  the 
IFR may  have  regard  to (among  other  things)— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 96 
Schedule  4—Threshold  requirements 
(a) the corporate  structure  of the club  and,  where  the club  is part of a 
group,  the group; 
(b) the qualifications,  experience,  training  and performance  of the club’s 
owners  and officers; 
5 (c) the club’s  corporate  governance  arrangements,  including  the club’s 
latest  corporate  governance  statement  (see paragraph  4 of Schedule 
5); 
(d) the specified  competition  in relation  to which  a relevant  team  is 
operated  by the club; 
10 (e) any other  competitions  in relation  to which  a team  is operated  by 
the club; 
(f) the club’s  financial  resources. 
Fan engagement 
4 
15The fan engagement  threshold  requirement  is met,  in relation  to a club,  if 
the club  has adequate  and effective  means  by which— (1) 
(a) the club  consults  its fans about  the relevant  matters,  and 
(b) the club  takes  the views  of its fans into account  in making  decisions 
about  the relevant  matters. 
(2) The relevant  matters  are matters  relating  to— 
20 (a) the club’s  strategic  direction  and objectives; 
(b) the club’s  business  priorities; 
(c) operational  and match-day  issues,  including  ticket  pricing; 
(d) the club’s  heritage; 
(e) the club’s  plans  relating  to additional  fan engagement. 
25 (3) Matters  that relate  to the club’s  heritage  include  matters  relating  to— 
(a) the club’s  home  ground  (within  the meaning  of section  46); 
(b) the crest  or predominant  home  shirt  colours  of a relevant  team 
operated  by the club; 
(c) the name  of a relevant  team  operated  by the club. 
30 (4) If the club  is in relevant  insolvency  proceedings  (within  the meaning  given 
by paragraph  13(3) of Schedule  1) sub-paragraph  (1)(b) applies  to the extent 
that the power  to make  decisions  about  the relevant  matters  remains 
exercisable  by the club. 
Interpretation 
35 5 For the purposes  of this Schedule — 
(a) an undertaking  (within  the meaning  of Part 1 of the Competition 
Act 1998)  is part of a group  if one or more  bodies  corporate  which 
are comprised  in the undertaking  are members  of the same  group 
as one or more  other  bodies  corporate; 
40 (b) two or more  bodies  corporate  are members  of the same  group  if— 
(i) one is the subsidiary  of another,  or 97 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  4—Threshold  requirements 
(ii) both  are subsidiaries  of the same  body  corporate; 
(c) “subsidiary”  has the meaning  given  by section  1159  of the 
Companies  Act 2006. 
Section  20 SCHEDULE  5 
5 MANDATORY LICENCE CONDITIONS 
Introduction 
1 The IFR must  attach  to each  operating  licence— 
(a) a financial  plans  condition, 
(b) a corporate  governance  statement  condition, 
10 (c) a fan consultation  condition,  and 
(d) an annual  declaration  condition. 
Financial  plans 
2 A financial  plans  condition  is a condition  requiring  a club  to— 
(a) 
15submit  a financial  plan  containing  specified  information  to the IFR 
before  a specified  date, 
(b) update  the financial  plan— 
(i) annually  or at such  more  frequent  intervals  as may  be 
specified,  and 
(ii) 
20as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  there  has been  a 
material  change  in circumstances  affecting  the club,  and 
submit  that updated  plan  to the IFR, and 
(c) act in accordance  with  the latest  financial  plan  submitted  to the IFR. 
3 For the purposes  of paragraph  2(a), the IFR— 
(a) must  specify— 
25 (i) information  about  how  the club  is, or is to be, funded  and 
the source  of such  funding, 
(ii) information  about  expected  revenues  and expenses,  and 
(iii) financial  risk assessments  and plans  for managing  financial 
risks,  and 
30 (b) may  specify  such  other  information  as the IFR considers  necessary 
for the purpose  of exercising  its functions  under  this Act. 
Corporate  governance  statement 
4 A corporate  governance  statement  condition  is a condition  requiring  a club 
to— 
35 (a) submit  a corporate  governance  statement  to the IFR before  a 
specified  date,  and Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 98 
Schedule  5—Mandatory  licence  conditions 
(b) update  the statement— 
(i) at specified  intervals,  and 
(ii) as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  there  has been  a 
5material  change  in the corporate  governance  arrangements 
at the club,  and 
submit  that updated  statement  to the IFR. 
5 The condition  must  require— 
(a) the corporate  governance  statement  to explain— 
(i) 
10how  the club  is applying  the code  published  under 
paragraph  7, and 
(ii) what  action  the club  is taking  to improve  equality,  diversity 
and inclusion,  and 
(b) the club  to publish  its latest  corporate  governance  statement  online 
15as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  it has been  submitted  to the 
IFR. 
6 The IFR must  publish  the latest  corporate  governance  statement  of each 
regulated  club  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  each  statement  is 
submitted  to the IFR. (1) 
(2) The IFR must  also publish  a corporate  governance  report. 
20 (3) The report  must— 
(a) summarise  the extent  to which  regulated  clubs  are applying  the 
code  published  under  paragraph  7, 
(b) set out the main  issues  that the IFR considers  to arise  from  the 
corporate  governance  statements  submitted  to the IFR, and 
25 (c) recommend  ways  in which  regulated  clubs  may  improve  their 
corporate  governance  arrangements. 
(4) The report  must— 
(a) be made  at such  time  and in such  form  as is specified  by the IFR 
in rules; 
30 (b) include  such  other  matters  as may  be specified  by the IFR in rules. 
7 The IFR must  prepare  and publish  a code  of practice  about  the corporate 
governance  of regulated  clubs. (1) 
(2) “Corporate  governance”,  in relation  to a club,  includes— 
(a) the nature,  constitution  or functions  of the organs  of the club, 
35 (b) the manner  in which  the organs  of the club  conduct  themselves, 
(c) the requirements  imposed  on organs  of the club, 
(d) the approach  of the club  to equality,  diversity  and inclusion,  and 
(e) the relationship  between  different  organs  of the club. 
(3) The IFR— 
40 (a) must  keep  the code  of practice  under  review,  and 
(b) may  from  time  to time  prepare  and publish  alterations  to the code 
or a replacement  code. 99 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  5—Mandatory  licence  conditions 
(4) Before  publishing  a code  of practice  or any alterations  to the code,  except 
where  the IFR considers  that the alterations  are minor,  the IFR must 
consult— 
(a) the Football  Association,  and 
5 (b) such  other  persons  as appear  to the IFR to be representative  of 
persons  likely  to be affected  by the code. 
(5) A code  of practice  published  under  this paragraph  comes  into force  on the 
day specified  in it. 
(6) 
10Alterations  to the code  of practice  come  into force  on the day specified  in 
the alterations  for that purpose. 
Fan consultation 
8 A fan consultation  condition  is a condition  requiring  a club  to carry  out 
regular  consultation  on relevant  matters  with— (1) 
(a) persons  elected  by the club’s  fans to represent  their  views,  or 
15 (b) persons  otherwise  appearing  to the IFR to represent  the views  of 
the club’s  fans. 
(2) So far as the condition  requires  consultation  with  persons  within 
sub-paragraph  (1)(a), the condition  may  require  the club  to constitute  a 
group  of such  persons  for that purpose. 
20 (3) In considering  whether  the condition  should  require  consultation  with 
persons  within  sub-paragraph  (1)(a), the IFR must  have  regard  to— 
(a) the club’s  corporate  governance  arrangements, 
(b) the size and composition  of the club’s  fanbase,  and 
(c) the club’s  financial  and non-financial  resources. 
25 (4) In sub-paragraph  (1) “relevant  matters”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph 
4(2) of Schedule  4. 
(5) In sub-paragraph  (3) “corporate  governance”  has the meaning  given  by 
paragraph  7(2). 
9 
30The condition  may  require  the consultation  to take place  by specified  means 
or at specified  intervals. (1) 
(2) In considering  what  to specify  for the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (1), the 
IFR must  have  regard  to— 
(a) the size and composition  of the club’s  fanbase,  and 
(b) the club’s  financial  and non-financial  resources. 
35 Annual  declaration 
10 An annual  declaration  condition  is a condition  requiring  a club  to submit 
an annual  declaration  to the IFR on a specified  date  or at specified  intervals. 
11 The condition  must  require  the declaration  to contain— 
(a) either— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 100 
Schedule  5—Mandatory  licence  conditions 
(i) a description  of any matter  notified,  or that should  have 
been  notified,  to the IFR in accordance  with  section  27, 33 
or 50 during  the previous  12 months,  or 
(ii) a statement  that there  were  no such  matters  to notify,  and 
5 (b) such  other  specified  information. 
Interpretation 
12 In this Schedule , “specified”  (unless  stated  otherwise)  means  specified  in 
the condition  concerned. 
Section  24 SCHEDULE  6 
10 COMMITMENTS IN LIEU OF FINANCIAL DISCRETIONARY LICENCE CONDITIONS 
Application  of Schedule 
1 This Schedule  applies  for the purposes  of commitments  mentioned  in section 
23(3)(c)(ii) in relation  to— 
(a) 
15the IFR accepting  a commitment  from  a specified  competition 
organiser, 
(b) the IFR accepting  a variation  of a commitment  (a “requested 
variation”),  or 
(c) the IFR releasing  a specified  competition  organiser  from  a 
commitment. 
20 Procedure  for accepting  a commitment  or requested  variation 
2 Before  accepting  a commitment  or a requested  variation  from  a specified 
competition  organiser,  the IFR must— (1) 
(a) give  a notice  to the club  concerned,  and 
(b) 
25have  regard  to any representations  made  in accordance  with  the 
notice. 
(2) The notice  must— 
(a) include  the commitment  or requested  variation  that the IFR proposes 
to accept, 
(b) 
30give  the IFR’s  reasons  for proposing  to accept  the commitment  or 
variation,  and 
(c) specify  the period  within  which  representations  may  be made  in 
relation  to the proposed  commitment  or variation. 
(3) The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a 
35period  of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice 
is given. 101 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  6—Commitments  in lieu of financial  discretionary  licence  conditions 
3 The IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  deciding  whether  to 
accept  a commitment  or requested  variation,  give  a notice  of its decision 
to the club  and the specified  competition  organiser  concerned. 
4 
5Paragraph  2 does  not apply  in relation  to a proposed  variation  which  the 
IFR does  not consider  material. 
Procedure  for releasing  a specified  competition  organiser  from  a commitment 
5 Before  releasing  a specified  competition  organiser  from  a commitment,  the 
IFR must— (1) 
(a) 
10give  a notice  to the club  concerned  and the specified  competition 
organiser,  and 
(b) have  regard  to any representations  made  in accordance  with  the 
notice. 
(2) The notice  must— 
(a) 
15include  a statement  that the IFR proposes  to release  the specified 
competition  organiser  from  the commitment, 
(b) give  the reasons  for the IFR’s  proposal,  and 
(c) specify  the period  within  which  representations  may  be made  in 
relation  to the proposal. 
(3) 
20The period  specified  in the notice  for making  representations  must  be a 
period  of not less than  14 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice 
is given. 
6 The IFR must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  deciding  whether  to 
release  a specified  competition  organiser  from  a commitment,  give  a notice 
of its decision  to the club and the specified  competition  organiser  concerned. 
Section  67 25 SCHEDULE  7 
MEANING OF “RELEVANT INFRINGEMENT” 
Introduction 
1 This  Schedule  sets out when  a person  commits  a relevant  infringement  for 
the purposes  of this Act. 
30 Relevant  infringements  committed  by clubs 
2 A club  commits  a relevant  infringement  if it— (1) 
(a) operates  a relevant  team,  and 
(b) does  not hold  an operating  licence. 
(2) 
35A club  also commits  a relevant  infringement  if the club  fails to comply 
with— 
(a) a condition  attached  to an operating  licence  held  by it; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 102 
Schedule  7—Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” 
(b) a requirement  imposed  on it by section  27 or 33; 
(c) a direction  given  to it under  section  40, 41 or 42; 
(d) a requirement  imposed  on it by or under  an order  under  section 
43; 
5 (e) a duty  or prohibition  imposed  on it by any of sections  45 to 53; 
(f) a commitment  accepted  under  section  70; 
(g) an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
(h) any rule made  by the IFR. 
(3) 
10A club  also commits  a relevant  infringement  if the club  fails to co-operate 
with  or assist,  or otherwise  obstructs— 
(a) an individual  appointed  as an officer  by virtue  of an order  under 
section  42; 
(b) a trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  section  43; 
(c) an expert  reporter  appointed  under  section  66; 
15 (d) a skilled  person  appointed  by virtue  of paragraph  5 of Schedule  9. 
(4) A club  is deemed  to have  committed  a relevant  infringement  if— 
(a) instead  of granting  the club  a full operating  licence  in accordance 
with  section  18(6)(a), the IFR— 
(i) 
20specifies  a further  period  for which  the club’s  provisional 
operating  licence  is to have  effect  in accordance  with  section 
18(6)(b), or 
(ii) revokes  the club’s  provisional  operating  licence  in accordance 
with  section  19; 
(b) an owner  of the club  fails to comply  with— 
25 (i) a direction  given  to the owner  under  section  39 or 41, or 
(ii) a requirement  imposed  on the owner  by or under  an order 
under  section  43; 
(c) an officer  of the club  fails to comply  with  a direction  given  to the 
officer  under  section  40 or 41; 
30 (d) an owner  or officer  of the club  fails to co-operate  with  or assist,  or 
otherwise  obstructs— 
(i) an individual  appointed  as an officer  by virtue  of an order 
under  section  42; 
(ii) a trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  section  43. 
35 Relevant  infringements  committed  by owners  of clubs 
3 An owner  of a club  commits  a relevant  infringement  if the owner— 
(a) fails to comply  with  a requirement  imposed  on the owner  by section 
27 or 33; 
(b) fails to comply  with— 
40 (i) a direction  given  to the owner  under  section  39 or 41, or 
(ii) a requirement  imposed  on the owner  by or under  an order 
under  section  43; 103 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  7—Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” 
(c) fails to co-operate  with  or assist,  or otherwise  obstructs— 
(i) an individual  appointed  as an officer  by virtue  of an order 
under  section  42; 
(ii) a trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  section  43; 
5 (d) fails to comply  with  a commitment  accepted  under  section  70; 
(e) fails to comply  with  an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
(f) fails to comply  with  any rule made  by the IFR. 
Relevant  infringements  committed  by officers  of clubs 
4 An officer  of a club  commits  a relevant  infringement  if the officer— 
10 (a) fails to comply  with  a requirement  imposed  on the officer  by section 
27 or 33; 
(b) fails to comply  with  a direction  given  to the officer  under  section 
40 or 41; 
(c) fails to co-operate  with  or assist,  or otherwise  obstructs— 
15 (i) an individual  appointed  as an officer  by virtue  of an order 
under  section  42; 
(ii) a trustee  appointed  by virtue  of an order  under  section  43; 
(d) fails to comply  with  a commitment  accepted  under  section  70; 
(e) fails to comply  with  an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
20 (f) fails to comply  with  any rule made  by the IFR. 
Relevant  infringements  committed  by senior  managers  of clubs 
5 A senior  manager  of a club  commits  a relevant  infringement  if— (1) 
(a) the club,  without  reasonable  excuse,  commits  a relevant 
infringement,  and 
25 (b) the relevant  infringement  is connected  to a senior  management 
function  carried  out by the senior  manager. 
(2) A senior  manager  also commits  a relevant  infringement  if the senior 
manager  fails to comply  with  a commitment  accepted  under  section  70. 
Relevant  infringements  committed  by specified  competition  organisers 
30 6 A specified  competition  organiser  commits  a relevant  infringement  if the 
organiser  fails to comply  with— 
(a) a commitment  accepted  by the IFR under  section  24; 
(b) a requirement  imposed  by section  55 (duties  to notify  and consult 
with  the IFR); 
35 (c) a distribution  order  made  under  section  62; 
(d) a commitment  accepted  under  section  70; 
(e) an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
(f) any rule made  by the IFR. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 104 
Schedule  7—Meaning  of “relevant  infringement” 
Relevant  infringements  committed  by other  persons 
7 A person  who  is not a club,  an owner  or officer  of a club  or a specified 
competition  organiser  commits  a relevant  infringement  if the person  fails 
to comply  with  a requirement  imposed  on the person  by— 
5 (a) section  27 (duty  to notify  where  prospect  of becoming  a new  owner 
or officer); 
(b) section  46 (duty  not to dispose  of etc home  ground  without 
approval); 
(c) section  47 (duty  not to appoint  administrator  without  approval); 
10 (d) an urgent  direction  under  section  79; 
(e) any rule made  by the IFR. 
Section  68 SCHEDULE  8 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS 
Application  of this Schedule 
15 1 This  Schedule  applies  where  the IFR decides  to conduct  an investigation 
under  section  68 into whether  a person  has committed  a relevant 
infringement. 
Power  to ask questions 
2 
20The IFR may  give  any person  (whether  or not the person  mentioned  in 
paragraph  1) a notice  (“an interview  notice”)  requiring  the person  to answer 
questions  that relate  to any matter  relevant  to the investigation. (1) 
(2) An interview  notice  must— 
(a) include  details  of the investigation; 
(b) 
25state  the place  at which,  or the manner  in which  (which  may  be 
remote),  the person  is to answer  the questions; 
(c) state  the time  at which  the person  is to answer  the questions; 
(d) include  information  about  the possible  consequences  under  Part 8 
of not complying  with  the notice. 
Power  to enter  business  premises  under  a warrant 
30 3 On an application  made  to it by the IFR, the court  or Tribunal  may  issue 
a warrant  if it is satisfied  that there  are reasonable  grounds  for suspecting (1) 
that there  is on, or accessible  from,  any business  premises  information  that 
relates  to any matter  relevant  to the investigation  (“relevant  information”). 
(2) 
35A warrant  under  this paragraph  authorises  an officer  of the IFR named  in 
the warrant  (“the  authorised  officer”),  and any other  of the IFR’s  officers 
whom  the IFR’s  Board  has authorised  in writing  to accompany  the 
authorised  officer,  to— 105 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  8—Investigatory  powers 
(a) enter  the premises  specified  in the warrant,  using  such  force  as is 
reasonably  necessary; 
(b) take onto  the premises  such  equipment  as appears  to the authorised 
officer  to be necessary; 
5 (c) search  the premises  for information  appearing  to be relevant 
information; 
(d) operate  any equipment  found  on the premises  for the purpose  of 
producing  information; 
(e) 
10require  any person  on the premises  to provide  such  assistance  as 
the authorised  officer  may  reasonably  require  (including  providing 
passwords  or encryption  keys  and operating  equipment  on the 
premises); 
(f) require  any person  on the premises  to give  information  to the 
authorised  officer; 
15 (g) require  any person  on the premises  to state,  to the best of their 
knowledge  and belief,  where  relevant  information  may  be found; 
(h) take copies  of, or extracts  from,  any information  appearing  to be 
relevant  information; 
(i) 
20take possession  of any information  appearing  to be relevant 
information  that is produced  under  paragraph  (d) or given  to the 
authorised  officer  under  paragraph  (f); 
(j) take possession  of any other  information  appearing  to be relevant 
information  if— 
(i) 
25such  action  appears  to be necessary  for preserving  the 
information  or preventing  interference  with  it, or 
(ii) it is not reasonably  practicable  to take copies  of the 
information  on the premises; 
(k) take any other  steps  which  appear  to be necessary  for the purpose 
30of preserving  any information  appearing  to be relevant  information 
or preventing  interference  with  it. 
(3) Any  information  which  is given  to an officer  under  sub-paragraph  (2) must 
be in a form— 
(a) in which  it can be taken  away,  and 
(b) 
35which  is visible  and legible  or from  which  it can be readily  be 
generated  in a visible  and legible  form. 
(4) A warrant  under  this paragraph  may  authorise  persons  specified  in the 
warrant  to accompany  the authorised  officer  who  is executing  it. 
(5) A warrant  under  this paragraph  continues  in force  until  the end of the 
period  of one month  beginning  with  the day on which  it is issued. 
40 (6) Any  information  which  the IFR obtains  under  sub-paragraph  (2) may  be 
retained  by the IFR for a period  of three  months. 
(7) An application  for a warrant  under  this paragraph  must— 
(a) in the case of an application  to the court,  be made  in accordance 
with  rules  of court; Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 106 
Schedule  8—Investigatory  powers 
(b) in the case of an application  to the Tribunal,  be made  in accordance 
with  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules. 
(8) The IFR may  not make  an application  under  this paragraph  to the court 
5or the Tribunal  unless  the IFR’s  Board  has approved  the making  of the 
application. 
(9) In this paragraph,  “court”  means  the High  Court. 
4 A warrant  under  paragraph  3 must  describe— (1) 
(a) the subject-matter  and purpose  of the investigation; 
(b) the offence  created  by section  78(5). 
10 (2) The powers  conferred  by paragraph  3 are exercisable  only  on production 
of the warrant  issued  under  that paragraph. 
(3) Before  executing  a warrant  under  paragraph  3, the authorised  officer  must— 
(a) take reasonable  steps  to inform  the occupier  of the premises  of the 
intended  entry,  and 
15 (b) afford  the occupier  or their  legal  or other  representative  a reasonable 
opportunity  to be present  when  the warrant  is executed. 
(4) But sub-paragraph  (3) does  not apply  if the authorised  officer  considers 
that so informing  the occupier  would  prejudice  the execution  of the warrant. 
(5) 
20If the authorised  officer  is unable  to, or under  sub-paragraph  (4) does  not, 
inform  the occupier  of the intended  entry  they  must,  when  executing  the 
warrant,  leave  a copy  of it in a prominent  place  on the premises. 
(6) On leaving  any premises  which  they  have  entered  by virtue  of a warrant 
under  paragraph  3, the authorised  officer  must,  if the premises  are 
25unoccupied  or the occupier  is temporarily  absent,  leave  them  as effectively 
secured  as they  found  them. 
Section  75 SCHEDULE  9 
SANCTIONS 
PART 1 
SANCTIONS RELATING TO INFORMATION ETC 
30 Introduction 
1 Paragraphs  2 and 3 apply  where— 
(a) the IFR determines  that a person  (“P”)  has, without  reasonable 
excuse,  failed  to comply  with  an information  requirement  (see section 
75(2)), or 
35 (b) the IFR is satisfied  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that P has committed 
an offence  under  section  78. 107 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 1—Sanctions  relating  to information  etc 
Censure  statements 
2 The IFR may  prepare  and publish  a censure  statement. (1) 
(2) A censure  statement  is a statement  that— 
(a) states  the identity  of P, 
5 (b) states  the information  requirement  that the IFR has determined  that 
P has failed  to comply  with  or the offence  that the IFR is satisfied 
P has committed, 
(c) explains  why  the IFR determined  that P failed  to comply  with  that 
10requirement  or is satisfied  that P committed  the offence  (as the case 
may  be), and 
(d) explains  why  the IFR considers  it appropriate  to publish  a statement 
under  this paragraph  in respect  of P. 
Financial  penalties 
3 The IFR may  impose  a financial  penalty  on P. (1) 
15 (2) The amount  of a penalty  imposed  under  this paragraph  may  be such 
amount  as the IFR considers  appropriate,  provided  it does  not exceed  the 
amount  set out in whichever  of sub-paragraphs  (5) to (9) applies. 
(3) Where  the IFR imposes  a penalty  under  this paragraph  it may  provide  that 
20the amount  of the penalty  is reduced  to, or by, a specified  amount  if the 
penalty  is paid  before  a day specified  in a decision  notice  under  section 
77. 
(4) The amount  of a penalty  imposed  under  this paragraph  must  be— 
(a) a fixed  amount, 
(b) an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  or 
25 (c) a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(5) Where  P is a club  or a competition  organiser,  the maximum  amount  of a 
penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) 
30in the case of a fixed  amount,  an amount  equal  to 10% of the total 
revenue  of the club or organiser  (both  inside  and outside  the United 
Kingdom); 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the club 
or organiser  (both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
35 (c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 108 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 1—Sanctions  relating  to information  etc 
(6) Where  P is a body  that is not a regulated  club  but has been  a regulated 
club,  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this 
paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  the higher  of— 
5 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the total  revenue  of the body’s 
(both  within  and outside  the United  Kingdom),  and 
(ii) £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day the higher  of— 
10 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the body 
(both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom),  and 
(ii) £25,000; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
15 (i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(7) Where  P is an owner  of a club  (including  where  P is also a senior  manager 
20or other  officer  of the club),  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may 
be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  an amount  equal  to 10% of the total 
revenue  of the club  (both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
25each  day an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the club 
(both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) 
30paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(8) Where  P is an officer  of a club  (including  where  P is a senior  manager  of 
the club,  but not where  P is also an owner  of the club),  the maximum 
amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  the higher  of— 
35 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the officer’s  remuneration,  and 
(ii) £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day the higher  of— 
(i) 
40an amount  equal  to 10% of the officer’s  daily  remuneration, 
and 
(ii) £25,000; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 109 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 1—Sanctions  relating  to information  etc 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(9) In any other  case,  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed 
under  this paragraph  is— 
5 (a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate, 
£25,000  per day; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
10 (i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(10) Where  a club  or body  is an undertaking  that is part of a group,  references 
15in sub-paragraphs  (5), (6) and (7) to the revenue  of the club  or body  are 
to the revenue  of that group. 
PART 2 
SANCTIONS RELATING TO RELEVANT INFRINGEMENTS 
Censure  statements 
4 
20This  paragraph  applies  where  the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of 
an investigation  or otherwise)  that a person  (“P”)  has, without  reasonable 
excuse,  committed  a relevant  infringement. (1) 
(2) The IFR may  prepare  and publish  a censure  statement. 
(3) A censure  statement  is a statement  that— 
(a) states  the identity  of P, 
25 (b) states  the relevant  infringement  that the IFR has determined  that P 
has committed, 
(c) explains  why  the IFR determined  that P has committed  the relevant 
infringement,  and 
(d) 
30explains  why  the IFR considers  it appropriate  to publish  a statement 
under  this paragraph  in respect  of P. 
Appointment  of a skilled  person 
5 This  paragraph  applies  where— (1) 
(a) the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of an investigation  or 
35otherwise)  that a club  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed  a 
relevant  infringement,  and 
(b) the infringement  is continuing. 
(2) The IFR may  require  the club  to appoint  a person  nominated  by the IFR 
(“a skilled  person”)  to assist  the club  in bringing  the relevant  infringement 
to an end. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 110 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 2—Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements 
(3) The IFR may  only  nominate  a person  if the IFR is satisfied  that the person— 
(a) has the skills  necessary  to assist  the club  in bringing  the relevant 
infringement  to an end,  and 
(b) does  not have  a conflict  of interest. 
5 (4) Where  a skilled  person  is appointed  by virtue  of this paragraph,  the club 
must— 
(a) co-operate  with  the skilled  person,  and 
(b) give  the skilled  person  such  reasonable  assistance  as the skilled 
10person  requests  (including  access  to business  premises,  equipment, 
services,  information  and individuals), 
in connection  with  bringing  the relevant  infringement  to an end. 
Financial  penalties 
6 This  paragraph  applies  where  the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of 
15an investigation  or otherwise)  that a person  (“P”)  has, without  reasonable 
excuse,  committed  a relevant  infringement. (1) 
(2) The IFR may  impose  a financial  penalty  on P. 
(3) The amount  of a penalty  imposed  under  this paragraph  may  be such 
amount  as the IFR considers  appropriate,  provided  it does  not exceed  the 
amount  set out in whichever  of sub-paragraphs  (6) to (10) applies. 
20 (4) Where  the IFR imposes  a penalty  under  this paragraph  it may  provide  that 
the amount  of the penalty  is reduced  to, or by, a specified  amount  if the 
penalty  is paid  before  a day specified  in a decision  notice  under  section 
77. 
(5) The amount  of a penalty  imposed  under  this paragraph  must  be— 
25 (a) a fixed  amount, 
(b) an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  or 
(c) a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(6) 
30Where  P is a club  or a competition  organiser,  the maximum  amount  of a 
penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  an amount  equal  to 10% of the total 
revenue  of the club or organiser  (both  inside  and outside  the United 
Kingdom); 
(b) 
35in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the club 
or organiser  (both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
40 (ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 111 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 2—Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements 
(7) Where  P is a body  that is not a regulated  club  but has been  a regulated 
club,  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this 
paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  the higher  of— 
5 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the total  revenue  of the body’s 
(both  within  and outside  the United  Kingdom),  and 
(ii) £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day the higher  of— 
10 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the body 
(both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom),  and 
(ii) £25,000; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
15 (i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(8) Where  P is an owner  of a club  (including  where  P is also a senior  manager 
20or other  officer  of the club),  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may 
be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  an amount  equal  to 10% of the total 
revenue  of the club  (both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
25each  day an amount  equal  to 10% of the daily  revenue  of the club 
(both  inside  and outside  the United  Kingdom); 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) 
30paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(9) Where  P is an officer  of a club  (including  where  P is a senior  manager  of 
the club  but not where  P is also an owner  of the club),  the maximum 
amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed  under  this paragraph  is— 
(a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  the higher  of— 
35 (i) an amount  equal  to 10% of the officer’s  remuneration,  and 
(ii) £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  for 
each  day the higher  of— 
(i) 
40an amount  equal  to 10% of the officer’s  daily  remuneration, 
and 
(ii) £25,000; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
(i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 112 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 2—Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(10) In any other  case,  the maximum  amount  of a penalty  that may  be imposed 
under  this paragraph  is— 
5 (a) in the case of a fixed  amount,  £75,000; 
(b) in the case of an amount  calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate, 
£25,000  per day; 
(c) in the case of a combination  of a fixed  amount  and an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the amount  specified  in— 
10 (i) paragraph  (a), in relation  to the fixed  amount,  and 
(ii) paragraph  (b), in relation  to the amount  calculated  by 
reference  to a daily  rate. 
(11) Where  a club  or body  is an undertaking  that is part of a group,  references 
15in sub-paragraphs  (6), (7) and (8) to the revenue  of the club  or body  are 
to the revenue  of that group. 
Injunctive  relief 
7 This  paragraph  applies  where— (1) 
(a) the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of an investigation  or 
20otherwise)  that a person  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed 
a relevant  infringement  to which  sub-paragraph  (2) applies,  and 
(b) the relevant  infringement  is continuing. 
(2) This  sub-paragraph  applies  to relevant  infringements  that are relevant 
infringements  by virtue  of any of the following  provisions  of Schedule  7— 
(a) paragraph  2(1); 
25 (b) paragraph  2(2)(c), (d) or (g); 
(c) paragraph  2(3)(a) or (b); 
(d) paragraph  3(b), (c) or (e); 
(e) paragraph  4(b), (c) or (e); 
(f) paragraph  6(c) or (e); 
30 (g) paragraph  7(d). 
(3) The IFR may  apply  to the Tribunal  for an injunction  to bring  the relevant 
infringement  to an end. 
(4) Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  may  make  provision  about  the transfer  from  the 
35Tribunal  to the High  Court  of all or any part of an application  under 
sub-paragraph  (3). 
Suspension  or revocation  of operating  licence 
8 Paragraph  9 applies  where— (1) 
(a) the IFR determines  (whether  as a result  of an investigation  or 
40otherwise)  that a club  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  committed  a 
relevant  infringement,  and 113 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 2—Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements 
(b) one or more  of the aggravating  conditions  are met in relation  to the 
relevant  infringement. 
(2) The first aggravating  condition  is that— 
(a) the relevant  infringement  is intentional  and persistent,  and 
5 (b) the IFR has already  taken  action  in accordance  with  this Part of this 
Schedule  and considers  that there  is no further  action  it could  take 
under  this Part of this Schedule  (other  than  action  under  paragraph 
9) that would  bring  the relevant  infringement  to an end. 
(3) The second  aggravating  condition  is that— 
10 (a) the club  has intentionally  and persistently  failed  to co-operate  with 
the IFR in relation  to any investigation  into the relevant 
infringement,  and 
(b) the IFR has already  taken  action  in accordance  with  this Part of this 
15Schedule  and considers  that there  is no further  action  it could  take 
under  this Part of this Schedule  (other  than  action  under  paragraph 
9) that would  bring  the relevant  infringement  to an end. 
(4) The third  aggravating  condition  is that the relevant  infringement  jeopardises 
the IFR’s  ability  to advance  one or more  of its objectives. 
(5) 
20For the purposes  of this paragraph,  behaviour  is persistent  if the behaviour 
has occurred  on a sufficient  number  of occasions  for it to be clear  that it 
represents  a pattern  of behaviour  or practice. 
9 The IFR may— (1) 
(a) suspend  the club’s  operating  licence,  or 
(b) revoke  the club’s  operating  licence  from  a day specified  by the IFR. 
25 (2) Where  the IFR suspends  an operating  licence— 
(a) it must  specify  in a decision  notice  under  section  77 the day on 
which  the suspension  takes  effect,  and 
(b) it must  specify  in that notice  either— 
(i) 
30the period  for which  the operating  licence  will be suspended, 
or 
(ii) that the operating  licence  is to be suspended  until  some 
event  specified  in the notice  occurs  (which  may  be the giving 
of a further  notice  by the IFR). 
(3) 
35Where  a decision  notice  under  section  77 is given  during  a football  season, 
the date  specified  in that notice  for the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (2)(a) 
may  not be a date  before  the end of that season. 
(4) Nothing  in this paragraph  prevents  the IFR from— 
(a) re-exercising  the power  in this paragraph  to suspend  an operating 
40licence  after  a previous  suspension  of the licence  has come  to an 
end,  or 
(b) revoking  an operating  licence  after  a suspension  of the licence  has 
come  to an end. Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 114 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 2—Sanctions  relating  to relevant  infringements 
PART 3 
FURTHER PROVISION ABOUT FINANCIAL PENALTIES 
Interpretation 
10 For the purposes  of paragraphs  3 and 6— 
5 (a) an undertaking  (with  the meaning  of Part 1 of the Competition  Act 
1998)  is part of a group  if one or more  bodies  corporate  which  are 
comprised  in the undertaking  are members  of the same  group  as 
one or more  other  bodies  corporate; 
(b) two or more  bodies  corporate  are members  of the same  group  if— 
10 (i) one is the subsidiary  of another,  or 
(ii) both  are subsidiaries  of the same  body  corporate; 
(c) “subsidiary”  has the meaning  given  by section  1159  of the 
Companies  Act 2006. 
Penalties  imposed  by reference  to a daily  rate 
15 11 In imposing  a penalty  under  paragraph  3 or 6 by reference  to a daily  rate— (1) 
(a) no account  is to be taken  of any days  before  the IFR gives  the person 
concerned  a warning  notice  under  section  76, and 
(b) unless  (whether  before  or after  the penalty  is imposed)  the IFR 
20determines  an earlier  day,  the amount  payable  ceases  to accumulate 
at the beginning  of the day on which  the conduct  giving  rise to the 
penalty  ceases. 
(2) Where  the IFR imposes  a penalty  under  paragraph  3 or 6 by reference  to 
a daily  rate,  the decision  notice  under  section  77 must  state  the day on 
25which  the amount  first starts  to accumulate  and the day or days  on which 
it might  cease  to accumulate. 
Revenue  and remuneration 
12 For the purposes  of paragraphs  3 and 6, the IFR may  by rules  (“revenue 
rules”)  make  provision  for determining— (1) 
(a) a person’s  total  and daily  revenue; 
30 (b) an officer’s  remuneration  and daily  remuneration. 
(2) Revenue  rules  may,  among  other  things,  make  provision  about— 
(a) amounts  which  are, or are not, to be included  in a person’s  revenue; 
(b) amounts  which  are, or are not, to be included  in an officer’s 
remuneration; 
35 (c) the period  or periods  by reference  to which  a person’s  revenue  is 
to be determined; 
(d) the period  or periods  by reference  to which  an officer’s  remuneration 
is to be determined. 115 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 3—Further  provision  about  financial  penalties 
(3) Before  making,  amending  or replacing  revenue  rules  the IFR must  consult 
the Secretary  of State. 
(4) Sub-paragraph  (3) does  not apply  in relation  to amendments  to or 
replacements  of revenue  rules  if the IFR considers  the changes  to be minor. 
5 (5) The consultation  must  include  a draft  of the proposed  revenue  rules. 
Interest 
13 If the whole  or part of a penalty  imposed  under  paragraph  3 or 6 is not 
paid  by the day by which  it is required  to be paid,  the unpaid  balance (1) 
10carries  interest  at an annual  percentage  rate of 5% plus  the Bank  of England 
base  rate. 
(2) But the IFR may,  by notice  to the person  on whom  the penalty  is imposed, 
provide  that this paragraph  does  not apply  in relation  to the penalty. 
(3) In sub-paragraph  (1), “Bank  of England  base  rate”  means— 
(a) 
15the percentage  rate announced  from  time  to time  by the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  of the Bank  of England  as the official  dealing 
rate,  being  the rate at which  the Bank  is willing  to enter  into 
transactions  for providing  short  term  liquidity  in the money  markets, 
or 
(b) 
20where  an order  under  section  19 of the Bank  of England  Act 1998 
is in force,  any equivalent  percentage  rate determined  by the 
Treasury  under  that section. 
Recovery  as a civil debt 
14 Where  a penalty  imposed  under  paragraph  3 or 6, or any part of such  a 
25penalty,  has not been  paid  by the day by which  it is required  to be paid, (1) 
the IFR may  recover  from  the person  on whom  the penalty  was imposed 
any amount  of the penalty  and interest  that has not been  paid. 
(2) Such  an amount  may  be recovered  as a civil  debt  due to the IFR. 
Power  to amend  figures 
15 
30The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  amend  the amounts  for the time 
being  specified  in— 
(a) paragraphs  (a)(ii) and (b)(ii) of paragraph  3(6); 
(b) paragraphs  (a)(ii) and (b)(ii) of paragraph  3(8); 
(c) paragraphs  (a) and (b) of paragraph  3(9); 
(d) paragraphs  (a)(ii) and (b)(ii) of paragraph  6(7); 
35 (e) paragraphs  (a)(ii) and (b)(ii) of paragraph  6(9); 
(f) paragraphs  (a) and (b) of paragraph  6(10). Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 116 
Schedule  9—Sanctions 
Part 3—Further  provision  about  financial  penalties 
Section  81 SCHEDULE  10 
REVIEWS 
Who  carries  out the review 
(the “applicable  reviewer”) 3 Decision  of the IFR (“the  reviewable  decision”) 
5 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 5 
6 to refuse  to grant  a provisional  operating  licence 
under  section  17 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 7 
8 to specify  a further  period  for which  a provisional 
operating  licence  is to have  effect  under  section 
18(6)(b) 
10 the Board 10 to revoke  a provisional  operating  licence  under 
section  19 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 12 
13 to attach  a discretionary  licence  condition,  to vary 
or remove,  or to not vary  or remove,  a discretionary 
15licence  condition  attached,  to an operating  licence 
under  section  21 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 16 
17 to accept,  or not to accept,  a commitment 
mentioned  in section  23(3)(c)(ii) 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 18 
19 to release,  or not release,  a specified  competition 
20organiser  from  a commitment  mentioned  in section 
23(3)(c)(ii) 
the Board 21 to make  a determination  in relation  to a person 
under  Part 4 
the Board 23 to make  an order  under  section  38 (disqualification 
orders) 
25 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 25 
26 to give  a direction  under  section  39 or 40 (removal 
directions) 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 27 
28 to give  a direction  under  section  41 (directions 
relating  to unsuitable  owners  and officers) 
30a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 29 
30 to give a direction,  or make  an order,  under  section 
42 (orders  and directions  effecting  alternative  officer 
arrangements) 
the Board 32 to make  an order  under  section  43 (ownership 
removal  orders) 
the Board 34 
35to specify,  or not specify,  a competition  as a 
prohibited  competition  under  section  45 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 36 
37 to approve,  or not to approve,  the carrying  out of 3 
one or more  of the activities  mentioned  in section 117 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  10—Reviews 
Who  carries  out the review 
(the “applicable  reviewer”) 3 Decision  of the IFR (“the  reviewable  decision”) 
46(1) (duty  not to dispose  of etc home  ground 
without  approval) 
5 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 5 
6 to approve,  or not to approve,  the appointment  of 
an administrator  under  section  47 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 7 
8 to approve,  or not to approve,  the entering  into of 
arrangements  mentioned  in section  48(1) (duty  not 
to relocate  without  approval) 
10 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 10 
11 not to approve,  or to approve  with  modifications, 
a personnel  statement  under  section  52 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 12 not to trigger  a resolution  process  under  section  59 
15a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 14 to make  a distribution  order  under  section  62 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 16 
17 to terminate  the resolution  process  under  section 
62(1)(c) or (4)(b) 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 18 to revoke  a distribution  order  under  section  63 
20 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 20 to appoint  an expert  reporter  under  section  66 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 22 to conduct  an investigation  under  section  68 
25a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 24 not to accept  a commitment  under  section  70 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 26 
27 not to release  a person  from  a commitment  accepted 
under  section  70 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 28 
29 to give  an urgent  direction  for breaches  of licence 
conditions  under  section  79 
30 a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 30 to exercise  its power  to ask questions  under 
31 paragraph  2 of Schedule  8 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 32 
33 to prepare  and publish  a censure  statement  under 
paragraph  2 or 4 of Schedule  9 
35a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 34 
35 to require  the appointment  of a skilled  person 
under  paragraph  5 of Schedule  9 
a committee  of the Expert 
Panel 36 
37 to impose  a financial  penalty  under  paragraph  3 
or 6 of Schedule  9 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 118 
Schedule  10—Reviews 
Who  carries  out the review 
(the “applicable  reviewer”) 3 Decision  of the IFR (“the  reviewable  decision”) 
the Board 3 to suspend  or revoke  an operating  licence  under 
paragraph  9 of Schedule  9 
Section  93 5 SCHEDULE  11 
INDEX OF DEFINED TERMS 
section  28(1) 7 affirmative  determination 
section  81(2) and Schedule  10 8 applicable  reviewer 
paragraphs  1 and 2 of Schedule  2 9 the Board 
10 section  92(1) 10 business  premises 
section  53(11) 11 chargeable  period 
section  69 12 closure  notice 
section  2(1) 13 club 
section  6 14 the club  financial  soundness  objective 
15 section  24 (in Part 3) and section  70 
(in Part 7) 15 commitment 
section  2(1) 17 competition 
section  2(1) 18 competition  organiser 
section  81(2) 19 concerned  person 
20 section  92(1) 20 conflict  of interest 
section  77 21 decision  notice 
section  21 22 discretionary  licence  condition 
section  56(5) 23 distribution  agreement 
section  56(5) 24 distribution  order 
25 section  2(1) 25 English  football 
section  2(4) 26 English  team 
paragraphs  1 and 22 of Schedule  2 27 Expert  Panel 
section  66 28 expert  reporter 
paragraph  4 of Schedule  4 29 the fan engagement  threshold  requirement 119 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  11—Index  of defined  terms 
paragraph  2 of Schedule  4 1 the financial  resources  threshold 
requirement 
section  92(1) 3 the Football  Association 
section  2(1) 4 football 
5 section  2(1) 5 football  club 
section  11 6 football  governance  statement 
section  92(1) 7 football  season 
section  15(3) 8 full operating  licence 
section  92(1) 9 HMRC 
10 sections  1(2)(a) and 2(1) 10 the IFR 
section  6 11 the IFR’s  objectives 
section  8 12 the IFR’s  regulatory  principles 
section  26(7) 13 individual  ownership  fitness  criteria 
section  92(1) 14 information 
15 section  75(2) 15 information  requirement 
section  53(2) 16 levy  rules 
section  2(1) 17 licensed  club 
section  20 and Schedule  5 18 mandatory  licence  condition 
paragraph  3 of Schedule  4 19 
20the non-financial  resources  threshold 
requirement 
section  4 21 officer 
section  26(8) 22 officer  fitness  criteria 
section  2(2) 23 operates 
section  2(1) 24 operating  licence 
25 section  3(1) and Schedule  1 25 owner 
section  16(4) 26 personnel  statement 
section  15(2) 27 provisional  operating  licence 
section  56(5) 28 qualifying  football  season 
section  2(1) 29 regulated  club 
30 section  92(1) 30 registered  society 
section  67 and Schedule  7 31 relevant  infringement Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 120 
Schedule  11—Index  of defined  terms 
section  56(2) 1 relevant  revenue 
section  2(1) 2 relevant  team 
section  56(5) 3 resolution  process 
paragraph  12(1) of Schedule  9 4 revenue  rules 
5 section  81(2) and Schedule  10 5 reviewable  decision 
section  4(4) 6 senior  manager 
section  4(5) 7 senior  management  function 
section  92(2) 8 serious  criminal  conduct 
paragraph  5 of Schedule  9 9 skilled  person 
10 section  2(1) 10 specified  competition 
section  2(1) 11 specified  competition  organiser 
section  10 12 state  of the game  report 
section  6 13 the systemic  financial  resilience  objective 
section  2(1) 14 team 
15 paragraph  1 of Schedule  4 15 threshold  requirements 
section  92(1) 16 the Tribunal 
section  92(1) 17 Tribunal  Procedure  Rules 
section  3(2) 18 ultimate  owner 
section  79(2) 19 urgent  direction 
20 section  76 20 warning  notice 
Section  97 SCHEDULE  12 
MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS 
Public  Records  Act 1958 
1 
25In Schedule  1 to the Public  Records  Act 1958  (definition  of public  records), 
in paragraph  3, in Part 2 of the Table,  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“The Independent  Football  Regulator. ” 121 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  12—Minor  and consequential  amendments 
Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967 
2 In Schedule  2 to the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967  (departments 
etc subject  to investigation),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“The Independent  Football  Regulator. ” 
5 House  of Commons  Disqualification  Act 1975 
3 In Part 2 of Schedule  1 to the House  of Commons  Disqualification  Act 1975 
(bodies  of which  all members  are disqualified),  at the appropriate  place 
insert— 
“The Independent  Football  Regulator. ” 
10 Freedom  of Information  Act 2000 
4 In Part 6 of Schedule  1 to the Freedom  of Information  Act 2000  (other 
public  bodies  and offices:  general),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“The Independent  Football  Regulator. ” 
Criminal  Justice  and Police  Act 2001 
15 5 The Criminal  Justice  and Police  Act 2001  is amended  as follows. (1) 
(2) In section  50 (additional  powers  of seizure  from  premises),  in subsection 
(7), after  “section  74(2)(h)  of the Digital  Markets,  Competition  and 
Consumers  Act 2024”  insert  “or paragraph  3(2)(h) of Schedule  8 to the 
Football  Governance  Act 2025”. 
20 (3) In section  57 (retention  of seized  items),  in subsection  (1), at the end insert— 
“(w) paragraph  3(6) of Schedule  8 to the Football  Governance  Act 
2025. ” 
(4) In section  63(1)  (powers  of seizure:  copies),  in paragraph  (d), after  “section 
2574(2)(d)  and (f) of the Digital  Markets,  Competition  and Consumers  Act 
2024”  insert  “, and in paragraph  3(2)(d) and (f) of Schedule  8 to the Football 
Governance  Act 2025”. 
(5) In section  64 (meaning  of “appropriate  judicial  authority”)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), in the words  before  paragraph  (a), for “subsection 
(2)” substitute  “subsections  (2) and (4)”; 
30 (b) after  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(4) In this Part “appropriate  judicial  authority”,  in relation  to 
the seizure  of documents  under  paragraph  3(2) of Schedule 
8 to the Football  Governance  Act 2025  and in relation  to 
documents  seized  under  that power,  means  the High  Court. ” 
35 (6) In section  65 (meaning  of “legal  privilege”),  after  subsection  (3B) insert— 
“(3C) In relation  to property  which  has been  seized  in exercise,  or 
purported  exercise,  of— Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 122 
Schedule  12—Minor  and consequential  amendments 
(a) the power  of seizure  conferred  by paragraph  3(2) of Schedule 
8 to the Football  Governance  Act 2025,  or 
(b) so much  of any power  of seizure  conferred  by section  50 as 
is exercisable  by reference  to that power, 
5 references  in this Part to an item  subject  to legal  privilege  are to be 
read  as references  to a privileged  communication  within  the meaning 
of section  73(3) of that Act.” 
(7) In section  66(5)  (general  interpretation  of Part 2), after  paragraph  (j) insert— 
“(k) 
10paragraph  3(2)(j) of Schedule  8 to the Football  Governance 
Act 2025. ” 
(8) In Part 1 of Schedule  1 (powers  of seizure  to which  section  50 applies),  at 
the end insert— 
“Football  Governance  Act 2025 
73X 
15Each  of the powers  of seizure  conferred  by paragraph  3(2)(i) and 
(j) of Schedule  8 to the Football  Governance  Act 2025  (seizure  of 
information  for the purposes  of an investigation). ” 
Enterprise  Act 2002 
6 Schedule  4 to the Enterprise  Act 2002  (the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal: 
procedure)  is amended  as follows. 
20 7 Paragraph  1A (enforcement  of injunctions  in England  and Wales  and 
Northern  Ireland)  is amended  as follows. (1) 
(2) In sub-paragraph  (1), for “proceedings  under”  to “the Digital  Markets, 
Competition  and Consumers  Act 2024”  substitute  “relevant  proceedings”. 
(3) After  sub-paragraph  (3) insert— 
25 “(4) For the purposes  of this paragraph,  “relevant  proceedings”  means 
proceedings  under— 
(a) section  47A or 47B of the 1998  Act; 
(b) section  101 of the Digital  Markets,  Competition  and 
Consumers  Act 2024; 
30 (c) paragraph  7 of Schedule  9 to the Football  Governance  Act 
2025. ” 
8 Paragraph  10A (Tribunal  rules:  institution  of proceedings)  is amended  as 
follows. (1) 
(2) 
35In sub-paragraph  (1), in the words  before  paragraph  (a), for “warrant”  to 
“the 1998  Act”  substitute  “relevant  warrant”. 
(3) In sub-paragraph  (2), for “warrant  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (1)” 
substitute  “relevant  warrant”. 123 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  12—Minor  and consequential  amendments 
(4) After  sub-paragraph  (2) insert— 
“(3) For the purposes  of this paragraph,  “relevant  warrant”  means  a 
warrant  under— 
(a) section  194 of this Act; 
5 (b) section  28, 28A,  62, 62A,  63, 65G or 65H of the 1998  Act; 
(c) section  74 of the Digital  Markets,  Competition  and 
Consumers  Act 2024; 
(d) paragraph  3 of Schedule  8 to the Football  Governance  Act 
2025. ” 
10 Equality  Act 2010 
9 In Part 1 of Schedule  19 to the Equality  Act 2010  (authorities  subject  to the 
public  sector  equality  duty),  in the group  of entries  under  the heading 
“Regulators”,  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“The Independent  Football  Regulator. ” 
15 Competition  Appeal  Tribunal  Rules  2015  (S.I. 2015/1648) 
10 The Competition  Appeal  Tribunal  Rules  2015  (S.I. 2015/1648)  are amended 
as follows. (1) 
(2) In rules  3 (application  of Rules)— 
(a) in paragraph  (b) after  “5A”  insert  “, 5B”; 
20 (b) after  paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(ba) rules  67 to 70 of Part 2 also apply  to appeals  under 
section  84 of the Football  Governance  Act 2025; ”; 
(c) after  paragraph  (ea) insert— 
“(eb) 
25Part 5B applies  to appeals  under  section  84 of the 
Football  Governance  Act 2025  ;”. 
(3) After  rule 98A insert— 
“PART 5B 
APPEALS UNDER SECTION 84 OF THE FOOTBALL GOVERNANCE ACT 2025 
98B Time  limits  for appeals 
30 (1) An appeal  to the Tribunal  under  section  84 of the Football 
Governance  Act 2025  (“the 2025  Act”)  in respect  of an appealable 
decision  must  be made  by sending  a notice  of appeal  within  the 
period  of 21 days  beginning  with  the relevant  day in relation  to 
that decision. 
35 (2) For the purposes  of paragraph  (1), “appealable  decision”  means— 
(a) a reviewable  decision  specified  in subsection  (3) of section 
84 of the 2025  Act, or Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 124 
Schedule  12—Minor  and consequential  amendments 
(b) a decision  or deemed  decision  made  by an applicable 
reviewer  in respect  of such  a reviewable  decision  under 
section  83 of that Act. 
(3) For the purposes  of paragraph  (1), the relevant  day is— 
5 (a) in relation  to a decision  that is an appealable  decision  by 
virtue  of paragraph  (2)(a), the day on which  notice  is given 
of the decision  under  the provision  of the 2025  Act 
concerned; 
(b) 
10in relation  to a decision  that is an appealable  decision  by 
virtue  of paragraph  (2)(b), the day on which  notice  of the 
decision  or deemed  decision  is given  under  section  82 or 83 
(as the case may  be) of the 2025  Act. 
(4) For the purposes  of paragraphs  (2)(b) and (3)(b), a deemed  decision 
15is a decision  that is treated  as having  been  made  under  section 
82(5)(b) or 83(6)(a) of the 2025  Act. 
(5) The Tribunal  may  not extend  the time  limits  provided  for in this 
rule unless  it is satisfied  that the circumstances  are exceptional. ” 
(4) Nothing  in this paragraph  affects  the power  in section  15 of the Enterprise 
20Act 2002  to revoke  or amend  the Competition  Appeal  Tribunal  Rules  2015, 
as those  Rules  are amended  by this paragraph. 125 Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  12—Minor  and consequential  amendments 
Football  Governance  Bill [HL] 
[AS AMENDED  IN COMMITTEE] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Establish  the Independent  Football  Regulator;  to make  provision  for the licensing  of 
football  clubs;  to make  provision  about  the distribution  of revenue  received  by organisers 
of football  competitions;  and for connected  purposes. 
Baroness  Twycross 
Ordered  to be Printed,   15th  January  2025 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 59



Bill 109 56/1Free School Meals (Automatic Registration of 
Eligible Children) Bill
CONTENTS
1 Free school meals: duty to identify qualifying children
2 Qualifying children: duty to inform schools3 Free school meals: duty to provide to qualifying children
4 Free school meals: opting out5 Free school meals: confidentiality6 Extent, commencement and citation.
Bill 109 56/1Free School Meals (Automatic Registration of Eligible Children) Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Provide local authorities wi th the duties and powers re quired to identify and
automatically register all children eligib le for free school meals; to provide for
an opt-out where the family wish es; and for connected purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Free school meals: duty to identify qualifying children
(1) A local education authorit y must identify each child of school age in its area
who is eligible for free school meals (a “qualifying child”).
(2) The Secretary of State must, by regulations, provide—
(a) local education authorities, and
(b) any other relevant departments or agencies
with the powers necessary to obtain and exchange the information necessary
for local education authorities to ca rry out the duty in subsection (1).
2 Qualifying children: duty to inform schools
(1) A local education authority must prov ide a relevant school with sufficient
information collected undersection 1 to enable them to carry out the duty in
section 3 (subject only to section 4).
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a school is “relevant” to a local education authority
if that school has on its pupil roll a qua lifying child resident  within that local 
education authority’s area. 
3 Free school meals: duty to provide to qualifying children
(1) A state-funded school has a duty to  provide a free school meal to every
qualifying child whether identified to th e relevant school by a local education 
authority or not (subject only to section 4).B
5
10
15
Free School Meals (Automatic Regist ration of Eligible Children) Bill 2
(2) A state-funded school which identifies  a qualifying child whose eligibility for
free school meals has not been identified  by a local education authority must 
inform the appropriate author ity that this is the case. 
4 Free school meals: opting out
(1) Local education authorities must prov ide the means for a parent or guardian
of a qualifying child to opt out of the ar rangements envisaged in sections 1 to 3.
(2) State-funded schools must make arrangements for parents or guardians of
qualifying children to be able to gain  access to the means provided by local 
education authorities under subsection (1).
5 Free school meals: confidentiality
Local education authorities and school s must take all reasonable steps to
preserve the confidentialit y and right to privacy of qualifying children and
their parents or guardians in respect of the information, information-sharingand administrative arrangements provid ed, or required, for the purposes of
this Act. 
6 Extent, commencement and citation.
(1) This Act extends to England and Wales.
(2) This Act comes into force on the day af ter the day on which it receives Royal
Assent.
(3) This Act may be cited as the Free Sc hool Meals (Automat ic Registration of
Eligible Children Act 2016.5
10
15
20
Bill 109 (xxxxxx) 56/1Free School Meals (Automatic Registration of 
Eligible Children) Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2016
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
LONDON — THE STATIONERY OFFICE LIMITED
Printed in the United Kingdom by  The Stationery Office Limited
£x.xx
xxxbarxxxA
BILL
To provide local authorities with the duti es and powers required to identify and
automatically register all children eligible for free sch ool meals; to provide for an opt-
out where the family wishes; and for connected purposes.
Ordered to be brought in by Frank Field, 
John Glen, Mr Philip Hollobone, 
Alison McGovern, Andrew Bridgen, 
Peter Kyle, Wes Streeting, 
Sir Nicholas Soames, Ms Karen Buck, 
Stella Creasy, Heidi Allen and 
Mr Christopher Chope.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 15 December  2015.



Gambling  Act 2005  (Monetary  Limits  for Lotteries) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Removal  of monetary  limits  on proceeds  from  mandatory  conditions  of lottery 
operation  licences 
2 Transitional  arrangements:  application  to existing  licences 
3 Power  to make  consequential  provision 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 30 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Remove  monetary  limits  on proceeds  from  the mandatory  conditions  of lottery 
operating  licences;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Removal  of monetary  limits  on proceeds  from  mandatory  conditions  of 
lottery  operation  licences 
(1) Section  99 (mandatory  conditions  of lottery  operating  licence)  of the Gambling 
Act 2005  is amended  as follows. 
5 (2) Omit  subsection  (3). 
(3) In subsection  (4), for “third”  substitute  “second”. 
(4) In subsection  (5), for “fourth”  substitute  “third”. 
(5) In subsection  (6), for “fifth”  substitute  “fourth”. 
(6) In subsection  (8), for “sixth”  substitute  “fifth”. 
10 2 Transitional  arrangements:  application  to existing  licences 
(1) This  section  applies  in respect  of the conditions  attached  to an existing  licence 
by virtue  of section  75 or 77 of the Gambling  Act 2005. 
(2) The Commission  must  amend  those  conditions  in order  to give  effect  to 
15section  1 of this Act, and accordingly  section  76 of the Gambling  Act 2005 
applies  in respect  of those  amendments  with  the following  modifications— 
(a) subsection  (2) (requirement  to consult)  does  not apply, 
(b) subsection  (5) (cases  of urgency)  does  not apply. 
(3) In this section  – 
20“existing  licence”  means  a lottery  operating  licence,  within  the meaning 
of the Gambling  Act 2005,  that is in operation  on the day on which 
this Act comes  into force, 
“Commission”  means  the Gambling  Commission  within  the meaning  of 
the Gambling  Act 2005. 
59/1 Bill 30 1 Gambling  Act 2005  (Monetary  Limits  for Lotteries)  Bill 
3 Power  to make  consequential  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  that is consequential 
on this Act. 
(2) The regulations  may  amend  or repeal  provision  made  by— 
5 (a) an Act passed  before  this Act; 
(b) an Act passed  later  in the same  session  of Parliament  as this Act. 
(3) The regulations  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection  (2) (whether 
10alone  or with  other  provision)  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the 
instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a resolution  of each  House 
of Parliament. 
(5) Any  other  statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is 
subject  to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of 
Parliament. 
15 4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
20This  Act may  be cited  as the Gambling  Act 2005  (Monetary  Limits  for 
Lotteries)  Act 2025. Gambling  Act 2005  (Monetary  Limits  for Lotteries)  Bill 2 
Gambling  Act 2005  (Monetary  Limits  for Lotteries) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Remove  monetary  limits  on proceeds  from  the mandatory  conditions  of lottery  operating 
licences;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Wendy  Chamberlain 
supported  by Ben Lake, Pete Wishart , 
Rebecca  Harris  and Tonia  Antoniazzi . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 30



T 020 3334 3555  
F 0870 761 7753  E https://contact -moj.dsd.io/  
www.gov.uk/moj  102 Petty France  
London  
SW1H 9AJ  
 
  
Lord Ponsonby of Shulbrede  
Parliamentary Under -Secretary of 
State for Justice   
 
 
The Rt Hon The Lord Gardiner of Kimble  
Senior Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees  
House of Lords  
London  
SW1A 0PW   
 
 MoJ Ref: SUB 120918 
 
     
 23 January 202 5 
 
Dear Lord Gard iner,  
THE GENERAL CEMETERY  BILL  
 
I write concerning the General  Cemetery Bill.  
Standing Order No. 98A (Reports concerning human rights) requires that, in the case of a private bill 
originating in either House, a report from a Minister of the Crown on the statement of opinion required by 
Standing Order 38(3) shall be presented to the House (by being deposited in the Office of the Clerk of the 
Parliaments) not later than the second sitting day after that on which the Bill was read a first time.  
 
I consider that the Bill’s promoters have undertaken a full assessment of the compatibility of their 
proposals with the European Convention on Human Rights (the “Convention”) and I see no need to 
dispute their conclusions. I do, however, have two points to note.  
 
Firstly, in their assessment of compatibility,  the promoters do not express a view on whether the General 
Cemetery Company  (the “ Company ”) is a “public authority” for the purposes of section 6(3)(b) of the 
Human Rights Act 1998 (the “1998 Act”). However, in my view, in considering the compatibility of the Bill 
with the Convention, it is appropriate to consider whether the Company  will be subject to the duty in 
section 6(1) of the 1998 Act to act compatibly with the Convention rights. I consider that the Company will 
be exercising public functions within the meaning of the 1998 Act, and will therefore be subject to this duty 
when exercising the relevant functions. Nevertheless, as noted above, this does not affect my conclusion 
that the proposals are consistent with the Convention.  
 
Secondly, the promoters’ assessment of compatibility considered whether any interference with the 
relevant Convention rights, which is necessary for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others in 
using the cemetery, is justifiable and proportionate. The promoters have taken into consideration in 
particular the safeguards contained in the Bill. I have, however, also considered whether there may be 
alternative means available of achieving the same aim, which would not involve interference with 
Convention rights. I am satisfied that other methods of developing burial space have already been 
implemented to the extent available. I therefore agree with the promoters’ assessment that the powers 
conferred by the Bill are both justified and proportionate.  
 
 
 
 
 
LORD PONSONBY OF SHULBREDE



Great  British  Energy  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
After  Clause  1 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
★_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Objectives 
Great  British  Energy’s  objectives  are— 
(a) to reduce  energy  costs  in the United  Kingdom  in a sustainable  way, 
(b) to enhance  the United  Kingdom’s  energy  security, 
(c) to increase  the levels  of clean  energy  generation  in the United  Kingdom, 
and 
(d) to increase  the availability  of long-term  energy  storage  infrastructure  in 
the United  Kingdom. ” 
Clause  4 
LORD  ALTON  OF LIVERPOOL 
BARONESS  KENNEDY  OF THE  SHAWS 
LORD  OFFORD  OF GARVEL 
_ Clause  4, page  3, line 5, at end insert— 
“(6) Financial  assistance  under  this section  must  not be provided  if there  exists  credible 
evidence  of modern  slavery  in the energy  supply  chain  of any company  designated 
Great  British  Energy. ” 
59/1 HL Bill 43—R—Running  List 31 January 
Clause  5 
BARONESS  BOYCOTT 
BARONESS  YOUNG  OF OLD  SCONE 
LORD  TEVERSON 
BARONESS  MCINTOSH  OF PICKERING 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 8, at end insert— 
“(1A) The statement  of strategic  priorities  under  subsection  (1) must  include  a priority 
to advance  the production  of clean  energy  from  schemes  owned,  or part owned, 
by community  organisations. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the advancement  of community  energy  to be included  in the strategic 
priorities. 
LORD  OFFORD  OF GARVEL 
★_ Clause  5, page  3, line 8, at end insert— 
“(1A) The statement  of strategic  priorities  under  subsection  (1) must  include  the reduction 
of household  energy  bills by £300  in real terms  by 1 January  2030. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This ensures  that the statement  of strategic  priorities  includes  the reduction  of household  energy 
bills by £300  by 1 January  2030. 
LORD  OFFORD  OF GARVEL 
★_ Clause  5, page  3, line 8, at end insert— 
“(1A) The statement  of strategic  priorities  under  subsection  (1) must  include  the creation 
of 650,000  new  jobs in the United  Kingdom  by 1 January  2030  resulting  directly 
or indirectly  from  Great  British  Energy’s  pursuit  of its objects  under  section  3.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This ensures  that the statement  of strategic  priorities  includes  the creation  of 650,000  new jobs in 
the UK by 1 January  2030. 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 12, leave  out “consult  the Scottish  Ministers  before  including”  and 
insert  “not,  without  the consent  of the Scottish  Ministers,  include” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and my amendment  at page 3, line 13, provide  that the Secretary  of State  must 
not, without  the consent  of the Scottish  Ministers,  include  in a statement  of strategic  priorities Great  British  Energy  Bill 2 
anything  which  concerns  a matter  provision  about  which  would  be within  the legislative  competence 
of the Scottish  Parliament. 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 13, leave  out “subject” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
See the explanatory  statement  to my amendment  at page 3, line 12. 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 16, leave  out “consult  the Welsh  Ministers  before  including”  and 
insert  “not,  without  the consent  of the Welsh  Ministers,  include” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and my amendment  at page 3, line 17, provide  that the Secretary  of State  must 
not, without  the consent  of the Welsh  Ministers  , include  in a statement  of strategic  priorities 
anything  which  concerns  a matter  provision  about  which  would  be within  the legislative  competence 
of the Senedd  Cymru. 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 17, leave  out “subject” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
See the explanatory  statement  to my amendment  at page 3, line 16. 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 20, leave  out from  “must”  to “in” in line 21 and insert  “not,  without 
the consent  of the Department  for the Economy  in Northern  Ireland,  include” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and my amendment  at page 3, line 22, provide  that the Secretary  of State  must 
not, without  the consent  of the Department  for the Economy  in Northern  Ireland,  include  in a 
statement  of strategic  priorities  anything  which  concerns  a matter  provision  about  which  meets 
the conditions  in subsection  (6)(a)  and (b). 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 22, leave  out “subject” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
See the explanatory  statement  to my amendment  at page 3, line 20. 3 Great  British  Energy  Bill 
LORD  HUNT  OF KINGS  HEATH 
_ Clause  5, page  3, line 28, leave  out subsection  (7) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is made  in consequence  of my other  amendments  to this Clause. 
Clause  6 
LORD  BERKELEY 
_ Clause  6, page  3, line 38, at end insert— 
“(1A) The Secretary  of State  must  give  a specific  direction  to Great  British  Energy  that, 
in meeting  its objects  under  section  3, it must  give  full consideration  to properties 
which  are not connected  to the gas grid and the value  of renewable  liquid  fuels 
in meeting  those  objects. 
(1B) The direction  must  require  Great  British  Energy  to publish  a report  to assess  the 
potential  benefits  to consumers  of implementing  a renewable  liquid  heating  fuel 
obligation  under  section  159 of the Energy  Act 2023. 
(1C) A report  under  subsection  (1B) must  be made  within  three  months  of the day on 
which  this Act is passed. 
(1D) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a report  made  under  subsection  (1B) before 
Parliament. 
(1E) The Secretary  of State  must  implement  section  159(3)  of the Energy  Act 2023 
(renewable  liquid  heating  fuel obligations:  consultation)  within  three  months  of 
receiving  the report. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  introduce  a specific  strategic  priority  for Great  British  Energy  to work 
with the Government  to consider  the specific  energy-related  issues  of households  off the gas grid. 
The amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to exercise  powers  under  the Energy  Act 2023  to 
undertake  a consultation  on the introduction  of a renewable  liquid  heating  fuel obligation. 
After  Clause  7 
LORD  FROST 
_ After  Clause  7, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“The Chair  of Great  British  Energy 
(1) The Chair  of Great  British  Energy  may  not be appointed  until  the appointment 
has been  scrutinised  by the— 
(a) Treasury  Committee  of the House  of Commons,  or any successor 
committee,  and Great  British  Energy  Bill 4 
(b) Energy  Security  and Net Zero  Committee  of the House  of Commons,  or 
any successor  committee. 
(2) The Chair  of Great  British  Energy  must  undergo  an annual  review  on their 
performance  and this review  must  be— 
(a) carried  out by external  auditors; 
(b) submitted  to the Secretary  of State  and laid before  Parliament. ” 
BARONESS  MCINTOSH  OF PICKERING 
LORD  TEVERSON 
_ After  Clause  7, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Duty  of Great  British  Energy  to meet  environmental  criteria 
Great  British  Energy  must,  in the exercise  of its functions,  and when  delivering 
the objects  in section  3 and statement  of strategic  priorities  in section  5 of this Act, 
take all reasonable  steps  to contribute  to the achievement  of environmental  targets 
set under  the Environment  Act 2021. ” 
LORD  OFFORD  OF GARVEL 
★_ After  Clause  7, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Return  on investments 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  give  a specific  direction  to Great  British  Energy  that 
it must  achieve  a 10% minimum  return  on its investments  annually. 
(2) Great  British  Energy  must  report  to the Secretary  of State  on its in-year  rate of 
return  on investment. 
(3) A report  under  subsection  (2) must  be made  within  two years  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  and annually  thereafter. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  lay any report  made  under  subsection  (2) before 
Parliament. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  vary  the provision  in subsection  (1) by regulations 
made  by statutory  instrument. 
(6) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection  (5) may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This would  require  of Great  British  Energy  that on its investments  annually  it must  achieve  a 10 
per cent minimum  return. 5 Great  British  Energy  Bill 
LORD  OFFORD  OF GARVEL 
★_ After  Clause  7, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effective  delivery 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  appoint  an independent  person  to carry  out reviews 
of the effectiveness  of Great  British  Energy  in— 
(a) delivering  its objects  under  section  3, 
(b) meeting  its strategic  priorities  under  section  5, and 
(c) complying  with  any directions  given  under  section  6. 
(2) The independent  person  must,  as soon  as is reasonably  practicable  after  the 
completion  of the review— 
(a) prepare  a report  of the review,  and 
(b) submit  the report  to the Secretary  of State. 
(3) The independent  person  must  submit  to the Secretary  of State— 
(a) the first report  under  this section  within  12 months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  and 
(b) subsequent  reports  at intervals  of no more  than  12 months  thereafter. 
(4) On receiving  the report,  the Secretary  of State  must,  as soon  as is reasonably 
practicable  in each  case— 
(a) publish  the report, 
(b) lay a copy  of the report  before  Parliament,  and 
(c) prepare  and lay before  Parliament  a response  to the report’s  findings. 
(5) In this section,  references  to an “independent  person”  are to a person  who  appears 
to the Secretary  of State  to be independent  of— 
(a) the Secretary  of State,  and 
(b) Great  British  Energy. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  that the Secretary  of State  appoints  an independent  person  to 
review  the effectiveness  of Great  British  Energy  in delivering  its objects,  meeting  its strategic 
priorities,  and complying  with its directions. Great  British  Energy  Bill 6 
Great  British  Energy  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
31 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 43—R—Running  List 31 January



Bill 50 57/1Green Belt (Protection) Bill
CONTENTS
1 National register of green belt land
2 De-designation of green belt land3 Interpretation4 Extent, commencement and short title
Bill 50 57/1Green Belt (Protection) Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Establish a national register of green belt land in Englan d; to restrict the ability
of local authorities to de-designate gr een belt land; to make provision about
future development of de -designated green belt land; and for connected
purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 National register of green belt land
(1) The Secretary of State for Housing,  Communities and Lo cal Government must
hold and publish a public register of al l land in England de signated as Green
Belt land on 1 January 2019.
(2) That public register shal l be updated to reflect changes to the designation of
land—
(a) any land de-designated as Green Belt land after 1 January 2019 shall be
identified as Former Green Belt land, and
(b) any land designated as Green Belt land after 1 January 2019 shall be
identified as New Green Belt land.
(3) Any changes to the designation of land  under subsection (2) shall be reflected
in the public register within two months of the change being made. 
2 De-designation of green belt land
(1) No local authority in England shall de -designate any land which is designated
as Green Belt land on 1 January 2019 unless—
(a) it has ensured that alternative land  within its local authority area has
been designated as Green Belt land in substitution for the land to bedesignated,
(b) the substituted land satisfies the criteria set out in  subsection (2),
( c ) t h e  l a n d  i s  n o t  N e w  G r e e n  B e l t  land within the meaning of section
1(2)(b).B
5
10
15
20
Green Belt (Protection) Bill 2
(2) The criteria which su bstituted land must satisfy are that the land—
(a) is the same or greater in area than  that which is to  be de-designated,
(b) buts land on which—
(i) housing has been developed, and
(ii) the density of such housing is above average relative to the land
within the local authority area as a whole, and
(c) satisfies any requirem ents of Green Belt land issued in a National
Planning Policy Framework by the Secretary of State.
(3) No local planning authority shall gran t permission for development on Former
Green Belt land if such development is  for housing at a greater density than
any housing adjoining or contiguous to it.
3 Interpretation
In this Act “Green Belt land” means—
(a) any land within the meaning of Green Belt land given by section 2(1) of
the Green Belt (London and Home Counties) Act 1938, and
(b) any other land defined as Green Belt  land in order to prevent or restrict
development on that land by keeping it permanently open.
4 Extent, commencement and short title
(1) This Act extends to England and Wales only.
(2) This Act comes into force two months after Royal Assent.
(3) This Act may be cited as the Green Belt (Protection) Act 2018.5
10
15
20
Bill 50 57/1Green Belt (Protection) Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2018
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONSA
BILL
To establish a national register of green belt land in England; to restrict the ability of
local authorities to de-designate green be lt land; to make provision about future
development of de-designa ted green belt land; and for connected purposes.
Presented by Mr Christopher Chope,
supported by Mr Peter Bone, Mr William Wragg,
Philip Davies and Sir Edward Leigh.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 5 September  2017.



Hares  (Close  Season)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Protection  of wild  hares 
2 Penalties 
3 Exceptions  to offence 
4 Repeal 
5 Extent,  commencement,  and short  title 
59/1 HL Bill 52 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Establish  a close  season,  from  the start  of February  to the end of September, 
during  which  the killing  or taking  of hares  is prohibited;  repeal  the seasonal 
prohibition  of the sale of hares  in the Hares  Preservation  Act 1892;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Protection  of wild  hares 
(1) A person  who  intentionally  or recklessly  kills,  injures,  or takes  any hare  or 
leveret  in the close  season  is guilty  of an offence. 
(2) 
5In this section,  “close  season”  means  the period  in any year  beginning  on 1 
February  and ending  on 30 September. 
(3) Exceptions  to the offence  in subsection  (1) are set out in section  3. 
2 Penalties 
A person  guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 is liable  on summary  conviction 
to imprisonment  for a term  not exceeding  six months,  or to a fine,  or to both. 
10 3 Exceptions  to offence 
(1) A land  owner,  lawful  occupier  or person  authorised  by the landowner  or 
lawful  occupier  (an “authorised  person”),  is not guilty  of an offence  under 
section  1 if the person  shows  that their  action  was necessary  for the purpose 
of preventing  serious  damage  to crops  on the land  owned  or occupied. 
15 (2) To be entitled  to rely on the defence  under  subsection  (1) the authorised 
person  must  show  that— 
(a) they  had reasonable  grounds  for believing  that hares  of the same 
species  had caused  serious  damage  to crops  on the land; 
(b) 
20it was likely  that further  damage  would  be caused  to the crops  and 
the damage  was likely  to be serious; 
(c) non-lethal  methods  had failed;  and 
59/1 HL Bill 52 1 Hares  (Close  Season)  Bill [HL] 
(d) their  action  was necessary  and proportionate  for the purpose  of 
preventing  the damage. 
(3) To be entitled  to rely on the defence  under  subsection  (1) an authorised  person 
5must  also show  that they  obtained  a licence  under  section  16 of the Wildlife 
and Countryside  Act 1981,  prior  to the action. 
(4) A person  is not guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 if the person  shows  that 
the animal  had been  so seriously  disabled,  otherwise  than  by their  unlawful 
act, that there  was no reasonable  chance  of its recovering. 
(5) 
10A person  is not guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 if they  show  that the 
animal— 
(a) had been  disabled  otherwise  than  by their  unlawful  act; and 
(b) was taken  solely  for the purpose  of tending  it and releasing  it when 
no longer  disabled. 
4 Repeal 
15 The Hares  Preservation  Act 1892  is repealed. 
5 Extent,  commencement,  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of one month  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
20 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Hares  (Close  Season)  Act 2025. Hares  (Close  Season)  Bill [HL] 2 
Hares  (Close  Season)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Establish  a close  season,  from  the start  of February  to the end of September,  during 
which  the killing  or taking  of hares  is prohibited;  repeal  the seasonal  prohibition  of the 
sale of hares  in the Hares  Preservation  Act 1892;  and for connected  purposes. 
Baroness  Helic 
Ordered  to be Printed,   28th  November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 52



Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974 
(Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duty  to prevent  violence  and harassment  in the workplace 
2 Duties  of the Health  and Safety  Executive:  violence  and harassment  framework 
and protection  of women  and girls 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 56 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  to place  a requirement 
on employers  to take proactive  measures  to prevent  violence  and harassment 
in the workplace;  to make  provision  for protections  for women  and girls  in 
the workplace;  and to require  the Health  and Safety  Executive  to publish  a 
Health  and Safety  Framework  on violence  and harassment  in the workplace, 
including  violence  against  women  and girls  in the workplace. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  to prevent  violence  and harassment  in the workplace 
(1) Section  2 of the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  subsection  (2)(e)  insert— 
“(f) 
5the adoption  of proactive  and preventative  measures  to protect 
all persons  working  in their  workplace  from  violence  and 
harassment,  including— 
(i) gender-based  violence; 
(ii) sexual  harassment; 
(iii) psychological  and emotional  abuse; 
10 (iv) physical  and sexual  abuse; 
(v) stalking  and harassment,  including  online  harassment; 
(vi) threats  of violence. ” 
(3) After  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(3A) 
15It shall  be the duty  of every  employer  to prepare,  and as often  as may 
be appropriate  revise,  an assessment  to identify  potential  risks  of 
violence  and harassment  in the workplace  and implement  policies  and 
procedures  to eliminate  these  risks  so far as is reasonably  practicable. 
(3B) It shall  be the duty  of every  employer  to provide  training  to all 
20employees  on recognising  and preventing  violence  and harassment  in 
the workplace,  with  a focus  on gender-responsive  approaches. 
59/1 Bill 56 1 Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  (Amendment)  Bill 
(3C) In subsection  (3B) a “gender-responsive  approach”  means  taking  into 
account  the various  needs,  interests,  and experiences  of people  of 
different  gender  identities,  including  women  and girls,  when  designing 
and implementing  policies  and procedures. 
5 (3D) In this section,  “persons  working  in the workplace”  includes— 
(a) employees; 
(b) full-time,  part-time,  and temporary  workers; 
(c) interns  and apprentices; 
(d) volunteers;  and 
10 (e) job applicants. 
(3E) In subsection  (2)(f)  and subsections  (3A)  and (3B),  a reference  to the 
workplace  includes  remote  and hybrid  work  environments. ” 
2 Duties  of the Health  and Safety  Executive:  violence  and harassment 
framework  and protection  of women  and girls 
15 In the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974,  after  section  11 (functions  of 
the Executive)  insert— 
“11ZA Duties  of the Executive:  health  and safety  framework  on violence 
and harassment 
(1) 
20It shall  be the duty  of the Executive  to develop,  publish  and as often 
as may  be appropriate  revise  a health  and safety  framework  on 
violence  and harassment  in the workplace. 
(2) This  framework  shall  include  specific  provisions  relating  to— 
(a) the prevention  of violence  and harassment  against  women  and 
25girls  in the workplace,  and other  gender-based  violence  and 
harassment,  including  the prevention  of physical,  emotional, 
and psychological  abuse; 
(b) the duty  of employers  to create  safe and inclusive  workplaces 
and the preventative  measures  they  must  adopt;  and 
(c) 
30the use of monitoring  and enforcement  mechanisms  to ensure 
compliance  with  the duty  of the employer  in relation  to violence 
and harassment  (see section  2(2)(f)). 
(3) The Executive  shall  work  with  other  relevant  bodies,  including  the 
Equality  and Human  Rights  Commission  and law enforcement 
agencies,  to develop  and revise  this framework. 
35 11ZB Duties  of the Executive:  guidance  for employers 
The Executive  shall,  in consultation  with  such  other  persons  as it 
considers  to be relevant,  issue  guidance  for employers  about  the 
protection  of women  and girls  in the workplace  by— 
(a) 
40implementing  workplace  policies  to prevent  violence  and 
harassment; Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  (Amendment)  Bill 2 
(b) establishing  confidential  reporting  mechanisms  to allow  victims 
to report  incidents; 
(c) conducting  risk assessments  and ensuring  compliance  with  the 
health  and safety  framework  (see section  11ZA ); 
5 (d) reporting  and addressing  incidents  of violence  and harassment; 
and 
(e) supporting  victims  of violence  and harassment,  including 
making  accommodations  in the workplace  to support  such 
victims. ” 
10 3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974 
(Amendment)  Act 2024. 3 Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  (Amendment)  Bill 
Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974 
(Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Health  and Safety  at Work  etc. Act 1974  to place  a requirement  on employers 
to take proactive  measures  to prevent  violence  and harassment  in the workplace;  to 
make  provision  for protections  for women  and girls  in the workplace;  and to require 
the Health  and Safety  Executive  to publish  a Health  and Safety  Framework  on violence 
and harassment  in the workplace,  including  violence  against  women  and girls  in the 
workplace. 
Presented  by Liz Saville  Roberts 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 56



This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, details on the cover in the 
table of corrections (Published 2 August 2024).  
Bill 6–EN (Corrected)  59/1  
 HIGH SPEED RAIL 
(CREWE- MANCHESTER) BILL     
CORRECTED COPY - EXPLANATORY 
NOTES  
TABLE OF CORRECTIONS  
What these notes do  
These Explanatory Notes re late to the  High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill as introduced in the 
House of Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6 ).  
• These Explanatory Notes have been drafted by the Department f or Transport  in order to assist 
the reader to understand the High Speed Rail (Crewe -Manchester) Bill. They do not form part 
of the  High Speed Rail (Crewe -Manchester) Bill and have not been endorsed by Parliament.  
• These Explanatory Notes explain  what each part of the High Speed Rail (Crewe -Manchester) 
Bill will mean in practice; provide background information on the development of policy; and 
provide additional information on how the High Speed Rail (Crewe -Manchester) Bill will 
affect existing legislation in this area.  
• These Explanatory Notes might best be read alongside the High Speed Rail 
(Crewe- Manchester) Bill. They are not, and are not intended to be, a comprehensive 
description of the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill.  PAGE  REF CORRECTION  
7 para 11  “construction of the Millington to Manchester stretch of High Speed 2” 
has been replaced  with “construction of the railway between Millington 
and Manchester”.  
75 After 
para 723  Clause 58 and Schedule 33,  under Part 15, ‘Miscellaneous and 
General’ , formerly paragraphs 724 -744, have  been removed.  
The subsequent clause and schedule numbers have been updated 
accordingly.  This now matches the Bill as int roduced.  
1 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Table of C ontents  
Subject  Page of these Notes  
Overview of the Bill  6 
Policy background 6 
Legal background  7 
Territorial extent and application  7 
Commentary on provisions of Bill/Act 9 
Part 1: Works  9 
Clause 1: Power to construct and maintain works for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  9 
Schedule 1: Scheduled Works  9 
Construction requirements  9 
Clause 2: Further provision about works  9 
Schedule 2: Works  10 
Authority to survey and investigate land and protect and remove flora and fauna  10 
Support of buildings and apparatus etc.  10 
Trees on neighbouring land  11 
Exercise of powers of rights of entry under Paragraphs 2 to 7  11 
Noise mitigation for buildings  11 
Discharge of water  12 
Temporary interference with waterways 12 
Electronic communications apparatus  12 
Schedule 3: Overhead line diversions  13 
Clause 3: Highways  13 
Schedule 4: Manchester tram works  13 
General  13 
Further powers in relation to the construction and maintenance of the Manchester tram works  13 
Powers in relation to laying down lines of rails  13 
Construction of street tramways and tramroads  13 
Power to alter layout etc. of streets  14 
Street works  14 
Restoration of streets if street tramway is discontinued  14 
Level crossings  14 
Attachment of apparatus to buildings  15 
Mode of construction and operation of transit system  15 
Application of existing powers  15 
Traffic signs  15 
Traffic regulation  16 
Power to transfer undertaking  17 
Disapplication of other railway legislation  17 
Interpretation  17 
Schedule 5: Highways  18 
2 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Stopping up  18 
Effect of stopping up of highway  20 
Creation of public rights of way over new footpaths, bridleways etc.  20 
Deviation of new footpaths, bridleways etc.  20 
Permanent obstruction  20 
Temporary interference  21 
Street works  21 
Working sites in highways  22 
Roads constructed as highways  23 
Maintenance  23 
Bridges carrying highways  24 
Part 2: Compulsory Acquisition of Land  24 
Clause 4: Power to acquire land compulsorily  24 
Schedule 6: Acquisition of land for particular purposes  25 
Schedule 7: Acquisition of land -  application of compulsory purchase legislation  25 
Land Clauses Consolidation Act 1845  25 
Compulsory Purchase Act 1965  25 
Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981  25 
Acquisition of Land Act 1981  26 
Clause 5: Acquisition of rights and imposition of restrictive covenants  26 
Schedule 8: Land where powers of acquisition are limited to acquisition of rights or imposition of restrictive 
covenants  26 
Schedule 9: Acquisition of rights in land etc: application of compulsory purchase legislation  27 
Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 and compensation enactments  27 
Schedule 10: Acquisition of rights in land: substituted Schedule 2A for Compulsory Purchase Act 1965  27 
Clause 6: Acquisition of airspace  27 
Clause 7: Acquisition of subsoil or under -surface  27 
Schedule 11: Land where powers of acquisition are limited to sub- surface acquisition  28 
Restriction of power of compulsory acquisition to land under the surface or rights of passage  28 
Clause 8: Highway subsoil  29 
Schedule 12: Highways: restrictions on powers to use subsoils and acquire land  29 
Clause 9: Termination of power to acquire land  29 
Schedule 13: Rights to require acquisition  29 
Part 3: Extinction and Exclusion of Rights over Land  30 
Clause 10: Extinction of rights over land  30 
Schedule 14: Extinction of rights over land  30 
Land to which Schedule applies  31 
Private rights  31 
General rights  31 
Meaning of “the appropriate time”  31 
Amendments to registers of common land or town or village greens  31 
Interpretation  32 
Clause 11: Extinction of rights of statutory undertakers  32 
Clause 12: Exclusion of new rights of way  32 
Part 4: Temporary Possession and Use of Land  32 
Clause 13: Temporary possession and use of land  32 
Schedule 15: Temporary possession and use of land  32 
Right to enter upon and take possession of land  33 
Exceptions  33 
Powers exercisable on land of which temporary possession has been taken  33 
Procedure and compensation  33 
3 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Right to enter upon and take possession of land  34 
Procedure and compensation  34 
Suspension of rights relation to land  34 
Enforcement  34 
Schedule 16: temporary possession and use of land: table of land  35 
Clause 14: Use of roads  35 
Clause 15: Cranes  35 
Clause 16: Enforcement of restrictions on land use  35 
Clause 17: Compensation for injurious affection  36 
Part 5: Planning  36 
Clause 18: Deemed planning permission  36 
Schedule 17: Conditions of deemed planning permission  36 
Conditions relating to building works  36 
Conditions relating to other construction works  37 
Conditions relating to matters ancillary to development  37 
Conditions relating to road transport  37 
Conditions relating to waste and spoil disposal and evacuation  37 
Conditions on bringing scheduled works and depots into use  38 
Conditions relating to discontinuation of ancillary operations  38 
Conditions relating to site restoration  38 
Specification of qualifying authorities  38 
Transition  38 
Requests for planning approval  39 
Fees for requests for approval  39 
Consultation on requests for approval  39 
Directions restricting powers of approval and compulsory reference of requests for approval  39 
Non- material changes to approvals  39 
Termination of approval relating to road transportation arrangements  40 
Appeals  40 
Guidance by Secretary of State  40 
Regulations  40 
Interpretation  40 
Clause 19: Time limit on deemed planning permission  40 
Clause 20: Power to disapply deemed planning permission  41 
Clause 21: Development consent  41 
Part 6: Deregulation  41 
Clause 22: Listed buildings and Ancient Monuments  41 
Schedule 18: Listed buildings  41 
Buildings authorised to be demolished, altered or extended  41 
Buildings authorised to be altered or extended for heritage or monitoring purposes  41 
Damage to buildings  42 
Power to disapply provision made by Paragraphs 1 to 4  42 
Heritage partnership agreements  42 
Inspection and observation of works  42 
Recording of buildings  42 
Interpretation  42 
Schedule 19: Ancient monuments  43 
Disapplication of controls  43 
Power to disapply provision made by Paragraphs 1 and 2  43 
Inspection and observation of works etc.  44 
Interpretation  44 
Clause 23: Burial grounds  44 
4 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Schedule 20: Burial grounds  44 
Notice of removal of remains or monument  44 
Removal of remains under licence 44 
Removal of remains by nominated undertaker  44 
Removal of monuments  45 
Records  45 
Discharge of functions by nominated undertaker  46 
Clause 24: Consecrated land  46 
Clause 25: Commons and open spaces  46 
Clause 26: Trees  46 
Clause 27: Overhead lines  46 
Clause 28: Water  47 
Schedule 21: Water  47 
Clause 29: Buildings  48 
Schedule 22: Buildings  48 
Schedule 23: Party walls etc.  49 
Clause 30: Street Works  50 
Schedule 24: Street Works  50 
Clause 31: Lorries  52 
Schedule 25: Lorries  52 
Clause 32: Noise  53 
Schedule 26: Noise  53 
Clause 33: Local Acts  53 
Schedule 27: Local Acts  54 
Clause 34: Community Infrastructure Levy  54 
Part 7: Railway Matters  54 
Clause 35: Objectives of Office of Rail and Road  54 
Clause 36: Disapplication of licensing requirement in pre -operational phase  54 
Clause 37: Disapplication of statutory closure provisions  55 
Clause 38: Other railway legislation etc.  55 
Schedule 28: Application of other railway legislation etc.  55 
Clause 39: Co -operation  56 
Schedule 29: Arbitration between railway operators  56 
Clause 40: Transfer of functions relating to works 57 
Part 8: Traffic  57 
Clause 41: Traffic  57 
Schedule 30: Traffic regulation  57 
Part 9: Nominated Undertaker  59 
Clause 42: Nominated Undertaker  59 
Part 10: Statutory Undertakers  60 
Clause 43: Extension of planning permission for statutory undertakers  60 
Schedule 31: Extension of planning permission for statutory undertakers  60 
Clause 44: Protective Provisions  60 
Schedule 32: Protective provisions 60 
Clause 45: Existing agreements  70 
Part 11: Reinstatement and environmental works  70 
Clause 46: Compulsory acquisition of land for relocation of an undertaking  70 
Clause 47: Power to carry out reinstatement works  71 
Clause 48: Planning permission: works involving reinstatement of undertaking  71 
Clause 49: Enforcement of environmental covenants  72 
5 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Part 12: Further High Speed Rail Works  72 
Clause 50: Power to apply Act to further high speed rail works  72 
Part 13: The Crown  73 
Clause 51: Application of powers to Crown land 73 
Clause 52: Highways for which the Secretary of State is highway authority  74 
Clause 53: Crown Estate  74 
Part 14: Deposited Plans and Sections  74 
Clause 54: “Deposited plans” and “deposited sections”  74 
Clause 55: Correction of deposited plans  74 
Part 15: Miscellaneous and General  75 
Clause 57: Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations: miscellaneous  75 
Clause 58: Arbitration  75 
Clause 59: Notices and other documents  76 
Clause 60: Vocational Qualifications  76 
Clause 61: Resumption of previous use of land  76 
Part 16: Interpretation  76 
Clause 62: “Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes”  76 
Clause 63: Interpretation  77 
Part 17: Final  77 
Clause 64: Scotland  77 
Schedule 33: Scottish modifications  77 
Clause 65: Financial provision  80 
Clause 66: Commencement and short title  80 
Commencement  81 
Financial implications of the Bill  81 
Parliamentary approval for financial costs or for charges imposed  81 
Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights  81 
Environment Act 2021  82 
Related documents  83 
Annex A - Territorial extent and application in the United Kingdom  84 
Subject matter and legislative competence of devolved legislatures  89 
6 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Overview of the Bill 
1  This Bill confers the powers required to construct part of the second phase –  “Phase 2b (Crewe 
– Manchester)” - of a proposed new national high speed rail network, “High Speed 2” (or 
“HS2”). Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) will involve the construction of a new railway line 
from Crewe to Manchester, serving new stations at Manchester Airport and Manchester 
Piccadilly. A railway  will also be constructed  between  Hoo Green in Cheshire and a junction 
with the West Coast Main Line at Bamfurlong , which  will enable trains to transfer between 
the HS2 main line and the West Coast Main Line. A new train stabling facility for HS2 trains will also be constructed between Gretna Green and Kirkpatrick Fleming in Dumfries and 
Galloway.  A 15 mile  stretch  of the Phase 2b route will also form the backbone of Northern 
Powerhouse Rail , a proposed new rail network connecting major cities in the North of 
England.   
2  On 21  May 2024 a new Instruction Motion was passed for this bill. The Instruction Motion 
provides that only those works required as part of Northern Powerhouse Rail should be 
continued, with all other works to be removed from the B ill before it is reported back to the 
House by the Select Committee.  
Policy background  
3  The 2010 Coalition Programme for Government included a commitment to establish a 
national high speed rail network, and to do so in phases. Following a period of consultation and an appraisal of sustainability, in January 2012 the Secretary of State for Transport 
presented to Parliament the Command Paper “High Speed Rail: Investing in Britain’s Future -  
Decisions and Next Steps” (Cm 8247) . In that paper, the Secretary of State decided to promote 
a high speed rail network known as “HS2” linking London, the West Midlands, Leeds and 
Manchester with intermediate stations in the East Midlands and Sheffield.  
4  In November 2016, the Government published the Command Paper  “High Speed Two: From 
Crewe to Manchester, the West Midlands to Leeds and beyond” (Cm 9355)  confirming most  of 
the Phase 2b route. Alongside the preferred route of Phase 2b, the Government also 
announced a consultation on seven route refinement areas. On 17 July 2017, the Government 
announced a decision on these refinements and confirmed the remainder of the preferred 
route for Phase 2b.  
5  Consultations were run on both the working draft Environmental Statement and working 
draft Equality Im pact Assessment Report in October 2018. These consultations allowed 
members of the public and organisations to comment on preliminary environmental 
information and the potential effects of constructing and operating  Phase 2b on groups of 
people with protected characteristics.  
6  The Government commissioned Douglas Oakervee to lead a review of the HS2  project in 
August 2019. The Oakervee Review was published in February 2020 and the Government 
announced its decision to proceed with the project.  As part of this announcement, Phase 2b 
was to be sp lit into smaller, more manageable sections, delivered through separate hybrid 
Bills.  
7  The Government  also accepted the Oakervee recommendation to proceed with an Integrated 
Rail Plan  for the North and Midlands . This set out the form,  scope and phasing of Northern 
Powerhouse Rail, HS2 Phase 2b, Midlands Rail Hub  and other major rail  programmes .  
7 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 8  The Integrated Rail Plan  was published o n 18 November 2021, and confirmed the 
Government’s intention to build HS2 from Crewe to Manchester  with new stations at 
Manchester Airport and Manchester Piccadilly.  
9  On 4 October 2023 the Government publishe d Network North:  Transforming British 
Transport (CP946) , cancelling HS2 North of the West Midlands, but recommitting to delivery 
of Northern Powerhouse Rail  as previously planned.  On 25 March 2024 the Government 
confirmed that it would continue to promote this bill to deliver the 15 miles of the former 
Phase 2b route  between Millington, in Cheshire and Manchester  still required for Northern 
Powerhouse Rail.     
10  The High Speed Rail (Preparation) Act 2013 authorises the Secretary of State to incur 
expenditure in preparation for the construction of a high speed rail network. That Act is 
intended to ensure that, following enactment of the High Speed Rail ( Crewe - Manchester ) 
Bill, the development of the proposed network might proceed without delay. That Act’s other 
provisions include a power for the Secretary of State to incur expenditure in providing 
compensation in respect of property likely to be affected by the construction of the proposed 
network.  
11  The Government proposes that, subject to the successful passage of the High Speed Rail 
(Crewe - Manchester ) Bill, construction of the railway between Millington  and Manchester 
would commence i mmediately following Royal Assent .  
12  This Bill is a  hybrid  Bill. This means it is of general application, but it contains provisions 
which have a different legal effect on the private interests of particular persons. In procedural 
terms, this means it will be considered as a Public Bill, but will be treated as similar to a 
Private Bill during certain stages of its passage through Parliament. The hybrid Bill procedure 
gives those persons who are directly and specially affected an opportunity to petition against 
the Bill and be heard in Select Committee.   
Legal background  
13  This Bill will form part of the legislative authority for the construction of the high speed rail 
network from Crewe to Manchester . The High Speed Rail (London –  West Midlands) Act 2017 
provides the legislative authority for the construction of the first phase of the network from 
London to West Midlands.  The High Speed Rail (West Midlands - Crewe) Act  2021 provides 
the legislative authority for the construction of the second phase from the West Midlands to Crewe. 
Territorial extent and application  
14  The provision made by the Bill for the acquisition of land and the authorisation of works is local in nature. However, as with the High Speed Rail (London -West Midlands) Act 2017 (the 
Phase one Act), the High Speed Rail (West Midlands- Crewe) Act 2021 (the Phase 2a Act), the 
Crossrail Act 2008, the Channel Tunnel Rail Link Act 1996 and other hybrid bills, this Bill does 
not expressly limit its territorial extent. This means that that the Bill extends to the United 
Kingdom but most of the provisions will apply to England and Scotland only.  
15  Although the high speed rail line authorised by the Bill will be situated in England only, the 
Bill does authorise development in Scotland for the purposes of ensuring an effective link 
8 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 between the high speed rail line and the West Coast Mainline through the provision of a depot 
for stabling trains. Therefore, the majority of the provisions will apply to England and also to 
Scotland.  
16  At introduction this Bill, unlike the provisions of the Phase 2a Act, but similar to the Phase one 
Act, will contain provisions which trigger the Sewel convention. The Sewel convention 
provides that Westminster will not normally legislate with regards to devolved matters in 
Scotland without the consent of the Scottish Parliament. While cross -border rail infrastructure 
is a reserved matter, there are provisions in the Bill which require that  consent to legislate will 
be sought  from the Scottish Government.  
17  None of the provisions contained in this Bill will have an impact upon matters that have been 
devolved to the Welsh Government or the Northern Ireland Assembly.  
18  The Rt Hon Louise Haigh  MP is of the view that the Bill as introduced into the House of 
Commons does not contain provision which, if enacted, would affect trade between Northern 
Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom. Accordingly, no statement under section 13C of 
the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 has been made.  
19  See the table in Annex A for a summary of the position regarding territorial extent and 
application  in the United Ki ngdom. 
9 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
  
Commentary on provisions of Bill/Act   
Part 1: Works  
Clause  1: Power to construct and maintain works for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)   
1  The primary purpose of the Bill is to authorise the construction of Phase 2b (Crewe –  
Manchester) of High Speed 2. The provisions in Clause  1 allow the nominated undertaker to 
carry out the construction and maintenance of the principal works for this (known as the 
scheduled works), further detail s of which can be found in Schedule 1 . 
Schedule 1 : Scheduled Works  
Construction requirements  
2  Schedule 1  sets out the Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester) scheduled works, which are the main 
works authorised by the Bill. As well as railway works, these include tram works in Manchester required in consequence of the constructions of the railway works. Each of these 
works has a centre line (or in the case of a road widening, a limit of widening) shown for it on 
the deposited plans, with a limit of lateral deviation, and a level shown for it on the deposited 
sections.  
3  By virtue of P aragraph 1(1) , the scheduled works must be constructed in the lines or situations, 
and at the levels, shown on these plans. Some buildings also have an upper limit shown for 
them on the deposited sections, in which case the relevant works must be constructed within 
the limit.  
4  Paragraph 1(2)  allows deviation laterally from these lines or situations, but only within the 
limits of deviation shown on the plans. It also allows unlimited deviation downwards from 
the levels shown, and deviation upwards of not more than three metres. This power to deviate 
upwards is subject to any upper limit applying to stations, depots and shafts, if applicable.  
5  Paragraph 1(3)  allows the nominated undertaker to substitute an engineering work not shown 
on the deposited plans or specified in the Schedule for an engineering work shown on those 
plans or specified in the Schedule.  
6  Paragraph 1(4)  indicates this may include a bridge, tunnel, viaduct, cutting or embankment.  
Clause  2: Further provision about works   
7  Subsection (1)  allows the nominated undertaker to carry out ancillary works within the Act 
limits. Act limits are defined in Clause 63(1) as land within the limits of deviation or within the 
limits of land to be acquired or used.  
8  The types of works which may be undertaken in connection with the railway are set out in 
Subsections (1)  and (2).  
9  Subsection (3)  allows the nominated undertaker to carry out, within the Act limits, landscaping 
or other mitigation works to reduce the impact of construction, maintenance or operation of the Phase 2b works, and to undertake works which are intended to benefit or protect land 
affected by the Phase 2b works.  
10 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 10  Subsection (4)  introduces Schedule 2 , which contains additional works powers. Details of these 
can be found below.  
11  Subsection (5)  authorises the nominated undertaker to carry out the electric line works that are 
specifically authorised by the Bill and as specified in  Schedule 3 . 
12  Subsection (6) authorises a set of ancillary works powers as set out in Sc hedule 4  in relation to  
the Manchester tram works. Details of these ancillary powers can be found below.  
Schedule 2: Works  
Authority to survey and investigate land  and protect and remove flora and fauna  
13  Schedule 2  contains a number of further and supplementary works powers for Phase 2b  
(Crewe – Manchester) purposes .  
14  Paragraph s 1(1) and 1(4) authorise the nominated undertaker to survey or investigate land 
which is within the Act limits or affected by the Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) works to 
protect or remove flora or fauna.  
15  Paragraphs  1(2) and 1(3) provide that the nominated undertaker may enter land for these 
purposes and to monitor the effectiveness of mitigation measures.  
16  Paragraphs  1(5) and 1(6) apply provisions of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 on the 
exercise of these powers. These include the requirements to give notice to landowners, to pay 
compensation in relation to damage and to obtain a warrant where necessary authorising the 
use of force to enter land. 
Support of buildings and apparatus etc.  
17  Paragraph 2(1)  enables the nominated undertaker, on giving 8 weeks’ notice to the occupier, to 
support or strengthen buildings that may be affected by construction. This is because there 
may be cases where construction can lead to ground movement which requires supporting or 
strengthening work to be carried out for nearby buildings. These powers apply to buildings 
within the relevant distance of the works (see P aragraph 6(3)  of Schedule 2 ).  
18  Paragraph 2(2)  provides for recourse to arbitration if the occupier disputes the need for the 
supporting work to be carried out within 21 days . 
19  Paragraph 2(3) enables an arbitrator to prescribe how such supporting works are to be 
undertaken if the arbitrator decides the conditions  of sub-paragraph (1)(a)  are met .  
20  Paragraph 2(4)  contains provisions for the nominated undertaker to enter adjacent land to 
carry out the supporting works if the  works  cannot reasonably conveniently be carried out 
without doing so. The nominated undertaker must give the owners of the adjacent land 14 days’ notice  before entering the land.  
21  Paragraph 2(5)  provides that the power under s ub-paragraph s (1) or (4) may be exercised 
without notice in an emergency.  
22  Paragraph 2(6)  permits the nominated undertaker to enter and survey buildings and land to 
decide whether and how to carry out supporting work . Paragraph 2(7)  sets 14 days’ notice for 
this entry.  
23  Under Paragraph 2(8)  the nominated undertaker may  leave equipment or material in, next to , 
or under the building, or on or under land in its vicinity , in order to strengthen or support a 
11 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 building.  
24  Paragraph 3 (1) provides that the nominated undertaker may carry out further supporting or 
strengthening works for a building previously supported under P aragraph 2  providing that  8 
weeks’ notice  is given .  
25  Paragraph 3(2)  sets out the period within which this can be done, namely 5 years from when 
the Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) work necessitating the previous supporting work was 
brought into general use.  
26  Paragraph s 3(3) to (8) mirror Paragraphs 2(2)  to (7) for the further supporting works.  
27  Paragraph 4 (1) allows the nominated undertaker to install and operate movement measuring  
apparatus on any building.  
28  Paragraphs 4(2) to  4(10) set out s imilar provisions about objections and arbitration, entry onto 
adjacent land and surveying as for P aragraph 2 of this Schedule. Under P aragraph 4(7) , the 
nominated undertaker may also from time to time maintain, repair or alter the position of 
movement measuring  apparatus and take readings from it.  
29  Paragraph 5  applies Paragraphs 2  to 4 to the apparatus of a utility undertaker or relevant 
pipe-lines belonging to another body. This is subject to the conditions set out in P aragraph 5(3)  
and modifications in P aragraph 5(5) . 
30  Paragraph 6  refers to relevant definitions.  
Trees on neighbouring land 
31  Paragraph 7 (1) to 7(7) provides for cases where trees overhang or otherwise encroach on land 
used for the purposes of Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester) . The nominated undertaker may 
serve a notice (“a tree works notice”) on the occupier of the land requiring the occupier to remove or prune a tree or cut its roots for maintenance or safety reasons. The occupier may then serve a counter notice within 28 days in which case the tree works notice only has effect 
if confirmed by the county court. If a tree works notice is in effect for a continuous period of 
28 days without being complied with, the nominated undertaker may enter the land and carry 
out the tree works.  
32  Paragraph 7(8) provides that works required by a tree works notice may be carried out on a 
tree which is subject to a tree preservation order or which is in a conservation area.  
33  Paragraph 7(9) allows a landowner to recover compensation for complying with a tree works 
notice.  
Exercise of powers of rights of entry under P aragraphs 2 to 7  
34  Paragraph 8  applies where the nominated undertaker can enter land under any provisions set 
out in Paragraphs 2 to 7. 
35  Paragraphs  8(2) and 8(3) contains provisions to apply and modify certain sections of Part 7 of 
the Housing and Planning Act 2016 as respects the powers of entry under P aragraphs 2  to 7. 
These include the requirements to give notice to landowners, to pay compensation in relation 
to damage, and to obtain a warrant where necessary authorising the use of force to enter land.  
Noise mitigation for buildings  
36  Paragraph 9  authorises the nominated undertaker to carry out noise mitigation works in 
respect of a building if it is for the purposes of or in connection with the construction or 
12 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 operation of any of the works authorised by the Act . Such works may be carried out only with 
the consent of the owners and occupiers of the building.  
Discharge of water  
37  Paragraph 10 authorises the nominated undertaker to use watercourses and public sewers and 
drains for the purposes of construction or maintenance of works authorised by the Bill. 
Paragraph 10 (1) provides that this may entail the laying, removal and alteration of pipes or 
making connections with the watercourses, sewers or drains within the Act limits.  
38  Paragraph 10(2)  provides that the nominated undertaker may not discharge water into any 
public sewers or drains without the agreement of the owner, whose consent cannot be 
unreasonably withheld.  
39  Paragraph 10(3)  requires the nominated undertaker not to make openings into public drains or 
sewers unless the owner  has given approval of the plans and the owner has been given an 
opportunity to supervise the works.  
40  Under Paragraph 10(4) the nominated undertaker must not damage or interfere with the beds 
or banks of any watercourse forming part of a main river.  
41  Paragraph 10(5)  requires the nominated undertaker to take reasonable steps to secure that 
water being discharged is as free as is practicable from any solid substance, such as soil , 
gravel,  oil, or any other matter in suspension.  
42  Paragraph 10(6)  makes it clear that in the event of any dispute as to the giving of consent under 
Paragraph 10,  the matter should be referred to arbitration if both parties agree to do so, and to 
the Secretary of State if they do not. 
43  Paragraph 10(7)  sets out a number of definitions used in Paragraph 10.  
Temporary interference with waterways  
44  Paragraph 11 contains provisions to allow the nominated undertaker to interfere temporarily 
with the waterways identified in Paragraph 11(1).   
45  Paragraph 11(2)  provides that the nominated undertaker may carry out temporary works or 
dredging works in relation to these waterways, can temporarily moor or anchor vessels in a waterway mentioned in Paragraph 11(1), and  can temporarily close such waterways .  
46  Paragraph 11(3)  sets out that no more of a waterway is to be closed than is necessary in the 
circumstances , and if complete closure is necessary , then all reasonable steps are to be taken to 
cause the minimum obstruction to users.  
47  Paragraph s 11(4)  and (5) provide that the nominated undertaker is not liable for any losses 
which occur as a result of any interference with a public right of navigation, and provide for 
compensation for losses as a result of interference with a private right of navigation.  
48  Under Paragraph 11(6),  if there is a dispute, compensation must be determined in accordance 
with Part 1 of the Land Compensation Act 1961.  
Electronic communications apparatus  
49  Paragraph 12  allows the nominated undertaker, when installing telecommunications apparatus 
for Phase 2b, to provide additional capacity for others’ use  including by extending or altering 
electronic communications apparatus to provide such capacity .  
13 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 50  Under Paragraph 12(2), “ electronic communication apparatus” has the same meaning as given 
by Paragraph 5(1) of Schedule 3A to the Communications Act 2003.  This term  excludes  radio 
masts.  
Schedule 3: Overhead line diversions  
51  The table in this Schedule identifies the overhead line works authorised by Clause  2(5). 
Clause  3: Highways  
52  Subsection (1)  requires the nominated undertaker to gain  the consent of any relevant strategic 
highways company before carrying out works in relation to a strategic highway.  
53  Subsection (2)  introduces Schedule 5  which contains provisions relating to highways.  
Schedule 4: Manchester tram works  
54  Schedule 4  contains ancillary works powers in relation to the Manchester tram works.  
General  
55  Paragraph 1  sets out that powers in Schedule  4 are in addition to powers contained in the rest of 
this Bill. 
Further powers in relation to the construction and maintenance of the Manchester tram 
works  
56  Paragraphs 2(1)  and 2(2) allow the nominated undertaker to carry out the specified works on 
the Manchester tram network for the purposes of construction, maintenance or mitigation of 
works authorised by the Bill.  
57  Paragraph 2(3)  provides that the works in P aragraphs 2(1)  and (2) may not take place within the 
boundaries of streets outside the Act limits without the consent of the street authority, whose 
consent cannot be unreasonably withheld.  
58  Under Paragraph  2(4), Paragraph 2(5)  applies where the nominated undertaker  lays down 
conduits for Manchester tram works apparatus.  
59  Paragraph  2(5) allows other persons to use conduits or access  facilities to conduits constructed 
for the purposes of the Manchester tram works as agreed between  the nominated undertaker  
and the other persons . 
Powers in relation to laying down lines of rails  
60  Paragraph 3  allows the nominated undertaker to lay down different configurations of rails as 
part of the Manchester tram works, provided that consent has been granted by the street 
authority, which cannot be unreasonably withheld.  
Construction of street tramways and tramroads  
61  Notwithstanding  how the Manchester tram works are described in the Act, P aragraph 4(1)  
provides that the tram works can be constructed along a street as a street tramway or off -road 
as a tramroad and are to be regarded as authorised to be constructed in the chosen way. This 
applies as long as the construction is within the limits of deviation for that work.   
62  If a tramway becomes a tramroad through the creation or extinction of rights of way , 
Paragraph 4(2)  states that the new tramroad should be treated as if it were constructed as a 
tramroad. The same applies for a tramroad which becomes a tramway. 
14 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Power to alter layout etc. of streets  
63  Under Paragraph 5(1) , the nominated undertaker can change the layout and carry out 
supporting works in any street named in column 1 of the table in Part 2  of Schedule 4 .  
64  Paragraph 5(2)  allows the nominated undertaker to alter the layout of any street along which 
tram rails currently run or will run, as well as to alter the layout of any street which has a 
junction with a street along which tram rails currently run or will run.  
65  Paragraph 5(3)  specifies work which could be carried out under P aragraph 5(2) .  
66  Paragraph 5(4)  provides that powers under P aragraphs 5(2) and 5(3) must not be exercised 
without the consent of the street authority, who cannot unreasonably withhold that consent.  
67  Paragraph 5(5)  states that powers under P aragraph 5(2) are additional to the powers under 
Paragraph 5(1) and Paragraph 8 . 
68  Paragraph 5(6)  states that if the nominated undertaker could carry out the works listed in 
Paragraph  5(2), subject to consent, or could carry out works under other provisions in the Bill, 
the works should be carried out subject to the provisions of P aragraph 5(2).  
69  Paragraph 5(7) defines “relevant provision”  as meaning P aragraph 5(1), Paragraph 8 , or Section 1 . 
Street works  
70  Paragraph 6 (1) contains provision for the nominated undertaker to enter any street and install, 
maintain, alter or move apparatus and other works for the purpose of the construction, 
maintenance and use of the authorised transit system.  
71  Under Paragraph 6(2), a ny work undertaken for these purposes outside of the Act limits must 
gain the consent of the street authority. The street authority must not unreasonably withhold 
consent.  
72  Paragraph 6(3)  gives apparatus the same meaning as in Part 3 (street works in England and 
Wales) of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.  A reference to any work or apparatus in 
a street also includes any work or apparatus under, over, along, or upo n that street.  
Restoration of streets if street tramway is discontinued  
73  If tram works are abandoned, or cease operating, under P aragraph 7 , the nominated 
undertaker must restore the portion of the street along which the rails were laid, or were due 
to be laid, unless otherwise agreed with the street authority. This work must take place as 
soon as reasonably practicab le. 
Level crossings  
74  Paragraph 8(1)  allows the nominated undertaker to build and maintain the transit system to 
allow trams to cross roads and highways on level ground.  
75  Under Paragraph 8(2) , the nominated undertaker may provide, maintain  and operate 
protective equipment at  or near  level crossings as necessary.  
76  Paragraph 8(3)  states that any traffic sign placed under P aragraph 8  should be treated as being 
placed under the provisions of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.  
77  Paragraph 8(4)  establishes that the highway authority may enter into agreements with the 
nominated undertaker about the construction or maintenance of level crossings. Any agreement may contain terms and conditions as agreed by the parties involved.  
15 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 78  Paragraph 8(5)  defines the meaning of terms used in Paragraph 8.  
Attachment of apparatus to buildings  
79  Paragraph 9 (1) allows the nominated undertaker to affix equipment to buildings and other 
structures for the purposes of operating the transit system.  
80  Under Paragraph 9(2), t his is subject to subsections (2), (4) to (6), (8) and (9) of section 45 of the 
Public Health Act 1961 (affixing apparatus to buildings for street lighting), which set out a 
process for exercising these powers and safeguards for the building owners.  
Mode of construction and operation of transit system  
81  Paragraphs 10(1)  and 10(2) set out the power and gauge requirements of the transit system.  
82  Under  Paragraphs 10(3)  and 10(4) , where the transit system is constructed in a street or place 
accessible by the public, the nominated undertaker must take care that the transit system is 
constructed so that the street is safe for other users. The nominated undertaker must take the 
character and usage of the street into account when considering how to make the street safe.  
83  Paragraph 10(5)  provides that where works by other persons may impact on the nominated 
undertaker’s obligations under P aragraph 10(3) , consent must be obtained from the nominated 
undertaker before any work takes place. This consent must not be unreasonably withheld.  
Application of existing powers  
84  Paragraph 11  sets out the interaction between the Bill and the provisions of the Greater 
Manchester (Light Rapid Transit System) (Eccles Extension) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/2714), and 
the Greater Manchester (Light Rapid Transit System) Order 2006 (S.I. 2006/405).  
85  Paragraph s 11(1) and  11(2) appl y certain specified provisions of the Greater Manchester (Light 
Rapid Transit System) (Eccles Extension) Order 1996 (S.I. 1996/2714) to the tram system 
authorised by the Bill.  
86  Paragraph 11(3) amends Article 5 (liability in respect of repair of streets) of the Greater 
Manchester (Light Rapid Transit System) Order 2006 (S.I. 2006/405) so as to apply the defence 
under that provision against claims for failure to maintain the highway to liabilities of the 
nominated undertaker under th is Act. 
87  Paragraph 11(4)  stipulates that in the case of a conflict between byelaws made under the 
Greater Manchester (Light Rapid Transit System) (Eccles Extension) Order 1996 in relation to 
Piccadilly station , and any relevant byelaws, the relevant by elaws take precedence, unless a 
provision to the contrary is made with the consent of Network Rail.  
88  Relevant byelaws are defined in P aragraph 11(5) as byelaws made by Network Rail or its 
predecessors  which remain in force  by virtue of the specified legislation . 
Traffic signs  
89  Paragraph 12(1)  allows the nominated undertaker to place or maintain traffic signs for the 
purposes of constructing or operating the tram network. The signs can be placed on any street 
which contains tram rails, any street which gives access to a street which contains tram rails, 
any street used for traffic regulation as set out in Paragraph 13, and any other street as 
reasonably required to give information to traffic.  
90  Paragraph 12(2)  provides that in order to use the powers in P aragraph 12(1) , the nominated 
undertaker must consult the traffic authority about the placement of the signs, and, unless the 
16 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 traffic authority is unwilling to do so, must enter into arrangements with the traffic authority 
for the signs to be placed and maintained by the traffic authority. This does not apply to traffic 
lights.  
91  Paragraph 12(3)  provides that a power under section 65 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 
1984 to give directions to a traffic authority about traffic signs, includes a power to give directions to the nominated undertaker. Any powers used by the nominated undertaker as set 
out in paragraph 12(1)  are subject to, and in compliance with, directions given under section 65 
of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.  
92  Paragraph 12(4)  requires a traffic authority which places and maintains traffic signs on streets 
with trams under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984, must consult with the nominated 
undertaker if these signs would impact the operation of the tram network.  
93  Paragraph 12(5) states that tramcars are public service vehicles.  
94  Paragraph 12(6)  sets out the meaning of the terms “traffic authority” and “traffic sign”.  
Traffic regulation  
95  Paragraph 13( 1)(a) allows the nominated undertaker to make changes to any order made under 
sections 32, 45 or 84 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. P aragraphs 13(1)(b) to (1)(f) allow 
the nominated undertaker to make changes to traffic speed, traffic direction, traffic priority, 
parking provision, road access, and the loading or stopping of vehicles. Changes under  
Paragraphs 13(1)(a) to (2)(f) may be made for the purposes of, in connection with or in 
consequence of constructing, maintaining or operating the transit network at times or on days 
as specified by the nominated undertaker. 
96  Paragraph 13(2) states that the powers under P aragraph 13(1) are subject to the consent of the 
traffic authority, but consent must not be unreasonably withheld.  
97  Under Paragraph 13(3), the powers listed in P aragraph 13(1) cannot be used by the nominated 
undertaker after the transit system has been operational for 12 months. Any restriction or provision made under P aragraph 13(1) may have effect both before and after the 12 -month 
period, subject to the conditions set out in P aragraph 13(8). 
98  Paragraph 13(44) requires the nominated undertaker to consult the relevant chief constable and 
the traffic authority with responsibility for the road before following the requirements of 
Paragraph 13(5). 
99  Paragraph 13(5) requires the nominated undertaker to give to the chief constable and the traffic 
authority no less than 12 weeks’ notice in writing of a permanent provision, or 4 weeks’ notice in writing of a temporary provision, before the nominated undertaker can use the powers in 
Paragraph 13(1). The nominated undertaker must also advertise its intention to use such a 
power in a manner specified in writing by the traffic authority. This must take place within 28 days of receipt of notice for a permanent change, and within 7 days of receipt of notice for a temporary provision.  
100  Paragraph 13(6) stipulates that the nominated undertaker must consult any other persons as 
considered necessary  by the nominated undertaker  before using the powers in P aragraph 
13(2) . Any  responses  received must be taken into consideration.  
101  Paragraph 13(7) provides that any restriction or other provision made by the nominated 
undertaker under sub-paragraph ( 1) has effect as if made by the traffic authority in whose area 
the road is located, or by the local authority in whose area the road is located, depending on 
17 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the relevant legislation. Except for provision  of vehicle speed limits, these rest rictions are 
deemed to be traffic orders for the purposes of Schedule 7 (r oad traffic contraventions subject 
to civil enforcement)  to the Traffic Management Act 2004.  
102  Paragraph 13(8) allows the nominated undertaker to suspend or revoke any restriction or other 
provision made under P aragraph 13  by using powers under P aragraph 13(1). 
103  Paragraph 13(9) defines “traffic authority” as having the same meaning as in 121A of the Road 
Traffic Regulation Act 1984.  
104  Paragraph 13(10) states that powers under P aragraph 13  have effect subject to discussions 
between the nominated undertaker and any person who ha s an interest, or who undertakes 
work relating to premises on the affected road. 
Power to transfer undertaking  
105  Under Paragraph 14(1) , the nominated undertaker may permanently transfer its functions 
relating to the Manchester tram works or related functions to another person. This  can only 
take place with the consent of the Secretary of Stat e.  
106  Paragraph 14(2) allows the same to occur, but only for a period of time as agreed between the 
nominated undertaker and the other party. This  can only take place with the consent of the 
Secretary of State.  
107  Paragraph 14(3)  states that any agreement made under Paragraphs 14(1) or 14(2)  can contain 
provisions relating to the costs of carrying out the functions by the nominated undertaker or 
any other party.  
108  Paragraph 14(4) provides that where a reference is made in the Act  to the nominated 
undertaker, it also applies to the transferee or lessee when an agreement is made under 
Paragraphs 14(1)  or 14(2) . 
109  Under  Paragraph 14(5) , the use of powers by the transferee or lessee is subject to the same 
restrictions, liabilities and obligations under the Act  as would apply if those powers were 
used by the nominated undertaker. 
Disapplication of other railway legislation  
110  Paragraph 15(1) disapplies in relation to the transit system, the Highways (Railway Crossings) 
Act 1839, the Railway Regulation Acts 1840 to 1893, the provisions of the Railway Clause s 
Consolidation Act 1845 referred to in P aragraph 4(1) of Schedule 5,  and sections 55 and 56 of 
the British Transport Commission Act 1949.  
111  Paragraph 15(2)  states that Paragraph 15 applies despite anything set out in  Schedule 28.  
Interpretation  
112  Paragraph 16(1)  contains a number of definition of terms used in Schedule 4  and the ways in 
which they should be applied in Schedule 4 . For any definitions which refer to another Act, 
please see the definition in the relevant piece of legislation.  
113  Paragraph 16(2)  states that in the case of any street with a pedestrian planning order made 
under section 249(2)  (order extinguishing right to use vehicles on highway) o f the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 where there is no kerb on a street, the kerbline is taken to be the 
edge of the part of the street where vehicles are permitted. 
18 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Schedule 5: Highways  
114  Schedule 5  deals with highways as they relate to the works authorised by this Act . 
Part 1 – Highway access  
115  Paragraph 1  contains provision for the nominated undertaker to create or improve means of 
access within the Act limits.  
116  For access at places shown on the deposited plans, P aragraph 1(2) provides that on any 
highway used by vehicular traffic, works under Paragraph 1(1)  to make a means of access may 
only be carried out after giving at least 28 days’ notice to the highway authority.  
117  Paragraphs 1 (3) and 1(4) provide that the works are not to be carried out if the highway 
authority objects to the siting of the access within the 28 -day period, because in its view , the 
access ought to be moved to another place within the Act limits on grounds of road safety , or 
because of injury to local amenity.  The works must be reasonabl y capa ble of being carried out  
at that other  place.  
118  If works under Paragraph 1(1) are to be carried out on a highway with vehicular traffic, 
Paragraph 1(5) requires that the work s are carried out in accordance with plans approved by 
the highway authority.  
119  Under Paragraph 1 (6), the only ground on which approval of the plans can be refused is that 
the plans ought to be modified to prevent or reduce either injury to local amenity or effects on 
road safety, and are reasonably capable of being so modified.  
120  Paragraphs 1 (7) and 1(8) concern works  under Paragraph 1(1)  for access undertaken within the 
Act limits at places not shown on the deposited plans. These require the highway authority’s 
approval, which must not  be unreasonably withheld.  
121  Paragraph (9)  requires  the highway authority to consider  effects on road safety and on the free 
flow of traffic  when considering whether to give consent  or approval  for the purposes of  
Paragraph 1(7)  or Paragraph 1(8) . 
122  Paragraphs 1 (10) and 1(11) establish that, if  the highway authority does not respond within 28 
days to requests under Paragraphs 1(5), 1( 7), or 1(8) , it is assumed to have approved the plans 
or given consent.  
123  Paragraph 1 (12) provides that, if the location of access works is moved as a result of P aragraph 
1(3), then Paragraphs 1 (5), 1(7), and 1(8) apply as if the new location were shown on the 
deposited plans.  
124  Under P aragraph 1(13), if there is any dispute with a highway authority under Paragraph 1,  the 
matter should be referred to arbitration if both parties agree to do so, and to the Secretary of 
State if they do not.  
Part 2 – Interference with highways  
Stopping up  
125  Paragraph 2 (1) authorises the nominated undertaker to stop up certain highways permanently. 
The highways which may be stoppe d-up for this purpose are listed in table 1  or 2 in Part 4  of 
this Schedule .  
126  Under  Paragraph 2(2), highways specified in table 1  in Part 4 of the Schedule  may not be 
stopped up unless all of the land abutting the highway fall into one or more categories 
19 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 described in P aragraph  2(2).  
127  Under Paragraph 2(3), a highway  or part of a highway  specified in table 2  may only be stopped 
up on provision of an alternative. P aragraph 2(3) provides that the nominated undertaker may 
temporarily stop up a highway specified in table 2  before the permanent closure when this is 
required to make the connection with the alternative road. 
128  Paragraph 2(4)  and 2(5) require the relevant highway authority to be consulted with regards  to 
public safety or convenience before the temporary closure under P aragraph 2(3). 
129  Under Paragraph 2(6) , if a new highway is provided as specified in column (3) of table 2  in Part 
4 of Schedule 5 , the opening day of that highway  is taken to be either determined under 
Paragraph 17(6) , or if  Paragra ph 17(6) doe s not apply, the opening date is certified under 
Para graph 7(5).   
130  Paragraph 2(7) provides that there is no need to reinstate a highway after a temporary closure 
where the permanent closures follows immediately after the end of the temporary closure.  
131  Paragraph 3(1)  contains provision for the nominated undertaker to stop up a bridleway or 
footpath within the Act limits which is not mentioned in table 1  or 2 (see Part 4  of this 
Schedule ), for the purposes of carrying out the Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) works. 
132  Paragraph 3(2)  provides that the power under Paragraph 3(1)  can only be used  if the stopping 
up has been confirmed by the appropriate Ministers, namely the Secretary of State for 
Transport and the Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs acting 
jointly ( see Paragraph 3(12)). 
133  Paragraph 3(3)  establishes the conditions under which the appropriate ministers can confirm 
the proposed stopping up. As long as the three conditions listed are satisfied, the application 
must be granted.  
134  Paragraph 3(4) states that the appropriate Ministers must notify the nominated undertaker of 
the basis on which an  application under Paragraph 3(2) was granted.  
135  Paragraph 3(5)  stipulates that if a n application  under Paragraph 3(2)  is granted on the basis that 
a substitute footpath or bridleway is to be provided by the nominated undertaker, the original 
cannot be stopped up until the substitute is available.  
136  Paragraph 3(6)  provides that, before the stopping up is confirmed, the nominated undertaker 
must publish certain details in a notice in a local newspaper with a circulation in the relevant 
area. The notice is required to set out how  the footpath or bridleway is to be altered, if there is 
an alternative route, and if no alternative is proposed, the reasons why this is the case. It must 
also specify how affected parties can make representations about the proposals.  
137  Paragraph 3(7)  states that the nominated undertaker must provide copies of the newspaper 
notice to every local authority whose area is affected, and also place the notice  at each end of 
the bridleway or footpath no later than the notice publication date .  
138  Under sub-paragraph (8) , these representations must be considered before the appropriate 
Ministers confirm an application  under Paragraph  3(2). 
139  Paragraph 3(9)  provides that unless the appropriate Ministers direct otherwise, the Ministers’ 
functions under Paragraph 3(2)  must be carried out by a person appointed by them for that 
purpose.  
20 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 140  Paragraphs  3(10)  to 3(12) contain definitions of terms used in Paragraph 3.  
Effect of stopping up of highway  
141  Paragraph 4 (1) provides that where any highway is stopped up under P aragraph 2  or 3, all 
rights of way over or along it are extinguished , and that the Secretary of State may 
appropriate and use the site of the highway without payment if the land on both sides is land 
owned by the Secretary of State.  
142  Under  Paragraph 4(2) and 4(3), compensation is payable for losses arising from the 
extinguishment of a private right of way. In the event of a dispute, s uch compensation is 
determined in accordance with Part 1 of the Land Compensation Act 1961.  
143  Under Paragraph  4(4), the Secretary of State has no rights  to any mines or minerals  under land 
specified in Paragraph 4(1), unless the minerals are extracted or used for Phase 2b  (Crewe – 
Manchester) purposes.  
144  Paragraph 4(5) applies Part 3 of Schedule 2 to the Acquisition of Land Act 1981, concerning the 
working of mines, to land beneath a highway stopped up under P aragraph 2  or 3 which the 
Secretary of State is entitled to take possession of, with specific modifications.  
Creation of public rights of way over new footpaths, bridleways etc.  
145  Paragraph 5 (1) provides for a public right of way to be created over a footpath, bridleway and 
other kinds of way as specified in column 3 of  table 2 , or in table  3 of Part 4  of Schedule 5 .  
146  Under Paragraph  5(2), a public right of way,  as specified in  column 3 of table 2 , or in table 3  of 
Part 4  of Schedule 5 , is created on the date o n which the right of way is first open for public 
use. 
147  Paragraphs 5(3) to 5(5) apply and modify certain provisions of the Highways Act 1980 as 
related  to compensation payable to the landowner s over whose land the right of way was 
created.  
148  Paragraph 5(6) states that a footpath under Paragraph 5(2 ) is open for public use subject to 
Paragraph 17(6)  if an opening date has been determined, and subject to P aragraph 17(5)  where 
there is no opening date.  
Deviation of new footpaths , bridleways etc.  
149  Paragraph 6  enables the nominated undertaker, when providing a footpath, bridleway or other 
kind of way specified in column (3) of table 2  or in table 3  of the Schedule , to deviate laterally to 
any extent from the lines shown on deposited plans, but within the limits shown on those 
plans.  
Permanent obstruction  
150  Paragraph 7  provides that the power to carry out ancillary works under Clause 2(1), (3) and (5) 
may be exercised in a way that permanently obstructs the highway.  
151  Paragraph 7(1)  requires the consent of the highway authority for works  which permanently 
obstruct the highway , which may not be unreasonably withheld.  
152  If these works are disputed, Paragraph 7(2) provides that the matter should be referred to 
arbitration if both parties agree to do so, and to the Secretary of State if they do not.  
153  Paragraph 7 (3) provides that consent will be assumed to have been given after 28 days, unless 
21 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the authority notifies the applicant to the contrary within that 28 day period. 
Temporary interference  
154  Under  Paragraph 8(1), the nominated undertaker may stop up, alter or divert the highway, 
divert traffic from it or prevent persons passing along it, break up or interfere with it or 
temporarily remove street furniture. It may also create or improve temporary accesses from 
the highway to places outside the Act limits (within the Act limits, paragraph 1  of Schedule 5  
authorises the creation or improvement of highway accesses).  
155  Under  Paragraph 8(2), the nominated undertaker may enter upon and use the airspace above 
any highway for the oversailing of cranes.  
156  Under  Paragraph 8(3), the nominated undertaker must provide reasonable access for 
pedestrians to or from premises abutting the highway affected by Paragraph  8(1)(a) to 
Paragraph 8(1)(c) if otherwise there would be no access to those premises . 
157  Where the highway is specified in table 4  in Part 4  of the Schedule , under Paragraph s 8(4) and 
8(5), the relevant authority must be consulted with respect to highway safety and convenience 
before powers under Paragraphs 8(1) or 8(2)  are exercised.  
158  In other cases, P aragraph 8(6) requires the consent of the relevant authority to be obtained in 
writing by the nominated undertaker prior to the power being exercised. Consent under  
Paragraph 8(6) is subject to Paragraph s 8(10) and 8(12). 
159  Paragraphs 8(7) and 8(9) provide that the relevant authority may not unreasonably withhold 
consent, but may apply reasonable conditions in the interests of public safety or convenience, and that any disputes about this must be determined by arbitration if both parties agree to the 
arbitration process, and to the Secretary of State if they do not . 
160  Paragraph 8(8) provides that consent will be assumed to have been given after 28 days, unless 
the authority notifies the applicant to the contrary within that period  of 28 days . 
161  Paragraph 8(10) states that consent is not required under P aragraph 8(5) if the nominated 
undertaker considers work under P aragraph 8(1) needs to be done urgently to prevent serious 
damage, avoid danger to the public, or for the purposes of using powers under any of Paragraphs 2  to 6 of Schedule 2.  
162  Under Paragraph 8(11), t he relevant authority must be consulted  to ensure highway safety and 
reduce public inconvenience as far as reasonably practicable . 
163  Paragraph 8(1 2) provides that consent is not required when the nominated undertaker decides 
it is necessary to place a traffic sign in a highway not specified in table 4  in Part 4 of this 
Schedule in consequence of works in a highway which is specified in that table.   
164  Paragraph 8 (13) provides that a highway stopped up under Paragraphs  1(1)(a) to (1)(d) and 2 
does not have to be reinstated after its temporary closure if that same highway is then permanently stopped up under P aragraph 2(1)  or Paragraph 3(1).  
165  Paragraph 8(1 4) sets out the meanings of “relevant authority” and “street furniture”. 
Street works  
166  Paragraph 9(1)  allows the nominated undertaker to place, maintain, reposition and remove 
apparatus in the highway, and also carry out works for these purposes.  
167  Paragraph 9(2) states that if work could be carried out under either P aragraph 9  of this Schedule , 
22 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 or under Paragraph 5 of Schedule 2, then the work must be carried out under Paragraph 5  of 
Schedule  2. 
168  Paragraph 9(3)  provides that ‘apparatus’ has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the New Roads 
and Street Works Act 1991.  
169  Paragraph 10(1)  treats certain works carried out on highways as major transport works for the 
purposes of Part 3 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.  
170  Under Paragraph  10(2), Paragraph 10(1) provides that , where highway works for Phase 2b  
(Crewe – Manchester) purposes  are carried out by the highway authority under a delegation 
agreement under P aragraph 14(2)  of this Schedule , the normal rules applying to highway 
authorities on whether the works are major highway works are to apply.  
Working sites in highways  
171  Paragraph 11 provides that a highway temporarily stopped up under P aragraph 2(3)(b)  or 
Paragraph 8(1)(a) may be used as a working  site for HS2 where it is within the Act limits.  
Part 3 – Construction and main tenance of highways  
172  Part 3  contains supplementary provision about the construction and maintenance of 
highways.  
173  Under Paragraph 12(1) , if a new highway is constructed, or an existing highway altered (except 
by carrying out street works to which the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 applies), this 
must be done to the reasonable satisfaction of the highway authority.  
174  By virtue of P aragraphs 12(2) and 12(3), within 28 days of a request by the nominated 
undertaker, the highway authority must provide a certificate of their satisfaction or give 
notice of their refusal to issue such a certificate. If they do not do so within that period, then a 
certificate is treated as having been issued.  
175  If a dispute arises over the issuing of a certificate, Paragraph 12(4)  provides that this  matter  
must be settled by referral to arbitration if both parties agree, and to the Secretary of State if 
they do not . 
176  Paragraph 13(1) applies Paragraph 13(2) where the nominated undertaker constructs or realigns 
a highway which is constituted by or  comprises of a carriageway.  
177  Paragraph 13(2)  requires such construction or realignment to be done in accordance with plans 
approved by the highway authority, and such approval not to be unreasonably refused.  
178  If a dispute arises about this, under P aragraph 13(3)  it must be settled by referral to arbitration 
if both parties agree to do so, and to the Secretary of State if they do not.  
179  Paragraph 13(4)  provides that approval is to be treated as having been given after 28 days, 
unless the authority notifies the applicant to the contrary within that period.  
180  Where the nominated undertaker is allowed to stop up or interfere with existing highways, 
Paragraph 14 (1) enables the nominated undertaker to enter into agreements with a highway 
controller about the construction  and expenses of any new highway, alteration of the existing 
highway, or any related matters . 
181  Paragraph 14(2)  allows the nominated undertaker to delegate  powers to a highway controller 
in order to allow the highway controller to construct  any new substitute highway,  or any 
alteration of an existing highway . This includes the power of constructing any bridge over any 
23 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 railway.  
182  According to Paragraph 14(3), any powers delegated under Paragraph 14(2)  which could have 
been carried out under Section 64 or 184 of the H ighways Act 1980, are to be treated as having 
been carried out under those provisions for the purposes of  Section 86(3) of the New Roads 
and Street Works Act 1991.  
183  Paragraph 14(4)  defines the meaning of a “highway controller”.  
184  Paragraph s 15(1) and 15(2) appl y where the works involve extending or realigning a trunk 
road or special road . In such a case, the Secretary of State may , by regulations,  provide that 
the extended or realigned portion is to become a trunk road or motorway on a day specified 
in or under the regulations.  
185  Paragraph s 15(3)  and 15(4)  appl y certain sections of the Highways Act 1980  to specif y the 
classes of traffic which may use the highway . 
Roads constructed as highways  
186  Paragraph 16 applies where the nominated undertaker builds a road as a highway.  
187  Under Paragraphs 16(2) and 16(3) , the highway is created on the date on which the road first 
opens to the public.  
188  Under Paragraphs 16(4) and 16(5) , a temporary highway stops being a highway on the day 
after the date on which the road is last open for public use.  
189  Paragraph 16(6) states that the nominated undertaker must give at least 28 days’ notice to the 
highway authority before closing a temporary highway.  
Maintenance  
190  Paragraph 17 (1) applies Paragraph 17(2)  to the prov ision  of a new highway, or a highway 
altered other than by carrying out street works under the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.  
191  Paragraph s 17(2)  and 17(3)  provide that , unless otherwise agreed,  the nominated undertaker is 
responsible for maintaining the new or altered highway for 12 months from either the date of 
practical completion of the work , or the date it opens for use by the public, whichever is later . 
After that date,  the duty to maintain falls to the highway authority.  
192  Paragraph 17(4)  requires the highway authority, unless otherwise agreed with the nominated 
undertaker, to ensure (during the period that the nominated undertaker is responsible for 
maintenance) that , so far as reasonably practicable , safe passage is maintained along the 
highway with regard to snow and ice.  
193  Paragraph 17(5) requires the highway authority to certify the date on which the highway was 
practically complete or on which it was first open for public use.  
194  Paragraph 17(6)  provides that, if there is a dispute about this, it must be determined by referral 
to arbitration if both parties agree to do so, and to the Secretary of State if they do not.   
195  Paragraph 17(7)  provides that the date of completion of a highway is taken to be determined 
either by arbitration under P aragraph 17(6)  or the date certified under P aragraph 17(5).  
196  Paragraph 17(8)  disapplies  Paragraph 17(2)  in relation  to the structure of bridges over, or 
tunnels under, railways of the nominated undertaker.  
24 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 197  Paragraph 17(9)  makes clear that th is paragraph does not affect section 87 of the New Roads 
and Street Works Act 1991, which enables a local authority to declare prospectively 
maintainable highways.  
198  Under Paragraph 18, where the nominated undertaker is responsible for maintaining a bridge 
carrying a highway over a railway that was constructed or altered under the Act , it may enter 
into an agreement with the body responsible for maintaining the highway to delegate the 
function of maintaining the bridge to that body.  
199  Under section 58 of the Highways Act 1980, highways authorities responsible for maintaining a highway have a defence for any action against them for non- repair if they can prove they 
have proper inspection and maintenance systems in place. Paragraph 19 applies this to the 
maintenance responsibilities of the nominated undertaker under P aragraph s 17(2)  or 17(3)(a).  
200  Paragraph 20 modifies the maintenance duties for bridges applying under section 46 of the 
Railways Clause s Consolidation Act 1845, to bring them into line with current practice (so that 
the highway authority is responsible for maintaining the surface of the highway and the 
nominated undertaker is responsible for the bridge).  
Bridges carrying highways 
201  Paragraph 21 applies the same rules under sections 116 to 117 of the Transport Act 1968 
concerning bridges over railways to Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) of High Speed 2 as apply 
to the national rail network.  
Part 4 – Tables relating to Part 2 of Schedule  
202  Part 4  contains tables that are relevant to the powers exercisable under Part 2  of Schedule  5. 
Part 2: Compulsory Acquisition of Land  
Clause  4: Power to acquire land compul sorily  
203  Clause  4 Subsection (1)  gives the Secretary of State powers of compulsory acquisition over the 
land shown within the limits of deviation and the limits of land to be acquired or used on the plans accompanying this Act. The land may only be acquired if it is needed “for Phase 2b  
(Crewe – Manchester)  purposes”. This expression is defined in Clause  63. 
204  Subsection (2)  introduces Schedule 6 which makes provision about the purposes for which the 
land within the limits of land to be acquired or used, as shown on the Bill plans, may be 
acquired.  
205  Subsection (3)  provides that Part 1 of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 applies to the 
acquisition of land under the Bill as if the Bill were a compulsory purchase order under the Acquisition of Land Act 1981, subject to the modifications contained in Schedule 7 referred to 
below . Part 1 of the 1965 Act provides for procedures for the compulsory acquisition of land.    
206  Subsection (4)  provides that the provisions of the Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) 
Act 1981 also apply as if this Bill were a compulsory purchase order, subject again to the modifications contained in Schedule 7. The 1981 Act, in its application by the Bill, provides an 
alternative streamlined method by which the Secretary of State may compulsorily acquire the 
land required for construction of the railway.  
207  Subsection (5)  introduces Schedule 7 which makes modifications to  the Compulsory Purchase 
Act 1965, the Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981 and other legislation 
25 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 relating to compulsory acquisition in their application to the acquisition of land under the Bill.  
Schedule 6: Acquisition of land for particular purposes  
208  Schedule 6  sets out the purposes for which the land set out in the table in the Schedule  may be 
acquired. The table gives an indication of the purposes for which the land in question may be 
acquired or used (for example for a worksite or for environmental mitigation), but the 
purposes for which the land may be acquired are not limited to those specified.  
Schedule 7 : Acquisition of land -  application of compulsory purchase legislation  
209  Schedule 7  makes provision as regards how certain legislation regarding compulsory purchase 
is to apply to compulsory acquisition under th is Bill. 
Land Clause s Consolidation Act 1845  
210  Paragraph 1  disapplies the Land Clause s Consolidation  Act 1845 in relation to the compulsory 
purchase of land by the Secretary of State under the Bill. 
Compulsory Purchase Act 1965  
211  Paragraph 2  makes modifications to the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 which is to apply to 
compulsory acquisition under the Bill instead of the 1845 Act. P aragraph 2(2) provides that 
section 4 of the 1965 Act (which provides a three -year time limit on the exercise of the power 
of compulsory purchase) is not to apply. A time limit is instead provided by Clause 9. 
Paragraph 2(4) makes a change which is consequential on that made by P aragraph 2(2).   
212  Paragraph 2(3)  reduces the period between serving a notice to treat and entering and taking 
possession from 3 months to 1 month in  cases where only subsoil lying more than 4.5 metres 
below the surface, airspace  or an easement , restrictive covenant  or other right over land is 
acquired.  
213  Paragraph 2( 4) reduces the length of the supplementary notice of entry required to be served 
under section 11A of the 1965 Act on an additional occupier or person with an interest in land 
who is identified after the service of a notice of entry on to the land but before possession has 
been taken. The period of the notice is reduced to 7 days where the newly identified person is an occupier or is an occupier whose existence has not been identified previously because 
misleading information has been given or where only subsoil  lying more than 4.5 metres 
below the surface, airspace or a right is to be acquired or a restrictive covenant is to be 
imposed. In other cases, the period of notice is reduced to 28 days. 
214  Paragraph 2(6) makes it clear that reference to taking possession in Schedule 2A to the 1965 Act, which applies where only part of a house, building or factory is proposed to be acquired, 
are references to taking permanent possession as opposed to taking temporary possession 
under Schedule 15. 
Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981  
215  Paragraph 3  makes modifications to provisions of the Compulsory Purchase (Vesting 
Declarations) Act 1981 for cases where a vesting declaration is made under the Bill and not under a compulsory purchase order. In particular, P aragraph 3(3)(a) provides that the 1981 Act 
has effect as if before section 4 there were inserted section 3A (Preliminary notices) , which 
makes provision for preliminary notices to be served on persons with relevant interests in land in place of the equivalent procedure provided for under the 1981 Act which only applies 
where a compulsory purchase order has been made.  Paragraph 3(3)(b)  amends section 4 
(execution of declaration)  of the 1981 Act  to make provision for the Secretary of State and the 
26 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 owner of an interest in the land to agree  a later vesting date  than that provided for in 
accordance with section 4 of the 1981 Act . 
Acquisition of Land Act 1981  
216  Paragraph 4  makes modifications to provisions of the Acquisition of Land Act 1981 which are 
necessary to make those provisions apply to compulsory acquisition under Bill powers in the 
same way as they apply to acquisition of land under a compulsory purchase order.  
Clause  5: Acquisition of rights and imposition of restrictive covenants  
217  Clause  5(1) gives the Secretary of State power to acquire rights over land (instead of acquiring 
the whole of a person’s interest in land). This includes power to acquire or create easements and other rights and to impose restrictive covenants.  
218  Subs ection  5(2) provides that, in the case of land specified in Schedule 8, only rights in land may 
be compulsorily acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, for the purposes mentioned in the 
table.  
219  Subs ection  5(3) provides that the power of compulsory acquisition  conferred under Clause 4(1) 
includes the power to acquire rights or to impose restrictive covenants for the benefit of a  
person other than the Secretary of State . 
220  Subs ection  5(4) enables the Secretary of State,  by order , to provide that a person specified in the 
order may exercise the powers under the Bill to acquire rights , or impose restrictive 
covenants. Some of the land within the Bill limits, particularly that outside the limits of 
deviation , but within the land to be acquired or used, is intended to be used for the diversion 
of statutory undertakers’ apparatus. An order made under S ubsection  5(4) will enable a 
statutory undertaker to create the rights in land necessary to e ffect the diversion of the 
apparatus rather than those rights being acquired by the Secretary of State for the benefit of 
the undertaker concerned.  
221  Subsection 5(5) provides that the power to make an order under S ubsection  5(4) includes a 
power to make an order varying or revoking an order previously made under that subsection.  
222  Subsections 5(6) and 5(7) make provision for the power to acquire rights or impose covenants 
over land  provided for in Clause  5(1) to be exercised for the benefit of a utility undertaker or 
the owner of a relevant pipeline, where they are for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes . 
Where, immediately before removal of the existing apparatus or pipeline in connection with 
Phase 2b (Crewe - Manchester) purposes , the  apparatus  had the benefit of rights or covenants 
over land in relation to the existing apparatus or pipeline that were subject to commercial or 
other terms , Subsection 5(7)  makes provision for those terms to be reflected in the rights to be 
acquired pursuant to Clause  4(1) of the Bill .  
223  Subsection 5(7) enables rights to be acquired or the covenants to be imposed under S ubsection  
5(6) to have effect incorporating such commercial or other terms as  may be  required in the 
exercise of the power conferred under S ubsection  5(1).  
224  Subsection 5(9) defines  what  a “relevant pipe -line” is for the purposes of Clause 5. 
225  Subsection 5(10) introduces  Schedules 9 and 10 which contain provision about the application of 
compulsory purchase legislation to compulsory acquisition under this Clause . 
Schedule 8: Land where powers of acquisition are limited to acquisition of rights or 
imposition of restrictiv e covenants  
27 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 226  Schedule 8  specifies the land in respect of which the compulsory power in Clause 4(1) is limited 
to the acquisition of rights or the imposition of covenants for the purposes specified in relation 
to the land in column (3)  of the table.  
Schedule 9: Acquisition of rights in land etc: application of compulsory purchase 
legislation  
Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 and compensation enactments  
227  Schedule 9  makes modifications to provisions of compulsory purchase legislation, which refer 
to the acquisition of land, to make them apt for the acquisition of rights and the imposition of 
restrictive covenants. The effect of the modifications is that the regime under that legislation 
will apply where the powers to acquire land under Clause  4(1) are used to acquire existing 
rights, to create rights or to impose restrictive covenants. 
228  Paragraphs 1(a)  and 2 make specific modifications to provisions of the Compulsory Purchase 
Act 1965, the Land Compensation Act 1961  and the Land Compensation Act 1973 which are 
needed to make them apply where rights are acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, in 
exercise of the compulsory acquisition power under Clause 4(1).  
229  Paragraphs 3(1)(a)  and 4 make specific modifications to provisions of the Compulsory 
Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981 which are similarly needed to make them fit where rights are acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, under that power. In addition , 
Paragraphs 1(b)  and 3(1)(b) provide that enactments relating to compulsory acquisition are to 
have effect with such other modifications as may be necessary to make them suitable where 
rights are acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, under that power. 
Schedule 10: Acquisition of rights in land: substituted Schedule 2A for Compulsory 
Purchase Act 1965  
230  Schedule 10 sets outs the version of Schedule 2A to the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 that is 
referred to in P aragraph 2(8) of Schedule 9 . 
Clause  6: Acquisition of airspace  
231  Certain works for the railway may require the taking of only the airspace above land shown 
on the deposited plans rather than the totality of the land. Clause 6 Subsection  (1) enables the 
Secretary of State to acquire compulsorily only the airspace over land, without acquiring the land itself.  
232  Subsection (2)  disapplies the provisions of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 , the Compulsory 
Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981  and the Town and Country Planning Act 1990  which 
enable a landowner, where it is proposed to purchase only part of property, to require the 
whole of the property to be acquired on the ground that taking that part of the land would 
result in material detriment to the remainder of the land. The result is that where only 
airspace over land is acquired, the Secretary of State cannot be required to acquire a greater 
interest in the  property.  
Clause  7: Acquisition of subsoil or under -surface  
233  Some of the land shown on the deposited plans is required for underground railway tunnels 
and ancillary works where only the subsoil of the land needs to be acquired. Clause 7 
Subsection  (1) enables the Secretary of State to acquire compulsorily the subsoil only, rather 
than having to acquire the whole of the land.   
28 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 234  Subsection (2)  disapplies the provisions of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 , the Compulsory 
Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981 , the Land Compensation Act 1973 and the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 which enable a landowner, in certain cases where it is proposed to 
purchase only part of property, to require the whole of the property to be acquired on the 
ground that taking that part of the land would result in material detriment to the remainder of 
the land. The result is that, where only the subsoil of land is acquired, the Secretary of State 
cannot be required to acquire a greater interest in the property.  
235  Subsection (3)  excludes  from a disapplication under Subsection  (2) cases where a cellar, vault, 
arch or other construction forming part of a building is to be acquired compulsorily. In such a case, the landowner’s right to claim that the whole of the property should be acquired on the 
ground of material detriment is not affected.   
236  Subsection (4)  introduces Schedule 11 which in certain cases restricts the Secretary of State’s 
power to acquire land to the purchase of subsoil or under -surface of land, or to both the 
subsoil or under -surface and rights of passage.  
Schedule 11: Land where powers of acquisition are limited to sub -surface acquisition  
Restriction of power of compulsory acquisition to land under the surface or rights of 
passage  
237  Schedule 11 restricts the power of compulsory acquisition under Clause  4(1) to subsoil which is 
specified in the table s in Paragraph s 1 to 4 as being subsoil at a specified depth below surface 
level of the land .  
238  Paragraph 1 provide s that powers of compulsory acquisition may only be exercised in relation 
to so much of the subsoil or und er-surface of land as lies more than 9  meters below surface 
level for land listed in set out in Paragraph 1 . Paragraph 2  provides that powers of compulsory 
acquisition may only be exercised in relation to so much of the subsoil or under -surface of 
land as lies more than 7.5  metres below surface level for land listed in the  table set out in 
Paragraph 2.  Paragraph 3  provides that powers of compulsory acquisition may only be 
exercised in relation to so much of the subsoil or und er-surface of land as lies more than 6 
meters below surface level for land listed in set out in Paragraph 3.  Paragraph 4  provides that 
powers of compulsory acquisition may only be exercised in relation to so much of the subsoil or und er-surface of land as lies more than 4.5 meters below surface level for land listed in set 
out in Paragraph 4.    
239  Paragraph 5(1) provides that the power of compulsory acquisition may only be exercised either 
in relation to so much of the subsoil or under -surface of land as lies more than 9 metres below 
the level of the surface and/or the acquisition of rights of passage in respect of the land listed 
in the table set out in Paragraph 5 . 
240  Paragraph 5(2) defines the meaning  of the phrase  “rights of passage”  for Phase 2b (Crewe – 
Manche ster) purposes.   
241  Paragraph 6(1) applies the powers of section 5(1)(b) to impose restrictive covenants in relation 
to the land identified in P aragraphs  1 to 5 of Schedule 11.  
242  Paragraph 6(2) provides that Paragraphs 1 to  5 do not restrict the exercise of powers under 
section 4(1)  to cellars or other underground constructions forming part of a building which is 
within the Act  limits and is subject to compulsory acquisition under Clause 4(1). 
29 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Clause  8: Highway subsoil  
243  Clause  8 Subsection (1)  provides that the nominated undertaker may take and use any subsoil 
beneath a highway within the Act limits without being required to acquire the subsoil or any 
interest in it. However, under S ubsection (2) , this does not apply to cellars, vaults, arches,  or 
other structures which form part of a building fronting on to the highway.  
244  Subsections (3)  and (4) provide that the powers to take subsoil or compulsorily acquire an 
interest in land cannot be exercised in the case of the highway land specified in the table in 
Schedule 1 2, except as regards a cellar or other underground structure which forms part of a 
building which fronts onto the highway, is within the Act limits, and in respect of which the power of compulsory acquisition under Clause 4(1) is exercisable.  
245  Subsection (5)  provides that, in the case of highways comprised in the land specified in the 
table in P aragraph 1  of Schedule 11 (where only subsoil lying more than 9 metres beneath the 
surface level of the land can be acquired compulsorily), only subsoil which is more than 9 metres beneath the level of the surface may be taken under S ubsection (1) . 
246  Subsection (6)  makes it clear that the restrictions in the Clause  as regards the highway land 
specified in the table in Schedule 12 or in P aragraph 1 of Schedule  11 do not prevent the 
nominated undertaker carrying out street works on those highways in exercise of the powers under the Bill.  
247  Subsections (7)  to (9) provide that compensation is payable for any loss suffered as a result of 
the taking and use of subsoil under this Clause , with any disputes about such compensation 
to be determined under the Land Compensation Act 1961. T his does not apply to cases 
relating to statutory undertakers which are covered by the costs sharing regime in section 85 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.  
Schedule 12: Highways: restrictions on powers to use subsoils and acquire land  
248  Schedule 12 contains the table referred to in Clause  8. The table specifies the highway land in 
respect of which the power of compulsory acquisition or to appropriate subsoil is not 
exercisable. 
Clause  9: Termination of power to acquire land  
249  Clause  9 Subsection (1)  provides that the compulsory purchase power conferred by Clause 4(1) 
is to expire 8 years from the date when the Bill receives Royal Assent.  
250  Subsection (2)  gives the Secretary of State the power by order to extend the period of 8  years  
that is specified in S ubsection (1). The period may only be extended once in relation to any 
particular land, and for a maximum of an additional 2  years.  
251  Under Subsection (3) , any order extending the time limit for the exercise of the compulsory 
acquisition powers is subject to a modified form of special parliamentary procedure under the 
Statutory Orders (Special Procedure) Act 1945. The arrangements for the making of such  an 
order are set out in  Subsections ( 4) to (7) of Clause 9. 
252  Subsection ( 6) provides that the Statutory Orders (Special Procedure) Act 1945 has effect in 
relation to an order under S ubsection (2)  with the specified amendments . 
253  Subsection ( 7) introduces Schedule 13, which gives rights to landowners to require acquisition 
of their land where an order is made extending the time limit in relation to the land. 
Schedule 13: Rights to require acquisition  
30 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 254  Schedule 13 sets out the arrangements to apply if the Secretary of State makes an order under 
Clause  9(2). The Schedule enables a person with a qualifying interest in the land to which the 
order relates to bring the period of uncertainty to an end.   
255  Paragraphs 1 to 3 provide that a person with a qualifying interest in any land may give a notice 
to the Secretary of State stating the person desires the Secretary of State to acquire the person’s 
interest in the land. Such a notice can be served on the Secretary of State between 5 and 8 
years from Royal Assent. Paragraph 4  provides that the Secretary of State must then within 
three months of receipt of the notice either agree to acquire the person’s interest in the whole 
or part of the land, exercise the applicable compulsory acquisition powers in respect of the 
person’s interest in the whole or part of the land, or notify the person that the Secretary of 
State does not intend to proceed with the purchase of the person’s interest in any of the land. 
If the Secretary of State makes an order under Clause 9(2), Subsection (2) of that Clause  
provides that an order made has effect from the date that the order comes into force and is 
operative until the expiry of the period provided for in the order .  
256  Paragraph 5(1)  provides that if the Secretary of State either fails to comply with the 
requirements of paragraph 4, or notifies the person that the Secretary of State does not intend 
to purchase the land, the compulsory acquisition powers cease to be exercisable in respect of 
the person’s interest.  
257  Paragraph 5(2) applies where notice is given to the Secretary of State under Paragraphs 1(2) or 
2(2) and the Secretary of State proposes either to use compulsory purchase powers or enter 
into an agreement pursuant to Paragraph 4  in respect of some but not all of a person’s interest 
in the land specified in the notice, the applicable compulsory purchase powers would cease to 
be exercisable in respect of that person’s interest in the remainder of that land that is not 
subject to acquisition under Paragraph 4(a) or (b).   
258  Paragraph 6 applies where a person gives notice to the Secretary of State under Paragraph 1(2) 
or 2(2), the Secretary of State proposes to use compulsory purchase powers in respect of a 
person’s interest in the whole or part of the land but the compulsory purchase powers, apart 
from this paragraph, cease to be exercisable before the end of the 3 month period specified in 
Paragraph 4  by virtue of section 9(1). Paragraph 6(2)  provides that, notwithstanding Section 
9(1), the applicable compulsory purchase acquisition powers will remain until the end of the 3  
month period mentioned in P aragraph 4 . Paragraph 6(3)  states that Paragraph 6(2)  is subject to 
Paragraph 5 which applies to the period extended under Paragraph 6(2).  
259  Paragraph 7 provides that the Paragraphs 1  to 6 do not apply to land where construction is 
taking place more than 4.5 metres below the level of the surface of the land.   
260  Paragraph 8(1)  sets out what “applicable compulsory acquisition powers” means in this 
Schedule . 
261  Paragraph 8(2)  defines the terms “lessee” and “owner”. 
Part 3: Extinction and Exclusion of Rights over Land  
Clause  10: Extinction of rights over lan d 
262  Clause  10 introduces Schedule 14, which relates to the extinction of private and other rights 
over land.  
Schedule 14: Extinction of rights over land  
31 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Land to which Schedule applies  
263  Schedule 14 makes provision for the extinction of private and general rights over land within 
the Act limits either held by the Secretary of State, or in which the Secretary of State has 
acquired rights or imposed restrictive covenants, for Phase 2b (Crewe -  Manchester) purposes.   
Private rights  
264  Paragraphs 2 to 4  deal with the extinction of private rights as defined by P aragraph 2(3).  These 
include private rights of way, rights of common and restrictions as to the user of land.   
265  Paragraph 2  provides the general position that private rights over land within the Act limits 
which is held by the Secretary of State for Phase 2b (Crewe -  Manchester) purposes are 
extinguished. Where only rights are acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, for Phase 2b  
(Crewe – Manchester) purposes in relation to land within the Act limits, private rights are 
only extinguished if they are inconsistent with the exercise of the acquired right or the 
restrictive covenant.  
266  Paragraphs 3(1) and (2)  enable the Secretary of State to direct that any particular private right is 
not to be extinguished under P aragraph 2 , either wholly or in part.  
267  Paragraph 3(3)  sets out circumstances where P aragraph 2  does not apply , and rights are not 
extinguished. These include rights of statutory undertakers in relation to their apparatus 
268  Paragraph 4  provides that compensation is payable to anyone who suffers loss due to the 
extinguishment of private rights under the Schedule. Disputes about such compensation are 
to be determined under the Land Compensation Act 1961. This does not apply to rights of 
common where compensation is payable under Schedule 4 to the Compulsory Purchase Act 
1965.   
General rights  
269  Paragraphs 5 and  6 deal with the extinction of general rights over land, as defined by paragraph 
5(3).  These include rights of access to, or other public rights over, land under section 2(1) of 
the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 200 0, or any enactment mentioned in section 15 of that 
Act. This also applies to rights exercisable as a result of trusts over commons, town or village 
greens, open space or allotments.   
270  Paragraph 5  provides that general rights over land within the Act limits which is held by the 
Secretary of State for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes are extinguished. Where only 
rights are acquired, or restrictive covenants imposed, for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) 
purposes in relation to land within the Act limits, general rights are only extinguished to the extent that they are inconsistent with the exercise of the acquired right or the restrictive 
covenant.  
271  Paragraph 6  enables the Secretary of State to direct that any particular general right is not to be 
extinguished under P aragraph 5, either wholly or in part.   
Meaning of “the appropriate time”  
272  Paragraph 7  provides that when the extinction of private or general rights under the Schedule 
is to take effect, provision is made for different times to apply in different specified 
circumstances.  
Amendments to registers of common land or town or village greens  
273  Paragraph 8  makes provision for registers of common land or town or village greens to be 
32 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 updated to reflect the extinguishment of rights over such land.  
274  Paragraph 8(2)  obliges the Secretary of State to notify the commons registration authority 
where land registered as a common or as a town or village green within the Act limits is 
acquired for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes or where rights are acquired, or 
restrictive covenants are imposed, in relation to such land for those purposes.  
275  Paragraphs 8(3), 8 (4) and 8(5) prescribe the information that must be given by the Secretary of 
State to the commons registration authority.  
276  The commons registration authority must then make any necessary consequential amendments to the relevant register as set out in P aragraph 8(6). 
277  Under Paragraph  8(7),  nothing in regulations under section 14 of the Commons Act 2006 or 
section 13 of the Commons Registration Act 1965 applies to an acquisition mentioned in 
Paragraph 8(1).  
Interpretation  
278  Paragraph 9  contains definition of terms used in Schedule 14 and the ways in which they should 
be applied in Schedule 14.  
Clause  11: Extinction of rights of statutory undertakers  
279  Clause  11 Subsection (1)  concerns the rights of statutory undertakers over land acquired by the 
Secretary of State which is required for the purposes of the works authorised by the Bill. The 
nominated undertaker may extinguish these rights as if the land had been acquired under 
Part 9 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.   
280  Subsections (2) to (4) make modifications to sections 271 to 273 (and related provisions) of the 
1990 Act so that references to the acquiring authority refer to the nominated undertaker. 
Clause  12: Exclusion of new rights of way 
281  Clause  12 Subsection (1)  prevents rights of way from being acquired by prescription or user 
over  land which forms an access or approach to any railway infrastructure , and which is 
acquired or held for Phase 2b  (Crewe - Manchester)  purposes. Prescription is the legal process 
of a right of way becoming established through use over a period of at least 20 years.  
282  Subsection (2)  specifies the land which falls within Clause 12. 
283  Subsection (3)  defines “railway infrastructure” as any building, structure, railway track or 
other work used, or intended to be used, for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  purposes.  
Part 4: Temporary Possession and Use of Land  
Clause  13: Temporary possession and use of land  
284  Clause  13 introduces Schedule s 15 and 16, which makes provision for temporary possession 
and use of l and for the purposes of Phase 2b (Crewe - Manchester) purposes.  
Schedule 15: Temporary possession and use of land  
Part 1 – Temporary possession for construction of works  
285  Schedule 15 allows the nominated undertaker temporarily to take possession, and make use of, 
land for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes. Provision is made for two cases, land 
which is identified in the table in Schedule 16 (“the table land”) and other land within the Act 
33 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 limits.  
Right to enter upon and take possession of land  
286  Paragraph 1  deal s with the land  specified in the table in Schedule 16. The table sets out specific 
purposes for which the land may be used. This table therefore gives an indication of the 
purposes for which certain parcels of land may be used temporarily (for example, for 
environmental mitigation, utility diversions, highway access or work sites) but the purposes 
are not exhaustive and the land can be used for other Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) 
purposes.   
287  Paragraph  1(2) provides that the nominated undertaker may take temporary possession of land 
within the Act limits other than the land  in the table . However, this is subject to the exceptions 
in Paragraph 2(1) .  
288  Paragraph  1(3) provides that the reference in Paragraph 1 (1)(a)  to the specified authorised 
works also includes a reference to any works undertaken in connection with the works specified in column (4)  of the table in Schedule 16.  
Exceptions  
289  Paragraph 2(1) disapplie s Paragraph 1(2) in relation to land which is subject to the specified 
restrictions.  
290  Paragraph  2(2) applies Paragraph s 2(1)(b) and 2(1)(c) only to land where notice of entry has been 
served on all interests in the land.  
291  Paragraph s 2(3), 2(4)  and 2(5) provide that the powers of compulsory acquisition under 
Paragraph 4(1)  which are exercisable in relation to the land specified in the table in Schedule 16 
are restricted to the acquisition of rights or the imposition of covenants (in which case the land 
must also be included in the table in Schedule 8 ), or the acquisition of subsoil or under -surface 
(in which case the land must also be included in the table in P aragraph 1  of Schedule 11).   
Powers exercisable on land of which temporary possession has been taken 
292  Paragraph 3  provides that , where temporary possession is taken , the nominated undertaker 
may clear the site and construct certain works on the land including landscaping and other 
environmental mitigation works involving the planting of trees and shrubs and the provision 
of replacement habitat for wild animals . 
Procedure and compensation  
293  Paragraph 4 (1) requires that at least 28 days’ notice must be given to the owners and occupiers 
of the land before possession is taken .  
294  Paragraph 4(2) provides  that the nominated undertaker cannot remain on the land for longer 
than one year from the completion of the work for which possession was taken unless the 
owners agree otherwise.  
295  Under Paragraphs 4(3) and 4(4), Paragraph 4(2)  does not apply if before the end of the one -year 
period, powers under either Part 1 of the Compulsory Purchase Act  1965 or under section 4 of 
the Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) Act 1981 have  been used. An estate or land 
interest is relevant if the interest entitles a person to take possession of the specified land.  
296  Paragraphs  4(5) to 4(7) set out the requirements for compensation payable under this Schedule . 
Compensation is payable for any loss suffered as a result of the exercise of the powers, with 
34 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 any disputes about such compensation to be determined under the Land Compensation Act 
1961.  
297  Paragraph 5  requires the nominated undertaker, before giving up possession of any land used 
under Paragraph 1 , to put the land in question back into such condition as may be provided in 
a scheme agreed between the nominated undertaker, the owners of the land and the local 
planning authority, or in absence of agreement, determined by the appropriate Ministers (for 
these purposes defined as the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, acting jointly).  
Part 2 – Temporary possession for maintenance of works  
Right to enter upon and take possession of land  
298  Paragraph 6  allows the nominated undertaker, during the maintenance period for any work 
(defined as the period beginning when the work is completed and ending five years after the date on which the work is brought into general use), to enter upon and take possession of 
land within the Act limits and within 20 metres of any work within Schedule 1 , and to 
construct temporary works, if reasonably required for maintaining the work.  
299  Under Paragraph 6(2), t his power does not extend to any house or garden, any other structure 
which is occupied or land where the power of compulsory acquisition under Clause  4(1) is 
restricted to the acquisition of rights, subsoil or under -surface of land, or the imposition of 
restrictive covenants .  
Procedure and compensation  
300  Paragraph  7 provide s safeguards relating to the exercise of the power in P aragraph 6 . The 
undertaker must give at least 28 days’ notice to the owners and occupiers of the land before 
possession is taken, may only remain in possession of such land as long as is reasonably 
necessary to carry out the maintenance works and must, before giving up possession, restore 
the land to the reasonable satisfaction of its owners. Compensation is payable for any loss 
suffered as a result of such use, with any disputes about such compensation to be determined 
under the Land Compensation Act 1961.  
Part 3 – Suspension or rights and enforcement  
Suspension of rights relation to land  
301  Paragraph 8  provides for private rights (including rights of way, rights of common and 
restrictions as to user) over land of which temporary possession is taken under the Schedule 
to be suspended during the period of possession. This is subject to any direction to the 
contrary made by the nominated undertaker. Compensation is payable to anyone who suffers 
loss as a result of any such suspension, with any disputes about such compensation to be 
determined under the Land Compensation Act 1961.  
302  Paragraph 9  similarly provides for all general rights over land of which temporary possession 
is taken to be suspended during the period of possession. This is subject to any direction to 
the contrary made by the nominated undertaker. The general rights to which P aragraph 9  
applies include rights of access to, or other public rights over, the land under any enactment 
and rights exercisable under trusts over commons, town or village greens, open space or 
allotments . 
Enforcement  
35 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 303  Paragraph 10 applies section 13 of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965  to make  provision for 
the enforcement of required possession, should the owner or occupier of the land in question 
refuse to give up, or hinder the taking of, possession.  
Schedule 16: temporary  possession and use of land: table of land  
304  The table in this Schedule identifies the land referred to in Schedule 15 of which temporary 
possession may be taken . 
Clause  14: Use of roads  
305  Clause  14 Subsection  (1) confers on the nominated undertaker a power to use any roads on the 
land specified in the table in S chedule 7 for the passage of persons or vehicles for Phase 2b 
(Crewe to Manchester) purposes.  
306  Under Subsection s (2) and (3) at least 7 days’ notice  (or, where access is urgently required, such 
notice as is reasonably practicable)  must normally be given before the first use of a road under 
this power.  
307  Under Subsection  (4), this power ends 5 years after railway works authorised by the Bill are 
brought into general use. Under S ubsection s (5) and (6), compensation is payable to the person 
responsible for managing the road for any loss suffered as a result of the use of it, with any 
disputes about such compensation to be determined under the Lands Compensation Act 1961.  
Clause  15: Cranes  
308  Clause  15 Subsection s (1) and (2)  allow the nominated undertaker to enter upon and use 
airspace above the surface of any land within the Act limits for the oversailing of cranes for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes, provided that 7 days’ notice has been given to the 
owners and occupiers of the land.  
309  Under Subsection (3) , the nominated undertaker may not, without the agreement of the owners 
of the land, use the airspace in this manner after the end of 7 days following the completion of 
activities for which the crane has been used. This allows for the prompt removal of apparatus.  
310  Under Subsection (4) , the nominated undertaker must pay compensation to the owners and 
occupiers of land above which the power is exercised for any losses caused as a result of the power being exercised. Subsections (5)  and (6) add that disputes around entitlement to 
compensation must be determined under and in accordance with Part 1 of the Land Compensation Act 1961, and that liability to pay compensation under section 10(2) of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 remains unchanged by this section. Subsection (7)  adds that the 
power in subsection (1)  does not apply to airspace above a highway.  
Clause  16: Enforcement of restrictions on land use  
311  Clause  16 enables covenants between the Secretary of State and persons with an interest in 
land entered into by agreement to bind successors in title to such interests even though they 
are not direct parties to the original covenant.    
312  In order for covenants concerning land to be enforceable against successors in title to such 
land, the person claiming the benefit must usually have a neighbouring interest in land. The 
Secretary of State will usually not have such an interest until compulsory purchase powers are 
exercised. Therefore, to enable covenants which bind successors in title to be entered into before that time, this Clause  16 Subsection (2)  removes the requirement to have a neighbouring 
interest in land.  
36 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 313  Subsection (1)  sets out the conditions in which the power to enforce restrictions applies, while 
Subsection (3)  disapplies Section 2(c) of the Local Land Charges Act 1975, under which a 
prohibition or  restriction enforceable by a Minister of the Crown under a covenant or  
agreement is not a local land charge if binding on successive owners because  made for the 
benefit of land of the Minister . 
Clause  17: Compensation for injurious affection  
314  Clause  17 modifies section 10(1) of the Compulsory Purchase Act 1965 which provides for 
compensation for ‘injurious affection’ by the acquiring authority. The compulsory purchase 
powers under the Bill are given to the Secretary of State and not the nominated undertaker. 
The modification of section 10 of the 1965 Act is needed to make the nominated undertaker, who is not the acquiring authority, responsible for the payment of compensation for injurious 
affection.  Injurious affection has a specific and detailed meaning developed by case law. In 
very broad terms, injurious affection under section 10 of the 1965 Act relates to circumstances 
where the construction of public works such as HS2 causes a diminution in the value of land.  
Part 5: Planning  
Clause  18: Deemed planning permission  
315  Clause  18 Subsections (1)  deem planning permission under Part 3 of the Town and Country 
Planning Act 1990 to be granted for development authorised by the Bill, subject to the other 
provisions of the Bill and the conditions set out in Schedule 17 . The conditions are enforceable 
by the relevant planning authority.   
316  Subsection (2)  provides that this permission does not apply to ancillary development not 
comprising a scheduled work, if that development would be likely to have significant effects 
on the environment, unless it is an exempt development or has been appropriately assessed in 
the Environmental Statement for the Bill.  
317  Subsection (3) introduces Schedule 17, which imposes conditions on deemed planning 
permission under  Subsection (1) . 
318  Subsection (4)  classifies this planning permission as “specific planning permission” for the 
purposes of treating the land within Bill limits as operational land of a statutory undertaker.  
319  Subsection (5)  ensures that, where works are carried out by the nominated undertaker, the 
conditions in Schedule 17 apply instead of  permitted development rights under the normal 
planning regime.  
Schedule 17: Conditions of deemed planning permission  
Part 1 – Conditions  
320  Schedule 17 sets out conditions  which apply to the planning permission granted by Clause  
18(1) . 
Conditions relating to building works  
321  Where a building (other than a temporary building) is to be constructed, altered,  or extended 
under the Bill, P aragraph 2  requires this to be done in accordance with plans and specifications 
approved by the relevant planning authority (which , in a non- unitary area , is the district 
council). Paragraph 2(3)  and (4) enable the authority, when approving these, to require plans 
and specifications showing additional details of the building works to be submitted, in order 
to permit approvals of the plans and specifications to be staged. Paragraph 2(5)  and (6) set out 
37 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the grounds on which approval can be refused or conditions applied. Qualifying authorities 
may in addition refuse approval or apply conditions on road and heritage grounds. Under 
Paragraph 2(7) , conditions may only be imposed by the authority on approval on a ground 
referred to in sub -paragraph (5)  or (6).   
Conditions relating to other construction works  
322  Where the relevant planning authority is a qualifying authority, (see Part 2 of Schedule 18) 
Paragraph 3  requires similar approvals in relation to other construction works which are part 
of Phase 2b, namely certain road vehicle parks, earthworks, screens, fences, walls,  lighting, 
transformers, telecommunications masts , and pedestrian accesses. Similar provision to that in 
Paragraph 2  about additional details, grounds of refusal (set out in a detailed table)  and 
conditions  on approval  are applied to these construction works.  
Conditions relating to matters ancillary to development  
323  Paragraph 4  sets out certain construction arrangements which require the approval of the 
relevant planning authority if that authority is a qualifying authority, including the handling 
of re -useable spoil or top soil, storage sites, construction camps, screening, artificial lighting, 
and the suppression of dust and mud on the highway. The paragraph also sets out the 
grounds on which approval can be refused or conditions applied. Under sub -paragraph (7) , 
conditions may only be imposed by the authority on approval for the purposes specified in 
the table in sub -paragraph (6) (b) in relation to the work in question.  
324  Paragraph 5  enables the Secretary of State, after consulting the affected planning authorities, to 
issue a class approval for these construction arrangements, except in relation to construction camps. Where a class approval is in effect, by virtue of P aragraph 5(5)  the nominated 
undertaker does not need to seek specific approval from the planning authority under 
Paragraph 4 , although if the circumstances of the case require it the nominated undertaker can 
still apply for that approval by virtue of P aragraph 5(6)  and (7). 
Conditions relating to road transport  
325  Under Paragraph 6 , if the relevant authority (which is the county council in a non- unitary area) 
is a qualifying authority, it has some control over the routes by which large goods vehicles 
travel by road to and from working, storage , and waste disposal sites which are used under 
the planning permission conferred by the Bill. Paragraph 6(3) and (7) provide that this applies 
only to the part of the route between the site and the nearest special road or trunk road and on 
days on which there are 24 or more large goods vehicle movements in a day. The paragraph 
also sets out the grounds on which approval can be refused or conditions applied. Under 
Paragraph 6( 6), conditions require the agreement of the nominated undertaker.  
Conditions relating to waste and spoil disposal and evacuation  
326  Where the relevant planning authority is a qualifying authority, Paragraph 7 requires waste 
and spoil disposal and the excavation of bulk materials from borrow pits to be done in 
accordance with plans and specifications approved by that authority (which in a non- unitary 
area is the county council). Paragraph 7(4)  and (5) enable the authority, when approving these, 
to require plans and specifications showing additional details to be submitted, in order to 
permit approvals of the plans and specifications to be staged. Paragraph 7(6)  to (9) sets out the 
grounds on which approval can be refused or conditions applied. Under P aragraph 7(10) , 
conditions require the agreement of the nominated undertaker.   
327  Paragraph 8  further provides that before development to which P aragraph 7  applies is begun, 
38 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the planning authority must approve a restoration scheme. Under P aragraph 8(3)  approval 
may only be refused on the ground that the scheme ought to be and is reasonably capable of 
being modified. Paragraph 8(5)  enables the scheme to make provision about aftercare. 
Conditions on bringing scheduled works and depots into use  
328  Paragraph 9  provides that where the relevant planning authority (which is the district council 
in non- unitary areas) is a qualifying authority, scheduled works which are not underground 
and certain depots cannot be brought into use without the approval of the of the authority. 
Under Paragraph 9(4) , approval must be granted if no further environmental mitigation is 
required or the authority has approved a mitigation scheme submitted by the nominated 
undertaker. Paragraph 9(5)  sets out the grounds on which approval of such a scheme may be 
refused or conditions imposed.  
329  Paragraph 10 requires such a mitigation scheme to be implemented in accordance with any 
conditions subject to which approval was given.  
Conditions relating to discontinuation of ancillary operations  
330  Paragraph 11 requires operations on ancillary works sites to cease as soon as reasonably 
practicable after the scheduled works to which they relate have been completed.  
Conditions relating to site restoration  
331  After such cessation, P aragraph 12 requires a site which has been materially altered by the 
construction operations  to be restored in accordance with a scheme agreed with the relevant 
planning authority (which is the district council in a non -unitary area). Under Paragraph 12(3)  
this must be submitted by the nominated undertaker within four months of the cessation. By 
virtue of P aragraph 12(6) , a scheme may reserve particulars for subsequent agreement.  
332  If no restoration scheme or reserved particular is agreed within the period required (or as 
extended by agreement by the nominated undertaker and planning authority), under 
paragraph 12(4)  and (7) it is determined by the Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing 
and Communities and Secretary of State for Transport acting jointly. Paragraph 12(8)  makes 
provision about costs if that happens.  
333  Under paragraph 12(9) , the requirement for a restoration scheme does not apply where the Bill 
imposes other requirements with respect to restoration. 
Part 2 – Qualifying  authorities  
Specification of qualifying authorities  
334  Paragraph 13 requires the Secretary of State, by means of regulations, to name “qualifying 
authorities” for the purposes of Schedule 17. These are the local planning authorities which, by 
the time the Bill is reported from the Select Committee in the House of Lords, have given the 
Secretary of State satisfactory undertakings about the handling of planning requests.  
335  Paragraph 13 also allows the Secretary of State to make orders revoking “qualifying authority” 
status and to make subsequent naming orders in certain circumstances. Before making such an order, the Secretary of State is to consult the nominated undertaker and, if it is not the body 
requesting the order, the relevant local planning authority.  
Transition  
336  Paragraph 14 allows for any order under P aragraph 13 to set out any transitional arrangements 
39 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 that may be necessary (for example, were a local planning authority to cease to be a qualifying 
authority for the purposes of the Bill whilst a number of undetermined planning applications 
were before it). 
Part 3 – Approvals: Supplementary  
337  This part of the Schedule deals with supplementary matters concerning the giving of 
approvals under Part 1, including appeals.  
Requests for planning approval  
338  Paragraph 15 provides that any approval under Part 1 may only be given at the request of the 
nominated undertaker. 
339  Paragraph 16  provides that the local planning authority is not required to consider  a request 
for approval unless the nominated undertaker has first submitted a programme of the 
approvals it intends to seek from the authority, and an explanation of how the matters dealt 
with in the request fit into the wider Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  scheme. This does not 
apply to a request for approval of additional details.  
Fees for requests for approval  
340  Paragraph 17 enables the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for 
Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  jointly to make regulations about fees payable by 
the nominated undertaker when making requests for approval. 
Consultation on requests for approval  
341  Paragraph 18 sets out requirements for consultation where a request relates to things which 
may affect certain conservation, recreational or heritage matters. Where this is the case, the 
planning authority must consult Natural England, the Environment Agency, the Canal & 
River Trust, or Historic England, as appropriate, before giving an approva l. The description of 
the matters on which Historic England is to be consulted may be updated by regulations to 
reflect a change in the regime for designating matters of heritage or historic interest . 
Environmental requirements  
342  Paragraph 19 requires planning authorities making decisions as to approvals under this 
Schedule to have regard to environmental requirements which the Secretary of State has 
imposed on the nominated undertaker and given an undertaking to Parliament to enforce. 
Directions restricting powers of approval and compulsory reference of requests for 
approval  
343  Paragraphs 20 and 21 set out a mechanism for the Secretary of State for Transport and the 
Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities to issue directions restricting a 
planning authority’s power to approve under the Schedule and to “call in” a particular 
request for approval. Paragraph 21( 5) makes clear that any challenge to a determination of a 
“called -in” application may only be made by way of judicial review and must be made within 
6 weeks of notification of the determination.  
Non- material changes to approvals  
344  Paragraph 2 2 enables a planning authority at the request of the nominated undertaker to make 
a non- material change to any approval it has previously given under Part 1. This is to allow 
changes which do not have material planning significance to be made without the necessity 
40 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 for the nominated undertaker to make a fresh request for approval. It is similar to the power 
available to planning authorities in respect of “normal” planning permissions in section 96A 
of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.  
Termination of approva l relating to road transportation arrangements  
345  Under paragraph 2 3, arrangements relating to transportation under P aragraph 6  cease to have 
effect at the end of the relevant period, provided that the nominated undertaker gives a termination notice to the planning authority which approved the arrangements.  
Appeals  
346  Paragraphs 2 4 to 27 make provision about appeals to the Secretary of State for Transport and 
the Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  acting jointly, where the 
nominated undertaker is aggrieved by a decision of the planning authority on a request for approval.  The nominated undertaker may appeal within 42 days of the decision or of the 
period for making a decision having ended. The period for making a decision is 8 weeks unless a longer period is agreed between the nominated undertaker and the planning 
authority  or a longer period is notified to the planning authority by the nominated 
undertaker. The Secretaries of State may make regulations prescribing the form to be used when appealing, and about the decision period in cases where fees are paid by cheque. 
347  Paragraph 26 provides that a decision on an appeal is final. It may only be challenged by way 
of judicial review proceedings which must be brought within six weeks of notification of the 
decision.  
348  An appeal is determined by an appointed person unless the Secretaries of State direct that 
they should decide it. An appeal is decided by written representations unless the person 
deciding it thinks a hearing is required.  
349  Under Paragraph 2 7(2) to (4), the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for 
Levelling Up, Housing and Communities may make regulations about the procedure to be 
followed with respect to appeals.  
Guidance by Secretary of State  
350  Paragraph 2 8 enables the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for 
Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  to give guidance to planning authorities about the 
exercise of their functions under the Schedule. The authorities must have regard to the guidance.  
Part 4 – Supplementary and general  
Regulations  
351  Paragraph 2 9 makes supplementary provision about regulations and orders under the 
Schedule. These are to be made by statutory instrument. Regulations, and orders changing the 
list of qualifying authorities after the first order specifying them has been made, are subject to 
annulment by resolution of either House of Parliament.  
Interpretation  
352  Paragraph 30 defines terms used in this Schedule.   
Clause  19: Time limit on deemed planning permission  
353  Clause  19 Subsection (1)  provides that, for scheduled works, the deemed planning permission 
41 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 granted by Clause 18(1)  applies only to works which commence within ten years after Royal 
Assent to this Bill.    
354  Subsections (2)  and (3) allow the Secretary of State to extend this time limit by statutory 
instrument, which will be subject to the negative resolution procedure in either  of the  House s 
of Parliament .  
355  Subsection (4)  disapplies section 91 of the Town and Country Act 1990  in relation to Clause  18 
Subsection (1), which sets out the time limit for “normal” planning permissions.  
Clause  20: Power to disapply deemed planning permission  
356  Clause  20 Subsection s (1), (3) and (4) allow the Secretary of State, by means of a statutory 
instrument, to disapply the deemed planning permission granted by Clause  18(1)  in respect of 
development consisting of operations for the maintenance or alteration of the Phase 2b  (Crewe 
– Manchester ) works, from the date specified in the statutory instrument.    
357  Subsection (2)  provides that, in the event of such a disapplication, any further development 
would be subject to the normal provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 applying to development authorised by a local 
Act. 
Clause  21: Development consent  
358  Clause  21 removes the requirement for development consent under the Planning Act 2008 for 
the works authorised by this Bill. A  requirement for development consent under the 2008 Act 
would be inappropriate for works which already have the specific authorisation of Parliament.  
Part 6: Deregulation  
Clause  22: Listed buildings and Ancient Monuments  
359  Clause  22 introduces Schedule 18, which disapplies and modifies various controls relating to 
listed buildings and Schedule 19 , which disapplies and modifies various controls relating to 
ancient monuments.  
Schedule 18: Listed buildings  
360  Schedule 18 concerns how legislation in respect of listed buildings under the Planning (Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (“the 1990 Act”) applies to the Phase 2b works.  
Buildings authorised to be demolished, altered or extended  
361  Paragraph 1(2)  disapplies some of this legislation, and in particular the requirement for listed 
building consent, from the Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  works in respect of the listed 
buildings set out in table 1 , or which are listed after 24 January 2022.  
362  Paragraph 1(3)  provides that for the buildings specified in table 1  which have a description of 
works in column (3)  of the table, the disapplication of the requirement for listed building 
consent only applies, as regards works of demolition or alteration which do not comprise 
works to maintain or restore their character or for the affixing of monitoring apparatus, to 
works falling within that description.  
Buildings authorised to be altered or extended for heritage or monitoring purposes  
363  Paragraph 2  disapplies legislation from the Phase 2b works in respect of those listed buildings 
42 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 which were listed before 24 January 2022 and are specified in table 2 in relation to works for 
heritage or monitoring purposes.  
Buildings in respect of which noise mitigation works are authorised  
364  Paragraph 3  also disapplies some of this legislation, and in particular the requirement for listed 
building consent, for  listed buildings set out in table 3, but only in respect of works for noise 
mitigation purposes (as defined in P aragraph 10(2) ).  
Damage to buildings  
365  Paragraph 4  disapplies section 59 of the Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas Act 1990, 
concerning acts which might damage listed buildings, in relation to works carried out under 
the powers in this Bill.  
Power to disapply provision made by P aragraphs 1 to 4  
366  Paragraph 5  allows the Secretary of State, once the initial construction phase is over, to restore, 
by statutory instrument, the normal regime under the 1990 Act for subsequent maintenance and alteration works.  
Heritage partnership agreements  
367  Paragraph 6  provides that partnership agreements under section 26A of the 1990 Act have 
effect subject to the works powers of the Bill.  
Inspection and observation of works  
368  Paragraph 7  provides for anyone authorised by Historic England to enter land on which a 
listed building is situated which is affected by certain Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) works, 
to inspect those works. Under P aragraph 7(3) , these rights are not to be exercised if the 
nominated undertaker considers that it is not safe to do so. Paragraph 7(4)  provides that any 
person exercising the rights will have to comply with directions from the nominated 
undertaker in respect of compliance with health and safety requirements.   
Recording of buildings  
369  Paragraph 8  requires the nominated undertaker to give notice to Historic England of the 
demolition of a building that would require listed building consent, to allow recording prior to demolition. Under P aragraph 8(2) , at least eight weeks’ notice is required, or longer if agreed 
by the nominated undertaker . However, in cases of emergency , shorter notice can be given, 
under paragraph 8(3) .   
370  Paragraph 9 (1) provides that where notice has been given under P aragraph 8  anyone authorised 
by Historic England may enter the building concerned to do the recording during the notice 
period.   
371  Paragraph 9(2)  and (3) provide that this right is not to be exercised if the nominated undertaker 
considers that it not safe to do so, and any person exercising the right will have to comply 
with directions from the nominated undertaker in respect of compliance with health and 
safety requirements.  
Interpretation  
372  Paragraph 10(1)  contains definitions of terms used in Schedule 18 and the ways in which they 
should be applied. For any which refer to another Act, please see the definition in the relevant 
piece of legislation.  
43 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Schedule 19: Ancient monuments  
373  Schedule 19 concerns how legislation in respect of ancient monuments applies to Phase 2b 
works.  
Disapplication of controls  
374  Paragraph 1  modifies the application of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 
1979 (“the 1979 Act”) in respect of Phase 2b works.  
375  Paragraph 1(2)  provides that section 2 of the 1979 Act does not apply to works authorised by 
the Bill.  
376  Paragraph 1(3)  provides that the powers of entry conferred by sections 6(1), 6A(1) and 26 of the 
1979 Act are not to be exercisable in relation to land used for or in connection with the 
carrying out of such works.  
377  Paragraph 1(4)  provides that the functions of a guardian under the 1979 Act and the provisions 
of an agreement under section 17 have effect subject to the powers of the Bill.   
378  Paragraph 1(5)  disapplies section 19 of the 1979 Act where a monument is closed by the 
nominated undertaker for works authorised under the Bill, meaning that public access will no longer be available.   
379  Paragraph 1(6)  disapplies regulations under section 19(3) or (4A) of the 1979 Act in relation to 
Phase 2b works, so removing restrictions on things which may injure or disfigure the 
monument in question for Phase 2b. Paragraph 1(7)  provides that the power conferred by 
section 19(6) of that Act to restrict access is not to be exercisable so as to prevent or restrict the 
undertaking of the works authorised by this Bill.    
380  Paragraph 1(8)  prevents superintendence under section 25 of the 1979 Act of the carrying out 
of any of the Phase 2b works, and provides that English Heritage may not charge for advice in relation to the undertaking of these works.    
381  Paragraph 1(9)  to (13) disapplies sections 28 (offence of damaging certain ancient monuments), 
35 (notice of operations in areas of archaeological importance), 39(1) (power to investigate in 
advance of operations notice), 42(1) (use of metal detectors) and 42(3) (removal of objects 
discovered by metal detector) of the 1979 Act, in relation to the works authorised by this Bill.   
382  Paragraph 2  modifies the application of the National Heritage Act 1983 to the Phase 2b works. 
The power of entry conferred by section 36(1) of the 1983 Act is only to be exercisable in 
relation to land used, or intended for use, for or in connection with the Phase 2b works with 
the consent of the nominated undertaker, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. Such consent may be given subject to compliance with any reasonable requirements or conditions 
imposed for reasons of safety or for the purpose of preventing interference with or delay to 
the works. Section 36(6) of the 1983 Act, which regulates the right to enter land for the 
purposes of record keeping, will not apply to land on which works authorised by the Bill are 
being carried out. Any disputes about this are to be determined by the Secretary of State for 
Transport and the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, acting jointly.  
Power to disapply provision made by P aragraphs 1 and 2  
383  Paragraph 3  allows the Secretary of State, once the initial construction phase is over, by 
regulations made by statutory instrument, to restore the operation of some of the provisions 
of the 1979 and 1983 Acts referred to in P aragraphs 1  and 2 for subsequent maintenance and 
44 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 alteration works.   
Inspection and observation of works etc.  
384  Paragraph 4  provides for anyone authorised by Historic England to enter land at any 
reasonable time on which a scheduled monument is situated to inspect, observe or advise on 
the Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  works as appropriate. Paragraph 4(2)  and (3) provide that 
this right is not to be exercised if the nominated undertaker considers that it not safe to do so. 
Any person exercising the right will have to comply with directions on the health and safety 
requirements given by the nominated undertaker.   
Interpretation  
385  As stated in P aragraph 5 , references to “the Commission” in Schedule 19 are to the Historic 
Buildings and Monuments Commission for England.  
Clause  23: Burial grounds  
386  Clause  23 Subsection s (1) and (2)  state that no conditions or restrictions appl y to the use of any 
land comprised in a burial ground for the purpose of constructing any of the  Phase 2b (Crewe 
– Manchester)  works , except in such cases where the use of the land would involve disturbing 
any human remains or monuments to the deceased that have not been dealt with in accordance with Schedule 20 . 
387  Subsection (3)  defines the terms “burial ground” and “monument” for both Clause 23 and 
Schedule 20.  
Schedule 20: Burial grounds  
Notice of removal of remains or monument  
388  Paragraph 1  requires the nominated undertaker to publish and display notice of the intention 
to remove any human remains or monuments before any such removal, and sets out what such a notice should contain,  including an explanation that a personal representative or 
relative may within 56 days apply, as per P aragraph 2(1) , for a licence to remove the remains 
and monument themselves. No notice is required in cases where the Secretary of State has notified the nominated undertaker that the Secretary of State is satisfied that the remains were 
buried more than 100 years ago and that no relative or representative of the deceased is likely 
to object  (Paragraph 1(3)) . Nor is a notice required in cases where the nominated undertaker 
has been granted a faculty in relation to the remains by a court, or already holds a licence to 
remove human remains under section 25 of the Burial Act 1857. “Relative” is defined in 
Paragraph 11.   
Removal of remains under licence  
389  Paragraph 2  sets out the circumstances in which the nominated undertaker must, upon written 
application by a relative or personal representative of the deceased, issue a licence to 
authorise the removal and reburying or cremation of the remains. The reasonable costs of 
removal and reburial or cremation must be paid by the nominated undertaker.  
Removal of remains by nominated undertaker  
390  Paragraphs 3  and 4 allow the nominated undertaker to remove human remains where no 
written application for a license by a relative or personal representative is received, or where a 
license has been issued but the remains have not been removed within 28 days. For remains  in 
relation  to which Paragraph 1 (1) applies, the remains must, within 2 months, be buried in a 
45 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 place set apart for the purposes of burial or cremated in a crematorium. 
391  For remains  in relation to which Paragraph 1 (3) applies,  the period of two months is extended 
to 24 months , beginning with the relevant day , or such longer period as the Secretary of State 
may direct , and must  be buried, cremated, or otherwise dealt with in another manner directed 
by the Secretary of State, within this period. The meaning of “the relevant day” is defined in 
Paragraph 12.  
392  However, if remains  (to which P aragraph 1(3)  applies)  are identified in consultation with the 
Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England  (the Commission)  or the 
Archbishop s’ Council as being of historical or archaeological interest , then the period is 
extended to 5 years ( beginning with the relevant day)  to enable archaeological or other studies 
to be carried out where appropriate. In addition, for remains removed from non -consecrated 
land,  the nominated undertaker may  make arrangements in consultation with the 
Commission to have the remains transferred to a museum, archive, or similar institution 
instead of having the remains buried or cremated within this period.   
393  Provision is made under P aragraphs 3(3)  and (4) and 4(6) and (7) for cases where a question as 
to an applicant’s entitlement to be granted a license has been referred to a court but has not 
yet been determined. 
394  Paragraph 5  applies where the nominated undertaker already holds a licence to remove 
remains under section 25 of the Burial Act 1857. In such a case , the nominated undertaker may 
remove the remains but is subject to the same requirements as under Paragraph s 3 and 4 to 
bury them, cremate them or, for remains to which P aragraph 1(3)  applies, to  arrange for them 
to be transferred to a museum, archive or similar institution (if they are of archaeological or historical interest), or  deal with them in another manner specified by the Secretary of State. 
Removal of monuments  
395  Paragraph 6  sets out the arrangements to apply to the removal of any monument associated 
with human remains removed under the Schedule. Where a licence has been issued to the 
relative or personal representative of the deceased, the licensee may also remove any 
monument to the deceased, re- erect it elsewhere or dispose of it. The reasonable costs of doing 
so must be paid by the nominated undertaker.  
396  Paragraph 7  allows the nominated undertaker, where human remains have been removed by 
the nominated undertaker under the Schedule, also to remove any monument to the deceased. Where remains have been removed under a licence but a monument to the deceased has not 
been removed within 28 days, the monument may be removed by the nominated undertaker. 
The nominated undertaker can also remove any monument to a deceased person whose 
remains have been removed under a licence under section 25 of the Burial Act 1857 which is not removed by the licensee. Monuments which are removed by the nominated undertaker 
may be re- erected at the place where the remains are reburied or removed to some other 
appropriate place. If that is not done, they are to be broken up and defaced to prevent 
inappropriate use.  
Records  
397  Paragraph 8  sets out the records required to be kept by the nominated undertaker as respects 
human remains or monuments removed under the Schedule. Records as to the removal of 
remains must be provided to the Registrar General within two months of their removal and 
records of the removal of a monument must be provided both to the Registrar General and to 
46 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the relevant local authority. In the case of remains to which Paragraph 1 (3) applies, the period 
of two months is extended to 24 months, or such longer period as the Secretary of State may 
direct, to enable archaeological or other studies to be carried out where appropriate. 
Discharge of functions by nominated undertaker  
398  Paragraph 9  requires the nominated undertaker, in removing remains or monuments, to 
comply with any reasonable request of a relative or personal representative of the deceased to 
whom a license  has been granted under the Schedule. This is intended to apply to cases where 
a license  has been issued to a relative or personal representative but, because the right to 
remove the remains or monument has not been exercised, the nominated undertaker does so. Provision is made for cases where more than one license  has been granted under the Schedule . 
399  Paragraph 10 enables the Secretary of State to make directions to the nominated undertaker 
with respect to the carrying out of functions under the Schedule . 
400  Paragraphs 11 and 12 define terms used in this Schedule.  
Clause  24: Consecrated land  
401  Clause  24 Subsection (1)  provides that no law, either ecclesiastical or otherwise which applies to 
consecrated ground, is to restrict the works authorised by the Bill.  
402  Subsection (2) makes clear that this provision does not apply to burial grounds, which are 
covered by Clause 22 and Schedule  20.  
403  Subsection  (3) states that “burial ground” has the same meaning as in Clause  23.  
Clause  25: Commons and open spaces  
404  Clause  25 disapplies enactments which regulate the use of commons, town or village greens, 
open spaces , or allotments. It provides that no such enactment prevents or restricts the doing 
of anything for Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) purposes on land held by the Secretary of 
State or the nominated undertaker for those purposes, the exercise of any right of entry under 
the Bill or the doing of anything in exercise of any other power of the Bill. This allows the 
carrying out of works for Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester)  purposes which would otherwise be 
in breach of such enactments.  
Clause  26: Trees  
405  Clause  26 Subsection  (2) specifies that  tree preservation orders made under section 198(1) or 
202(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and regulations made under section 202A 
of that Act, and the provisions of section 211 of that Act dealing with trees in conservation 
areas, are disapplied  in relation to certain tree works.  
406  Subsection (1) specif ies that these disapplications are specifically for  works on trees within the 
Act limits that are carried out for the purposes of the construction of Phase 2b, and also to 
works on trees growing on any other land used for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  purposes 
which are necessary for the maintenance or operation of Phase 2b, or for safety reasons.  
407  Subsection (3)  sets out what is meant by “tree works” in this context.  
Clause  27: Overhead lines  
408  Clause  27 relates to the installation and diversion of overhead lines.  
409  Subsection (1)  removes the need for the Secretary of State’s consent under the Electricity Act 
1989 where the overhead line work concerned is within the Act limits, is work authorised by 
47 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the Bill,  and has deemed planning permission under the Bill.  
410  Where overhead line work is needed to which Subsection (1) does not apply, and a consent 
under section 37 of the Electricity Act 1989 is therefore required, S ubsection (2)  provides that 
there is no automatic duty upon the Secretary of State to hold a public inquiry in every case 
where the planning authority has objected. Instead, the decision whether to hold a public 
inquiry is to be a matter for the Secretary of State after considering whether the number and 
substance of any objections require one.  
411  Under Subsection (3) , Subsection (1)  applies where the work concerned is done by a person 
other than the nominated undertaker if the work would be authorised by the Bill and would 
have deemed planning permission if carried out by the nominated undertaker.   
412  Under Subsection (4) , development consent under the Planning Act 2008 is not required for 
electric line work done in consequence of the Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) works, even if 
carried out by the electricity undertaker.  
Clause  28: Water  
413  Clause  28 introduces Schedule 21  which provides for the disapplication of certain legislation 
relating to water.  
Schedule 21: Water  
414  Schedule 21 contains provisions relating to the treatment of water sources and features in 
relation to this Bill. These generally disapply a restriction or requirement to obtain a further 
consent for works which are authorised by the Bill.    
Water abstraction and impounding  
415  Paragraphs 1 and 2 disapply sections of the Water Resources Act 1991 with regards to works 
authorised by this Bill. These provisions require consent for the abstraction or impoundment 
of water. The requirement for consent for abstraction is disapplied in relation to the 
construction of works and the requirement for consent for impoundment is disapplied in 
relation to the exercise of any powers with respect to works. 
416  Paragraph 3  relates to loss or damage caused by the abstraction of water. Section 48A(1) of the 
Water Resources Act 1991 is disapplied in relation to any power authorised by this Bill. If the 
nominated undertaker does cause loss or damage and the conditions around this would have 
breached the duty in section 48A(1), then the nominated undertaker must compensate the 
affected party, under P aragraph 3(2) . Paragraph 3(3)  states how such compensation should be 
determined.   
417  Paragraph 3(4)  disapplies the prohibition under section 48A(5) of the Water Resources Act 1991 
on making claims in respect of loss or damage. This allows for claims for compensation to be 
made under this paragraph of this Bill and those others listed.   
No environmental permit required for operating regulated facility etc  
418  Paragraph 4  disapplies the requirement for an environmental permit for flood risk activities, 
water discharges or groundwater activities carried out in the exercise of the powers of this Bill.   
Floods  
48 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 419  Paragraph 5  removes the restrictions on removing designated features under the Flood and 
Water Management Act 2010, in relation to works authorised under this Bill.   
Drainage  
420  Paragraph 6  disapplies the requirements to provide approval for the drainage systems of 
construction works if those works are exercised under the powers of this Bill.   
421  Paragraph 7  disapplies the requirements of byelaws made under the Land Drainage Act 
1991(which control or regulate works affecting land drainage) in relation to works authorised 
under the Bill.   
Eels 
422  Paragraph 8  disapplies Part 4 of the Eels (England and Wales) Regulations 2009, which relate 
to protection for the passage of eels in the process of construction works.  
Interpretation  
423  Paragraph 9  contains a number of definition of terms used in Schedule 21 and the ways in 
which they should be applied.  For any which refer to another Act, please see the definition in 
the relevant piece of legislation.  
Clause  29: Buildings  
424  Subsection (1)  introduces Schedule 22 which provides for the disapplication or modification of 
various provisions of the Building Act 1984 and building regulations.  
425  Subsection (2)  introduces Schedule 23 which provides for the modification of the Party Wall etc. 
Act 1996.  
Schedule 22: Building s 
426  Schedule 22 disapplies and modifies provisions in the Building Act 1984 (“the 1984 Act”) and 
in building regulations where they would impede the use of powers for Phase 2b (Crewe – 
Manchester) purposes.  
Building regulations  
427  Paragraph 1 (1) disapplies Part 1 of the 1984 Act with respect to other building regulations  
under section 1 of that Act  in relation to certain buildings held by the Secretary of State or by 
the nominated undertaker and used for the purpose of the nominated undertaker’s undertaking under the Bill.  
428  Under Paragraphs 1(2) and  1(3), sub-paragraph (1)  does not apply to houses, hotels, or offices or 
showrooms, unless the offices or showrooms are part of a railway station or other railway 
facility.  
429  Paragraph 1(4) defines a “railway facility” as including a maintenance depot, electrical supply 
facility or stabling facility.  
430  Paragraph 1(5)  excludes certain requirements of the building regulations listed in regulation 
34(1) of the Building Regulations 2010 which relate to energy efficiency from the 
disapplication.  
Drain repairs  
49 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 431  Paragraph 2  exempts works to drains carried out for Phase 2b (Crewe- Manchester) purposes 
from certain requirements under section 61 of the 1984 Act relating to the carrying out of 
works to underground drains.  
Drain disconnections  
432  Paragraph 3  modifies section 62 of the 1984 Act which enables the local authority to impose 
requirements as regards the reconstruction or disconnection of drains  and other drain  works 
that are carried out for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes , and substitutes a 
requirement to give at least 48 hours’ notice to the local authority before carrying out the 
works.  
Raising of chimneys  
433  Paragraph 4  modifies section 73 of the 1984 Act which makes provision for the protection of an 
owner (“the adjoining owner”) where a person (“the building owner”) erects or raises a building to a greater height than the chimney of an adjoining building. It applies where the 
nominated undertaker or Secretary of State own the taller building for the purpose of the 
nominated undertaker’s undertaking under the Bill and the nominated undertaker or 
Secretary of State is served a counter- notice by the adjoining owner.  
434  Under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) , the adjoining owner may not enter onto Phase 2b  (Crewe – 
Manchester)  land to carry out the work without the consent of the Secretary of State or 
nominated undertaker.  
435  Under Paragraph 4(5) , references to “the taller building” and “counter -notice” have the same 
meaning as in section 73 of the 1984 Act.  
Construction of cellars and rooms below subsoil water level 
436  Paragraph 5(1)  extends the exemption in section 74(2) of the 1984 Act so that section 74(1) does 
not apply to the construction of a cellar or room in connection with a shop, inn, hotel or office 
which forms part of a railway station or other railway facility which is used, or intended for 
use, for the purpose of the nominated undertak er’s undertaking under the Bill.  
437  Paragraph 5(2)  defines “railway facility” as a maintenance depot, electrical supply facility, or 
stabling facility used for railway purposes.  
Demolition of whole or part of building  
438  Paragraph 6  disapplies sections 80(2)(b), 81 and 82 of the 1984 Act (which allow a local 
authority to impose requirements as to the demolition of a building)  to the demolition of the 
whole or part of a building which is carried out under the powers in this Bill and to which 
section 80 of the 1984 Act otherwise applies.  
Interpretation  
439  Paragraph 7  contains definition of terms used in Schedule 22 and the ways in which they should 
be applied.   
Schedule 23: Party  walls etc.  
440  Schedule 23 disapplies or modifies various provisions of the Party Wall etc. Act 1996 (“the 1996 
Act”) which affect Phase 2b  (Crewe to Manchester)  works.  
50 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 441  Paragraph 2  modifies section 1 of the 1996 Act following service by the nominated undertaker 
on an adjoining owner of a notice under section 1(2) of the 1996 Act.  For section 1(3) of the 
1996 Act is substituted a new subsection (3) which provides that a wall can be built half on the 
adjoining owner’s land at the expense of the nominated undertaker. Two new subsections are 
also inserted after (3), namely (3A) and (3B) which provide for the placing of footings and 
foundations  under the wall within a specified time after service of a notice in section 1(3) and 
that the nominated undertaker must compensate the adjoining owner for any damage caused 
by the construction of the wall or the placing of footings and foundations referred to in 
subsection (3A).     
442  Paragraph 3  ensures that an adjoining landowner does not acquire any rights over Phase 2b  
(Crewe to Manchester)  works under the 1996 Act.   
443  Paragraph 4  removes the requirement under section 3 of the 1996 Act for the nominated 
undertaker to give notice to the adjoining landowner before carrying out works to certain 
walls or other structures at the boundary of adjoining land. This applies where the works are 
carried out in connection with the construction of Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  works or 
the maintenance of such works within five years of Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  being 
brought into general use.  
444  Paragraph 5  removes the requirement under section 6 of the 1996 Act to obtain the consent of 
the adjoining owner before carrying out any excavation or erection for Phase 2b  (Crewe – 
Manchester)  purposes.   
445  Paragraph 6  modifies section 6 of the 1996 Act where a landowner proposes to undertake any 
excavation or erection near a building or structure which has been erected for Phase 2b 
purposes or which is on land held by the Secretary of State or the nominated undertaker for 
Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  purposes. This modification allows the Secretary of State or 
the nominated undertaker to decide that works for the protection of the building or structure 
should be carried out by the Secretary of State or the nominated undertaker at the expense of 
the landowner, instead of by the landowner.  
446  Paragraph 7  provides a new procedure for the resolution of disputes which relate to works 
required for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  purposes, or to a building or structure on land 
held by the Secretary of State or the nominated undertaker for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  
purposes, rather than the procedure provided by section 10 of the 1996 Act. The disputes are 
to be determined by a single arbitrator appointed, if no agreement can be reached, by the 
President of the Institution of Civil Engineers.   
447  Paragraph 8  modifies sections 13 and 14 of the 1996 Act regarding works carried out by an 
adjoining owner, if that work is given notice under section 6(5) of that Act.  
Clause  30: Street Works  
448  Clause  30 introduces Schedule 24  which disapplies various controls relating to works in or near 
streets and highways.  
Schedule 24: Street Works  
449  Schedule 24 disapplies a number of provisions of highways legislation which relate to works 
affecting highways and streets, where they intersect with Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  
works. The disapplications do not apply to highways and streets for which the Secretary of State or a strategic highways company is the highway or the street authority, unless the 
Secretary of State or the strategic highways company consents. In the case of each of the 
51 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 disapplications listed, placing restrictions on works could risk the delivery timetable for Phase 
2b (Crewe –  Manchester) of High Speed 2. 
Works in or near highways  
450  Paragraph 1  disapplies sections 141, 167 and 169(1) of the Highways Act 1980 as regards the 
planting of trees or shrubs, placing a retaining wall near a highway,  or the erection of 
scaffolding, for the purposes of or in connection with the exercise of powers conferred by this Bill.   
Street works  
451  Paragraph 2(1)  disapplies sections 56 (1) and 56 (1A) of the New Roads and Street Works Act 
1991 (“the 1991 Act”) regarding works done in exercise of any powers conferred by the Bill. 
These provisions provide for the power to direct when works that could affect traffic take 
place.  
452  Paragraph 2(2)  disapplies section 56A of the 1991 Act for street works authorised by the Bill, 
which allows an authority to direct an undertaker doing street works to place apparatus in 
one street rather than another.  
453  Paragraph 2(3)  disapplies section 58(1) of the 1991 Act with respect to works authorised by the 
Bill, which would allow the street authority to restrict further street works on a highway on 
which they have carried out substantial road works for a period of 12 months after 
completion.  
454  Paragraph 2(4)  disapplies section 61(1) of the 1991 Act which provides that apparatus cannot 
be placed in a protected street without the consent of the street authority.   
455  Sub-paragraphs (5)  and (6) disapply section 62(2) and (4) of the 1991 Act. These refer to street 
authorities’ ability to ask for apparatus placed in a street to be moved if the street is later 
designated a protected street and direct the nominated undertaker regarding ongoing works if 
a street is either designated or removed as protected.   
456  Paragraph 2(7)  disapplies section 63(1) of the 1991 Act which provides that a street with special 
engineering difficulties cannot be worked on until plans and sections of works are agreed 
between the nominated undertaker and street authority.  
457  Sub-paragraphs (8)  and (10) disapply sections 73A(1) and 78A(1)(b) of that Act. These relate to 
the requirement to re- surface streets after carrying out street works. These sections have been 
disapplied as these works are addressed by provision in Part I of Schedule 32 to the Bill.   
458  Paragraph 2(9)  disapplies section 74A of the 1991 Act and regulations made under that section 
which allow a highway authority to make charges for occupying highways to carry out street 
works.   
459  Sub-paragraphs (11)  to (15) disapply the restrictions which apply under Schedule 3A to the 
1991 Act where a street authority receives notice that substantial street works are proposed in 
a highway. These paragraphs remove the right of the street authority to require notification of 
other street works in such a highway and to give directions as to when street works may 
commence, and also remove restrictions on the construction of further street works during or 
after the completion of street works.  
460  Under Paragraph 2(16) these provisions only apply to a street for which the Secretary of State 
52 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 or a strategic highways company is the street authority, if the Secretary of State or the 
company consents. This consent may be subject to conditions.   
Permit schemes  
461  Paragraph 3  includes provisions that make clear that nothing in Part 3 of the Traffic 
Management Act 2004, and nothing in any scheme or regulation made under that Part, applies 
to works authorised by the Bill. This is because these provisions would require further 
consent for works which have already been authorised by the Bill and are necessary for the 
implementation of Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) of High Speed 2.  
462  Under Paragraph 3(2) , this disapplication does not apply to streets for which the Secretary of 
State or a strategic highways company is the highway authority unless the Secretary of State 
or the strategic highways company consents. Consent may be subject to conditions.  
Clause  31: Lorries  
463  Clause  31 introduces Schedule 25, which contains provisions relating to the use of heavy 
commercial vehicles.  
Schedule 25: Lorries  
464  Schedule 25 modifies the application of lorry ban orders (as defined in the Schedule ) in respect 
of works for Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  of HS2. The provisions of the Schedule  apply to an 
order made at any time under section 1, 9 , or 14 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 which 
imposes restrictions on the use of roads by heavy commercial vehicles.  
Lorry ban orders  
465  Paragraph 1  defines the orders to which Schedule 25 applies. Paragraph 1  only applies to lorry 
ban orders made by the Secretary of State or a strategic highways company if the Secretary of 
State or strategic highways company consents. Consent may be subject to conditions.  
Required provision in lorry ban orders  
466  Paragraph 2  sets out a provision that is to be treated as included in any  orders made under 
Paragraph 1 . 
Issue of emergency permits  
467  Paragraphs 3  and 4 make provision for the grant of emergency permits under lorry ban orders 
in cases where a permit is required for a journey to be undertaken within eight working days 
of the application including provision to enable applications to be made at any time by 
telephone or by electronic means.  
Grant of applications for permit  
468  Given  that the routing  of heavy  commercial  vehicles  is intended  to be one of the areas  of 
control  that planning  authorities will have  under  the planning  regime established  under  the 
Bill, paragraph 5  applies where an application for the issue of a permit is made under P aragraph 
3, or is otherwise connected to authorised works. It restricts the right to refuse or condition a 
permit under a lorry ban order.  
469  Under Paragraph 5(4) , an applicant who disagrees with a decision of the authority not to grant 
a permit or to grant it subject to conditions may appeal the decision within 28 days. The 
53 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 appeal is made to the Secretary of State who may dismiss or vary the authority’s decision.  
Supplementary interpretation  
470  Paragraph 6  contains definition s of terms used in Schedule 25, and the ways in which they 
should be applied. For those which refer to another Act, please see the definition in the 
relevant piece of legislation.  
Clause  32: Noise  
471  Clause  32 introduces Schedule 26 , which contains provisions regarding noise on construction 
sites or which constitutes a statutory nuisance.   
Schedule 26: Noise  
Control of noise on construction sites  
472  Paragraph 1(1)  modifies the operation of sections 60 and 61 of the Control of Pollution Act 
1974, so that appeals under those provisions are determined by the Secretary of State or, if the 
parties agree, by arbitration, rather than by a magistrates’ court.   
473  Paragraph 1(2)  enables the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for the 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, acting jointly, to make regulations about procedure in 
relation to such arbitrations.  
474  Under Paragraph 1(3) , the regulations are to be made by statutory instrument subject to the 
negative resolution procedure.    
Defences to proceedings relating to statutory nuisance  
475  Paragraph 2  provides a defence to proceedings for failure to comply with an abatement notice 
under section 80 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, where the subject of the abatement 
notice concerns noise caused by the construction, maintenance or use of the works authorised 
by the Bill or the operation of Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester), and the noise cannot 
reasonably be avoided.  
476  Paragraph 3  provides that an order under section 82(2) of the Environmental Protection Act 
1990 may not be made for noise emitted from premises, or from a vehicle, machinery and 
equipment in a street, where the noise is a consequence of the construction, maintenance, use 
or the operation of Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester).  
477  Paragraphs 3  and 4 provide that an order under section 82(2) of the Environmental Protection 
Act 1990 may not be made by a magistrates' court in connection with noise emitted from 
premises, or from a vehicle, machinery and equipment in a street, where the nominated 
undertaker can show that the premises, or the vehicle, machinery or equipment, are or is 
being used  in connection with the carrying out of works authorised by the Bill, is a 
consequence of the construction, maintenance or use of the works authorised by the Bill or the 
operation of  Phase 2b and the works concerned are being carried out in accordance with a 
notice or consent issued by the local authority under section 60, 61 or 65 of the Control of 
Pollution Act 1974 or the noise cannot reasonably be avoided. These provisions of the 1974 
Act address control of noise on construction sites (section 60), consent for work on 
construction sites (section 61) and consent to exceed noise limits (section 65) . 
Clause  33: Local Acts  
54 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 478  Clause  33 introduces Schedule 27, which disapplies elements of certain local acts in Cheshire 
and Greater Manchester. Those elements will not apply in relation to premises or vehicles 
authorised by the Bill.   
Schedule 27: Local Acts  
479  Schedule 2  sets out particular elements of local acts in Cheshire and Manchester which will not 
apply to the works authori sed by this Bill.  
480  Paragraph 1  disapplies Section 12 of the Cheshire County Council Act 1968, which prohibits 
the parking of heavy goods vehicles.  
481  Paragraph 2 disapplies aspects of the  Cheshire County Council Act 1980, in relation to plans 
for new streets , the storage of flammable material , building plans and prescriptions of signs.  
482  Paragraph 3  disapplies aspects of the Greater Manchester Act 1981, in relation to parking of 
goods vehicles in residential streets, control of verges, dust, powers of entry for prevention of 
damage by pests, building plans, and the storage of flammable material.  
Clause  34: Community Infrastructure Levy  
483  Clause  34 provides that liability to the Community Infrastructure levy under Part 11 of the 
Planning Act 2008 or under regulations made under section 54 of the Planning (Scotland) Act 2019 does not apply or arise in relation to any development authorised by this Bill.  
Part 7: Railway Matters  
Clause  35: Objectives of Office of Rail and Road  
484  The Railways Act 1993 imposes on the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) a duty to address certain 
objectives in the execution of its non- safety functions. These objectives do not currently 
contain any explicit requirement for the ORR to facilitate the construction of Phase 2b (Crewe 
– Manchester) of High Speed 2.  
485  Clause  35 Subsection (1)  adds such a requirement and thereby clarifies the ORR’s role for the 
benefit of the ORR and rail operators.  
486  Subsection (2)  instructs the ORR to consult the Secretary of State about how it should carry out 
this duty. The duty will sit alongside the ORR’s existing duties and is not intended to override 
its existing duties.  
487  Subsection s (3) and (4) enable the Secretary of State to make an order by statutory instrument  
repealing this Clause . This power enables the objective to be removed from the remit of the 
ORR when it is no longer relevant.  
Clause  36: Disapplication of licensing requirement in pre -operational phase   
488  Subsection (1)  provides that section 6(1) of the Railways Act 1993 does not apply to a network 
constructed under this Bill, or any trains running on such a network, if it is not ready for 
commercial use. This allows for operational testing in the pre -commercial phase.  
489  Under Subsection (2) , a network will be deemed ready for commercial use if the Secretary of 
State lays a notice before Parliament to that effect.  
490  Subsection (3)  provides that such an exemption under this Clause  is an appropriate licence 
exemption for the purposes of section 122 of the Railways Act 1993. This means that a defence is available in the case of any proceedings for nuisance.  
55 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 491  Subsection (4)  defines terms used in the Clause .  
Clause  37: Disapplication of statutory closure provisions  
492  Subsection (1)  provides that the Secretary of State may at any time before a railway authorised 
by the Bill is ready for commercial use  disapply the closure provisions of the Railways Act 
2005 in the case of closures which are necessary or expedient because of the construction or 
operation of that railway . The disapplied closure provisions set out what must be done, in 
terms of notice, consultation and provision of information, in the event of a proposal to close 
existing services, stations or parts of the rail network.  
493  Subsection (2) defines statutory closure provisions.  
494  Under Subsection  (3), a railway is only ready for commercial use if the Secretary of State has 
notified Parliament that this is the case.  
Clause  38: Other railway legislation etc.  
495  Clause  38 introduces Schedule 28, which provides for the ways in which other railway 
legislation applies to Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) of High Speed 2.   
Schedule 28 : Application of other railway legislation etc.  
496  Schedule 28 contains a number of provisions which relate to how other legislation pertaining to 
railways applies to Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester) .  
Highway (Railway Crossings) Act 1839  
497  Paragraph 1  disapplies the Highway (Railway Crossings) Act 1839, concerning the gating of 
carriageways crossed on the level. This is because it is not proposed that level crossings for carriageways will be provided under the Bill.  
Railway Regulation Act 1840  
498  Paragraph 2  modifies section 16 of the Railway Regulation Act 1840 as it relates to Phase 2b 
(Crewe – Manchester) or trains that travel wholly or partly on Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester) , 
by increasing the maximum penalty for offences relating to obstruction and trespass to a fine 
on summary conviction at level 3 on the standard scale or imprisonment for 51 weeks (in 
England and Wales) or 12 months (in Scotland).  
499  By virtue of P aragraph 2(2)  however, the maximum term of imprisonment in England and 
Wales is to be read as one month for offences committed before section 281(5) of the Criminal 
Justice Act 2003 is brought into force.  
Railway Regulation Act 1842  
500  Paragraph 3  disapplies section 9 of the Railway Regulation Act 1842, concerning the gating of 
carriageways crossed on the level, for the same reason that paragraph 1 disapplies the 
Highway (Railway Crossings) Act 1839  
Railway Clause s Consolidation Act 1845  
501  Paragraph 4 incorporates the specified sections of the Railways Clause s Consolidation Act 1845 
into this Bill.  
Regulation of Railways Act 1889  
502  Paragraph 5  modifies section 5 of the Regulation of Railways Act 1889 as it relates to Phase 2b 
56 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 or trains that travel wholly or partly on Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester) , by increasing the 
maximum fine on summary conviction for offences under section 5(1) (relating to ticketing 
and fares) to level 2 on the standard scale and under section 5(3) (relating to travel with intent 
to avoid payment of fare) to level 3 on the standard scale, and also extends the power of arrest 
under section 5(2).   
British Transport Commission Act 1949  
503  Paragraph 6  applies sections 55 and 56 of the British Transport Commission Act 1949 
(provisions dealing with trespass on railways and stone throwing) to relevant railway works 
constructed under the Bill.  
Clause  39: Co -operation  
504  The nominated undertaker which builds and operates HS2 Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) , in 
the course of its work, have impacts on other controllers of assets on the UK rail network, and vice versa.  
505  Subsections (1)  and (2) require both parties, if they consider that a matter may affect an asset of 
another, to give notice and agree arrangements for working out how to address  the matter.  
506  Subsection (3)  provides that the terms of an agreement may  be accepted by both parties , or if 
not agreed, arbitration should be used to reach agreement.  
507  Subsection (4)  introduces Schedule 29, which contains further details on the provisions for such 
arbitration.  
508  Subsection (5)  defines  what is a Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) asset or facility for these 
purposes.  
509  Subsection (6)  provides that S ubsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to matters or 
agreements which are within the remit of the Office of Rail and Road. 
510  Subsection (7)  defines the terms used in this Clause .  
Schedule 29 : Arbitration between railway operators  
Schedule 29 Paragraph 1(1) sets out that this Schedule relates to the process should a difference 
between operators under Clause  39(3) be referred to arbitration.  
Directions as to results to be achieved  
511  Paragraph 1(2)  provides that, should the parties go to arbitration to reach agreement, the 
Secretary of State must be informed immediately.  
512  Paragraph 1(3)  allows the Secretary of State to require the arbitrator to ensure that any 
agreement reached delivers a particular result or outcome. This does not allow the Secretary 
of State to set the terms of any agreement, but protects against the arbitration process 
delivering an outcome that hampers the delivery or operation of Phase 2b (Crewe – 
Manchester) of High Speed 2.  
513  Paragraph 1(5)  provides that the Secretary of State may be asked by either party, or the 
arbitrator, to provide a direction, but does not have to be asked to do so. Paragraph 1(4)  states 
that a direction may be provided even if the Secretary of State is directly or indirectly a party 
to the arbitration.  
514  Paragraph 1(6)  considers the circumstances in which the arbitrator must comply with the 
57 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 direction made. The arbitrator must do so if the direction is both relevant to the determination 
of the terms of the agreement and is given before the arbitrator has reached a decision. 
515  Paragraph 1(7)  sets out what the arbitrator must do in complying with a direction. Broadly, the 
arbitrator must try to ensure that the agreement reached through arbitration achieves the outcome set out by the direction from the Secretary of State, as far as is reasonably possible.  
Directions as to consolidation and grouping of proceedings  
516  Paragraph 2  sets out the ways in which the proceedings for arbitration are to be conducted.  
517  Paragraph s 2(1) and 2(2) provide that the Secretary of State will have the power to request, or 
to direct, that a group of proceedings, for example on a similar matter, should be included in 
the same arbitration process, or should be arbitrated at the same time.  
518  Paragraph 2(3)  provides that the arbitrator may make a request for such direction, while 
paragraph 2(4)  sets out that such a direction must establish the terms for consolidating or 
timing hearings.  
519  Paragraph 2(5)  contains provisions for cases where hearings with different arbitrators are 
consolidated. These allow the direction for such hearings to both specify the person who will 
be the arbitrator and how that person shall be determined.  
520  Paragraph 2(6) defines the terms used in Schedule 29.  
Clause  40: Transfer  of functions relating to works  
521  Subsections (1)  to (4) provide that the Secretary of State may by order transfer the authority to 
carry out works on railway land where the land is also being transferred. This Clause  is 
included in the Bill because, during the construction of Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  of 
High Speed 2, works may be required on or close to other railways where unrelated work, 
approved under other legislation, is also due to be carried out and will still be necessary.  
522  Subsections (5) and (6) define terms used in the Clause .  
Part 8: Traffic  
Clause  41: Traffic  
523  Clause  41 introduces Schedule 30, which contains provisions relating to traffic regulation.  
Schedule 30 : Traffic regulation  
Traffic authority to consult Secretary of State before making traffic regulation order 
524  Paragraph 1  requires a traffic authority to consult the Secretary of State before making an order 
under section 1,9 or 14 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (a “TRO”) which could affect the construction of the works authorised by the Bill.  
525  The consultation requirement set out in P aragraph 1(2)  applies where the order relates to a 
road which is within the Bill limits or is, or may become, part of a construction traffic route for the authorised works, and the authority considers that the provisions of the traffic order could 
significantly interfere with the use of the road for the construction of the authorised works by 
heavy commercial vehicles.  
526  Paragraphs 1(3)  sets out the definitions of certain terms used within Schedule 30.  
58 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 527  Paragraph 2  enables the Secretary of State to designate a road or a part of a road to which the 
consultation requirement in  Paragraph 1(2)  does not, until further notice, apply because the 
road is not being used for the construction of the authorised works. The Secretary of State can 
also designate types of TRO in relation to which the consultation requirement is not to apply.  
528  Paragraph 3  provides that the consultation requirement under P aragraph 1(2)  will cease to 
apply in relation to the whole or part of the area of a traffic authority if the Secretary of State gives notice to the authority that no further works under the Bill are to be constructed in that area or part, and that the use of relevant roads in that area or part are no longer required for 
the construction of the Bill works.  
529  Under Paragraph 3(3) , the Secretary of State must give notice in a timely manner  if they 
consider this to be the case.  
Power of Secretary of State to direct traffic authority to make traffic regulation order 
530  Paragraph 4  enables the Secretary of State to direct a traffic authority to make a TRO if it is 
necessary for the purposes of the timely, efficient and cost -effective construction of the works 
authorised by the Bill and is reasonable in the circumstances. In this case, the relevant traffic 
authority may not make a further TRO varying or revoking that orders.  
531  Paragraphs 5  and 6 contain supporting provisions where a traffic authority is required by 
paragraph 4 to make an order under section 1,4 or 9 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.  
Further powers of Secretary of State (including in relation to variation or revocation of orders)  
532  Paragraph 7  enables the Secretary of State to direct a traffic authority to revoke or vary a TRO 
made in pursuance of a direction under P aragraph 4 .  
533  Paragraph 8  gives default power to the Secretary of State to make, revoke or vary a TRO where 
a traffic authority has failed to comply with a direction under P aragraph 4  or 7 requiring the 
traffic authority to do so.  
534  Paragraph 9  enables the Secretary of State by means of a statutory instrument  to vary or revoke 
a TRO made by a traffic authority if he considers that it is necessary for the purposes of the 
timely, efficient and cost -effective construction of the works authorised by the Bill and is 
reasonable in the circumstances.  
535  Paragraph 10 makes additional provisions relating to an order made by the Secretary of State 
under paragraph 8  or 9. 
Power to restrict traffic authority from making or implementing traffic regulation order  
536  Paragraph 11 enables the Secretary of State to direct a traffic authority not to make or bring 
into operation a TRO if the Secretary of State considers that the TRO could significantly 
interfere with the use of any road for the construction of the works authorised by the Bill.  
Consultation requirements applicable to the Secretary of State  
537  Paragraph 12(1) requires the Secretary of State to consult a traffic authority before giving a 
direction under P aragraph s 4, 7 or 11 to make, vary or revoke a TRO, or not to make a TRO, or 
bring the TRO into force. The Secretary of State must also consult a traffic authority before 
making an order under P aragraph 8(2)  or 9 revoking or varying a TRO made by the authority.  
538  Paragraph 12(2)  sets out the purposes of consultation , which are to ensure public safety and to 
59 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 take account of the requirements to which traffic authorities are subject . 
Guidance  
539  Paragraph 13 requires the Secretary of State, after consulting the nominated undertaker and 
affected traffic authorities, to prepare a statement setting out both guidance in connection 
with the traffic authorities’ duty to consult under P aragraph 1(2)  and how the Secretary of State 
proposes to exercise the powers relating to TROs set out in Schedule 30.  
Removal of vehicles  
540  Paragraph 14 enables a person authorised by the nominated undertaker to remove, or arrange 
for the removal of, any vehicle which is stationary on a road in contravention of a TRO or on a road which is stopped up under the powers of the Bill , if the vehicle, if not removed, is likely 
to obstruct the carrying out of any of the works authorised by the Bill or is at risk of being 
damaged by the construction of the works.  
541  Paragraph 14(4)  requires that the vehicle is only removed to another position on the same road 
or to another road.  
542  Paragraph 14(5)  requires the authorised person to give notice to both the local authority and 
the chief officer of the police force in whose area the vehicle is located, before the vehicle can 
be removed.  
543  Removing the vehicle can be done by the authorised person as set out in P aragraph 14(6) 
including using such measures as the person thinks necessary to enable the removal of the 
vehicle.  
Interpretation  
544  Paragraph 15 contains a number of definition of terms used in Schedule 30, and the ways in 
which they should be applied.  
Part 9: Nominated Undertaker  
Clause  42: Nominated Undertaker  
545  Clause  42 Subsection (1) gives the Secretary of State the power to nominate, by means of an 
order, one or more ‘nominated undertakers’ to carry out some or all of the works, scheduled 
and ancillary, authorised by the Bill.  
546  Subsection (2)  provides that, in the absence of a designated nominated undertaker for any 
provision of this Bill, the Secretary of State is deemed to be the nominated undertaker for that 
provision.  
547  Subsection (3)  allows the Secretary of State to restrict the discretionary exercise of the power 
granted by S ubsection (1). This is to provide for the Secretary of State to be able to make 
contractual agreements prior to the nomination of a person or body as the nominated 
undertaker.   
548  Subsection (4)  allows the Secretary of State, by regulations, to modify any provisions of the Bill 
that refer to the Secretary of State, for cases where modifications are needed in consequence of 
the Secretary of State’s having the functions of the nominated undertaker.  
549  Subsection ( 5) allows the regulations referred to in Clause  42 to contain relevant provisions at 
60 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the discretion of the Secretary of State.  
550  Subsection s (6) and (7) require that regulations made under Clause 42 are made by statutory 
instrument  under the negative procedure.  
Part 10: Statutory Undertakers  
Clause  43: Extension of planning permission for statutory undertakers  
551  Clause  43 introduces Schedule 31. This Schedule extends the planning permission available for 
certain works of statutory undertakers, carried out in consequence of Phase 2b  (Crewe – 
Manchester) , which have been environmentally assessed in connection with the Bill.  This 
environmental assessment , referred to in Clause 43 and Schedule 31 is carried out in the 
development and publication of the Environmental Statement.  
Schedule 31 : Extension of planning permission for statutory undertakers  
Case where planning permission extended  
552  Paragraph 1  disapplies the provisions of article 3(10) of the Town and Country Planning 
(General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 to allow certain statutory 
undertakers (such as sewerage and electricity undertakers) to rely on their own permitted 
development rights where the likely significant effects of their works are covered by a Phase 
2b (Crewe –  Manchester) environmental assessment.  
Condition of extended planning permission  
553  Paragraph 2  contains provisions enabling the Secretary of State to impose requirements in 
relation to the extended planning permission provided by this Schedule. This can be either to 
ensure compliance with an undertaking given to the Select Committees of either House of 
Parliament , or to ensure the environmental impacts of the development do not materially 
differ from those set out in the Environmental Statement.  
Controls on proposed development  
554  Paragraphs 3  and 4 enable the Secretary of State to give notice disapplying the planning 
permission given by P aragraph 1  where it appears that proposed development is not covered 
by the Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) Environmental Statement, or in order to avoid the 
breach of an undertaking given to the Select Committees of either House of Parliament.  
Notices  
555  Paragraph 5  specifies the content of a notice issued under Schedule 3 1.  
Clause  44: Protective Provisions  
556  Clause  44 introduces Schedule 32, which protects the interest of certain persons affected by the 
Bill.  
Schedule 32 : Protective provisions  
557  Schedule 32 contains provisions setting out the necessary protections for various bodies with 
statutory responsibilities likely to be affected by the works.  
Part 1 – Highways and Traffic  
558  The provisions of Part 1 contain protection s for highway authorities (which are defined for the 
61 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 purposes of the Bill to include roads authorities in Scotland).   
559  Paragraph 1 (1) provides that the arrangements set out in this Part of the Schedule are to apply 
unless the nominated undertaker and the highway authority concerned agree to vary them.  
560  Paragraph 1(2)  sets out the meaning of the terms “plans” and “property of the highway 
authority” used in this Part.  
561  Under Paragraph 1(3),  the arrangements set out in Part 1  of this Schedule  will apply instead of 
Part 3 (or, in Scotland, Part 4)  of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 . 
562  Paragraph 2  requires that wherever in this Part, approval or consent is required from  the 
highway authority, that approval must be in writing and must not be unreasonably withheld.  
563  Paragraph 3 imposes a general obligation to minimise disruption to traffic. This applies to the 
nominated undertaker in relation to powers to stop up streets and to construct works.  
564  Paragraphs 4  and 5 relate to works constructed under highways. Approval of plans by the 
highway authori ty is required for the construction of tunnels, subways,  or other structures 
within eight metres of the surface (excluding street works  or road works  within the meaning 
of Part 3  and Part 4 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991). Consent  is required if the 
completed  structure  will interfere with  drainage  or will be within  two metres  of the surface.  
565  Paragraph 6  applies to the construction of a new bridge, or an extension or alteration of an 
existing bridge.  Before work begins, the highway authority must approve plans of the works 
taking place.  A bridge must be constructed in such a way as to avoid water dripping onto a 
highway and the highway authority may place lamps or other apparatus at the cost of the 
nominated undertaker to light any highway under the bridge.  
566  Under  Paragraph 7,  the nominated undertaker must ensure that works under a highway are 
designed, constructed , and maintained to carry the appropriate loading for highway bridges. 
The nominated undertaker must also indemnify the highway authority against expenses 
reasonably accrued in the maintenance or repair of works caused by non -compliance with the 
provisions of Paragraph 7  by the nominated undertaker. 
567  Paragraph 8  allows a highway authority or its officers to inspect the construction of works 
which may affect the highways of the highway authority.  
568  Paragraphs 9  to 15 contain miscellaneous provisions governing the way that works are 
constructed in highways, together with provision for reinstating streets after completion of 
the work, making good damage caused to highways and street furniture, and providing for 
reimbursement of costs incurred by highways authorities in connection with road diversions 
required for the works.  
569  Paragraph 16  provides that the nominated undertaker will not be exempt from liability, under 
this Part of this Schedule or otherwise, by the fact that an act or thing was done in accordance 
with plans approved by the highway authority.  
570  Paragraph 17 sets out  how to resolve disputes arising between the nominated undertaker and 
the highway authority regarding matters under this Part. If both parties agree, or the dispute relates to the amount of compensation payab le, the matter should be referred to arbitration. 
Otherwise, the dispute must be determined by a person appointed by the Secretary of State, who must have regard to any such matters specified by the Secretary of State when the 
appointment is made.  In Scotland the appointment is to be made in consultation with the 
Scottish Ministers.  
62 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Part 2 – Electricity, Gas, Water and Sewerage  Undertakers  
571  Paragraph 18(1) provides that  the provisions of this Part have effect unless agreed otherwise in 
writing between the statutory undertakers and the nominated undertaker or Secretary of 
State.  
572  Paragraph 18(2) sets out the meaning of various terms used within this Part.  
573  Under Paragraph 18(3),  the provisions of this Part do not generally apply to apparatus 
governed by Part 3  (or, in Scotland, Part 4)  of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.  
574  Paragraph 18(4) applies Paragraph 25 of this Part  (which contains protection for apparatus 
which is not removed)  to the exercise of powers under P aragraphs 2  to 6 of Schedule 2 . 
Paragraphs 28 and 29 of this Part apply instead o f section 176 (right to compensation) of the 
Housing and Planning Act 2016, as applied by Paragraph 8(2)  of Schedule 2.  
575  Paragraph 18(5) makes clear that the provisions of this part apply instead of Clause  11 
(extinguishment of rights of statutory undertaker) of the Bill in relation to the removal of 
apparatus of the undertakers referred to in this Part.  
576  Paragraph 19 sets out the general principle that apparatus is not to be moved under the powers 
of the Bill until replacement apparatus has been provided and is in operation. This principle applies except in exceptional circumstances where a certificate is issued by the appropriate 
Ministers allowing this requirement to be dispensed with. The appropriate Ministers, in 
relation to England,  are the Secretary for State for Transport acting jointly with either the 
Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs , or the Secretary of State for 
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy , and in relation to Scotland, the Secretary of State 
acting in consultation with the Scottish Ministers . 
577  Paragraphs 20 to 24 set out a procedure for dealing with diversion of apparatus (which can be 
required by either the nominated undertaker or the undertaker concerned) in consequence of 
the Phase 2b (Crewe- Manchester) works. This requires the nominated undertaker or the 
Secretary of State to provide rights and facilities for the replacement apparatus when it  can do 
so, but otherwise the statutory undertaker is required to use its best efforts  to obtain these. 
The terms relating to any such replacement apparatus are to be agreed or otherwise 
determined in accordance with the  disputes procedure under Paragraph 3 1, and any 
person  making a determination  under  Paragraph 3 1 must have regard to any template 
provisions issued by the appropriate Ministers (following consultation with the undertake rs). 
Paragraph 20(3)  deals specifically with the position where replacement apparatus is to be 
constructed in land which is temporarily occupied by the nominated undertaker and makes it 
clear that the statutory undertaker may enter onto the land and construct and bring into use 
the replacement apparat us in advance of being granted permanent rights.  
578   Paragraph 25 applies to apparatus which is not proposed to be removed by the nominated 
undertaker. Plans of the proposed works near to the apparatus  must be provided by the 
nominated undertaker which include any proposed protective measures. The statutory 
undertaker can require any reasonable protective measures to be undertaken, or require the  
removal  of the apparatus.  
579  Paragraphs 26 and 27 protect access to apparatus for statutory undertakers. The statutory 
undertaker is entitled to enjoy  the same rights for the purpose of maintaining apparatus in 
streets which have been permanently stopped up under the powers of the Act  as was the case 
before the Act came into force.  
63 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 580  Under Paragraph 28,  the nominated undertaker must repay the reasonable expenses of the 
statutory undertaker incurred by the diversion or protection of apparatus . 
581  Paragraphs 28(3)  and 28(4)  apply where apparatus of a better type or greater dimensions is 
placed or where apparatus placed at a greater depth than the existing apparatus in the course 
of works under this Part . If the relocation works cost more than the cost of placing apparatus 
of the existing type or at the existing depth, the amount payable to the operator under 
sub-paragraph (1)  is to be reduced by that amount of excess. 
582  Under Paragraph 28(5),  an extension of apparatus is not to be counted as placing apparatus of 
greater dimensions except where the apparatus provides a more than equivalent service. 
Where a joint in a cable is necessary, the consequential provision of a jointing chamber or 
manhole is to be treated as if it had been agreed originally.  
583  Paragraph 28(6)  provides that if apparatus is substituted for apparatus placed more than seven 
and a half years earlier, any conferred financial benefit by replacing the apparatus should be 
discounted from the amount payable to an operator under sub -paragraph (1).  
584  Paragraph 29 provides an indemnity in respect of damage to apparatus or interruption to the 
undertakers’ service, caused by the construction of the works. This indemnity includes 
provision for reasonable compensation for any losses suffered by the undertaker. 
585  Paragraph 30 provides that, where Network Rail Infrastructure Limited (“Network Rail”) is the 
nominated undertaker, this Part of the Schedule  will apply,  subject to any existing agreements 
Network Rail may have with undertakers.   
586  Paragraph 3 2 sets out how to resolve disputes arising between the nominated undertaker and a 
statutory undertaker regarding matters under this Part. If both parties agree, or the dispute 
relates to the amount of compensation payable, the matter should be referred to arbitration. 
Otherwise, the dispute must be determined by a person appointed by the appropriate 
Ministers, who must have regard to any such matters specified by the appropriate Ministers 
when the appointment is made.  The appropriate Ministers are, in relation to England,  the 
Secretary for State for Transport acting jointly with either the Secretary of State for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, or the Secretary of State for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy and , in relation to Scotland, the Secretary of State acting in consultation 
with the Scottish Mini sters . 
Part 3 – Electronic Communications Code Networks  
587  Under Paragraph 33(1),  the arrangements set out in this Part of the  Schedule  are to apply unless 
the nominated undertaker and the operators concerned agree to vary them.  
588  Paragraph 3 3(2) sets out the meaning of various terms used within this Part.  
589  Paragraph 3 4(1) applies paragraph 23 of the electronic communications code for the purposes 
of the authorised works, subject to Paragraph 33(2).  
590  Paragraph 34(2) disapplies Paragraphs 21 and 23 of the electronic communications code where: 
the authorised works are regulated by the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991, the 
nominated undertaker exercises powers under subsection (4)(b) of section 272 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (or the equivalent legislation in Scotland), or regarding any 
matter regulated by P aragraph 36(3) to 36(8) of this Part.  
591  Paragraph 35 provides that the temporary stopping up or diversion of highways does not 
affect the statutory rights of operators to use that street for the purpose of installing or 
64 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 maintaining apparatus.   
592  Under Paragraph 36(1) , any operator of an electronic communications code network with 
apparatus under, over, in, on along, or across a highway has the same rights of access to 
inspect, maintain, or alter that apparatus as if this Act had not been passed. This does not 
affect the rights of nominated undertaker or the operator to require removal of the apparatus 
under this Part.  
593  Paragraphs 3 6(3) and 36(4) require the nominated undertaker to give no less than 28 days’ 
notice of its intention to stop up any highway under Paragraph 2  or 3 of Schedule 5. After 
service of the notice, the operator, if it considers it is necessary, may remove the apparatus 
and place it or other apparatus in substitution in any position the operator has power to place 
it. 
594  Under Paragraph 3 6(5), the nominated undertaker must pay the operator reasonable costs 
incurred by the operator in connection with apparatus relocation works.  
595  Paragraphs 36(6)  and 36(7)  apply where apparatus of a better type or greater dimensions is 
placed or where apparatus placed at a greater depth than the existing apparatus in the course 
of works under sub -paragraph (4).  If the relocation works cost more than the cost of placing 
apparatus of the existing type or at the existing depth, the amount payable to the operator 
under sub-paragraph (5)  is to be reduced by that amount of excess. 
596  Under Paragraph 36(8),  an extension of apparatus is not to be counted as placing apparatus of 
greater dimensions except where the apparatus provides a more than equivalent service. 
Where a joint in a cable is necessary, the consequential provision of a jointing chamber or 
manhole is to be treated as if it had been agreed originally.  
597  Paragraph 36(9)  provides that if apparatus is substituted for apparatus placed more than seven 
and a half years earlier, any conferred financial benefit by replacing the apparatus should be 
discounted from the amount payable to an operator under sub -paragraph (5).  
598  Paragraph 36(10)  disapplies Paragraphs 36(5) to  (9) where the authorised works constitute 
major transport or highway works under Part 3 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991, 
or, in Scotland, Part 4 of that Act. Instead, allowable costs are to be determined in accordance 
with section 85 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 or section 144, and the allowable 
coasts are to be paid by the nominated undertaker and the operator in the proportions set out 
by regulations.  
599  Paragraphs 37(1) and (2) provide that rights given by the Secretary of State or nominated 
undertaker to an operator to construct, maintain, repair, or inspect alternative apparatus must either have agree terms and conditions, or must be agreed in accordance with Paragraph 41. A 
decision under Paragraph 41 must have regard to template provisions issued  by the 
appropriate  Ministers.  Such  a determination  must  consider  all reasonable  health and safety  
requirements  and have  regard to the operator’s  ability  to fulfil its service  obligations.  
600  Paragraphs 37(3) and 37(4)  state that when determining the matters under sub -paragraph (2) , the 
appropriate Ministers must consult the operators on the form of the proposed template provisions. Any objections not resolved within six months of the date on which this Act comes 
into force must be referred for independent adjudication. The independent adjudicator is to be 
appointed by the President of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.  
601  Under Paragraph 37(5),  if the rights given by the nominated undertaker or the Secretary of 
State regarding alternative apparatus are more or less favourable to the operator than the 
65 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 existing rights, then compensation must be paid to or by the nominated undertaker or the 
Secretary of State to or by the operator in respect of the difference.  
602  Paragraph 3 8 provides an indemnity for operators in respect of damage to apparatus or 
interruptions to the supply of its services caused by the construction of the authorised works 
(or by subsidence resulting from those works). This does not apply to apparatus governed by 
Part 3 or Part 4 of the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991.   
603  Paragraph 3 9 provides that, where Network Rail Infrastructure Limited is the nominated 
undertaker, this Part of the Schedule  will have effect subject to any existing agreements 
Network Rail may have with operators.   
604  Paragraph 41 sets out how to resolve disputes arising between the nominated undertaker and a 
statutory undertaker regarding matters under this Part. If both parties agree, or the dispute 
relates to the amount of compensation payable, the matter should be referred to arbitration. 
Otherwise, the dispute must be determined by a person appointed by the appropriate 
Ministers, who must have regard to any such matters specified by the appropriate Ministers 
when the appointment is made. The cost of the dispute is to be allocated between the parties 
as directed by the appointed decision -maker.  
Part 4 – Land drainage, flood defence, water resources and fisheries  
605  These provisions contain protection for authorities (referred to as drainage authorities) which 
have functions in connection with land drainage, flood defence, fisheries and water resources. 
These bodies are, in England, the Environment Agency and the local drainage authorities (i.e. 
local authorities which are given drainage functions as lead local flood authorities as a result 
of the Flood and Water Management Act 2010 and internal drainage boards) and , in Scotland, 
the Scottish Environment Protection Agency (“SEPA”). Under these provisions, protection is 
given to each drainage authority in relation to works affecting their functions.  
606   In England , functions are divided between the Environment Agency and local drainage 
authorities. Where works authorised by the Bill affect a main river, groundwater, water 
resources or fisheries, i.e. matters affecting the functions of the Environment Agency, the 
protection applies to the Environment Agency. Where works affect ordinary watercourses (i.e. 
watercourses which are not main rivers) or flood defence features for which a local drainage 
authority is responsible, the protection applies to the relevant local drainage authority. In 
Scotland , all functions are exercised by SEPA.  
607  Paragraph 42(1) , provides that the arrangements set out in this Part of the  Schedule  are to 
apply unless the nominated undertaker and the drainage authority concerned agree to vary 
them.  It explains which type of drainage authority has responsibility in relation to the 
different types of works and also provides, given the strategic role of the Environment 
Agency, for local drainage authorities to consult the Agency in exercising their functions and 
for the Agency to be able to issue model conditions.  
608  Paragraphs  43 and 45 provide for the drainage authority to approve plans of any specified 
works and in approving plans to be able to make reasonable requirements (including 
requiring the nominated undertaker to construct protective works at its own cost). Approval 
of plans under these provisions is not to be unreasonably withheld.   
609  Paragraph  44 applies obligations under the Environmental Permitting Regulations 2016 to the 
drainage authority in England when exercising its functions under  Paragraph 4 3 to approve 
plans in relation to works affecting groundwater. These obligations relate to avoiding 
pollution of groundwater.  Similar obligations under the Water Environment (Controlled 
66 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Activities) (Scotland) regulations 2011 are imposed on SEPA in Scotland when it exercises its 
functions under these provisions.  
610  Paragraph  46 deals with the construction of the works (and any protective works).  It 
provides  for these works to be constructed to the drainage authority’s reasonable satisfaction, 
for the drainage authority to have the right to inspect the construction and to require 
alteration or removal of the works where they have not been constructed in accordance with 
the requirements of this Part.  
611  Under Paragraph 47,  the nominated undertaker must ensure that any drainage work within 
the Act limits of deviation is kept in good order and free from obstruction. If any such 
drainage work is not maintained to the satisfaction of the drainage authority, the drainage 
authority may require the nominated undertaker to repair and restore the work. In the event 
that the nominated undertaker does not take steps to rectify the work within 28 days’ of 
receiving notice, the drainage authority may take necessary steps for compliance.  
612  Paragraph  48 requires the nominated undertaker to make good any impairment to the 
efficiency of drainage works for flood defence purposes or any other damage. The drainage 
authority can take remedial action where the nominated undertaker fails to do so.  
613  Paragraph  49 requires the nominated undertaker to take all reasonably practicable measures to 
prevent interruption of the free passage of fish in any fishery and contains provision for the 
nominated undertaker to prevent or make good damage to fisheries (a fishery is defined as 
any waters containing fish and the fish within or migrating to or from such waters and the 
spawn, spawning grounds or food of such fish). The Environment Agency can take remedial 
action if the nominated undertaker fails to do so.   
614  Paragraphs  50 to  52 contain a general indemnity for the drainage authority in respect of claims 
against it arising from the construction of the specified works in respect of the drainage 
authority’s functions protected by this Part.   
615  Paragraph 5 3 requires any dispute between the nominated undertaker and the drainage 
authority to be referred to arbitration.  
Part 5 – Canal & River Trust  
616  Under Paragraph 54(1), the arrangements set out in this Part of the  Schedule  are to apply 
unless the nominated undertaker and the Canal & River Trust agree to vary them.  
617  Paragraph 54(2) sets out the meaning of various terms used within this Part. The Trust is a 
charitable trust which was established in July 2012 to replace the British Waterways Board, a 
statutory corporation. It owns and  manages a network of waterways comprising canal and 
river navigations, reservoirs, and docks. Several of its waterways may be affected by the 
powers of the Bill. These arrangements apply to “canals” which means any canal or waterway 
owned  or managed by the Trust, including towpaths and other land held or used for the 
canal. The nominated undertaker’s works to which the provisions apply are any “specified 
works” defined as works in, across, under or within 15 metres of, or which may affect, any 
canal.   
618  Under Paragraph 55,  the Secretary of State cannot compulsorily purchase land belonging to the 
Canal & River Trust, unless the land is necessary for the construction, maintenance, or 
operation of Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) works.  
619  Paragraph 56 requires the nominated undertaker to give plans of proposed work to the Canal 
& River Trust before any work can begin. The Canal & River Trust must object to the plans 
67 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 within 28 days of receiving the plans, or approval will be deemed to have been given. 
Approval must not be unreasonably withheld.  
620  Paragraph 57 deals with the construction of the specified works (and any protective works). It 
provides in particular for these to be constructed to the Canal & River Trust’s reasonable satisfaction and with minimum disruption to traffic on the canals and use of towpaths, for the 
Trust to have advance notice of commencement of construction, and the right to inspect the 
construction work.  
621  Paragraphs 5 8 and 59 deal with deposits of materials on, in, or  over canals, and discharge of 
water into canals. These operations will require the Trust’s consent (which is not to be 
unreasonably withheld). The exercise of the powers under Paragraph 10(5)  of Schedule 2  to 
discharge water into watercourses is made subject to the terms of any consent given under 
these provisions.   
622  Under Paragraph 60, if  access along a towpath  is temporarily obstructed and there is no 
alternative means of access, the nominated undertaker is required (so far as is reasonably 
practicable) to provide a substitute. These requirements are in addition to the obligation 
in Paragraph 8(3)  or (6) of Schedule 5  to ensure reasonable pedestrian access to premises 
adjoining a highway which has been temporarily stopped up and to obtain the consent of the 
highway authority for such closures.   
623  Under Paragraph 61,  if canal work is abandoned , or is in such a condition that it does or may 
constitute a danger or interference with navigation , the Canal & River Trust may require its 
removal or carry out remedial  works  at the nominated  undertaker’s  expense, if the nominated  
undertaker does  not take steps to repair the work.  
624  Paragraph 62  contains a general indemnity for the Trust in respect of claims against it arising 
from damage to canals covered by the works and for the costs of making good such damage.   
625  Paragraph 63  provides that no liability is to fall on the nominated undertaker for damage 
attributable to the action or inaction of the Canal & River Trust. However, work carried out by the nominated undertaker using plans agreed by the Canal & River Trust does not remove liability from the nominated undertaker in the absence of negligence on the part of the Canal 
& River Trust.  
626  Paragraph 64  provides that any dispute arising between the nominated undertaker and the 
Canal & River Trust should be referred to arbitration if both parties agree or the dispute relates to the amount of compensation payable. Otherwise, the dispute must be determined by 
a person appointed by the appropriate Ministers, who must have regard to any such matters 
specified by the appropriate Ministers when the appointment is made. The reference to the 
appropriate Ministers is to the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for 
Environment, Food and Rural affairs acting jointly.  
Part 6 – For the Protection of the Manchester Ship Canal Company Limited  
627  Paragraph 6 5(1) applies the arrangements set out in this Part of the  Schedule  unless otherwise 
agreed in writing between the nominated undertaker or the Secretary of State and the Manchester Ship Canal Company Limited  (MSCC) . 
628  Paragraph 65(2) defines the terms used in this Part.  
629  Under Paragraph 66, the Secretary of State must not acquire any MSCC land or rights over 
such land, unless that land is reasonably necessary for the construction or operation of works 
authorised by this Act.  
68 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 630  Paragraph 67 provides that  the nominated undertaker must fence off works where required by 
MSCC and to its reasonable satisfaction,  for ensuring the safety of the canal , or take any other 
necessary steps to separate works from the Canal. 
631  Under Paragraph 68(1) , the nominated undertaker must give plans of the work to MSCC 
before commencing construction of that work. Within 14 days of receiving the plans, MSCC 
may ask for reasonable further information about construction of the work if necessary for 
MSCC to give approval.  The nominated undertaker must only commence construction in 
accordance with the agreed plans or as determined under Paragraph 80.  
632  Paragraph s 68(2)  states that MSCC must not unreasonably withh old approval. If approval has 
not been granted  within 28 days of MSCC receiving the plans under Paragraph 68(1),  and 
MSCC has not indicated disapproval, then MSCC is deemed to have agreed to the work being 
carried out as submitted.  
633  Paragraph 68(3)  provides for  MSCC to specify conditions of any protective work or other 
requirements to be carried out by the nominated undertaker or MSCC when giving approval. 
Such protective work must be carried out without unnecessary delay. 
634  Paragraph 68(4)  provides that approval under Paragraph 68(3)  must not be unreasonably 
withheld. If MSCC has not disapproved the protective work within 7 days of the protective 
work being completed, then MSCC is deemed to have approved the protective work. 
635  Under Paragraph 68(5),  MSCC must give reasonable access to the nominated undertaker or its 
agents to protective works constructed by MSCC, and must give the nominated undertaker 
any information reasonably required about the protective works or their construction method.  
636  Paragraph 69  states that the nominated undertaker must provide and maintai n any temporary 
lighting in the vicinity of any specified work as reasonably required by MSCC . 
637  Paragraph 70(1)  sets out a number of conditions for the construction of specified work. Work 
must be constructed without unnecessary delay, under the supervision of MSCC if required, 
and in such a way as to cause as little disruption to the C anal as reasonably practicable.  
638  Under Paragraph 70(2),  following the completion of the specified work, the nominated 
undertaker must restore the Canal  to its condition before the commencement of those works.  
639  Paragraph 71(1)  provides that in the course of constructing any specified work or protective 
work , or otherwise in connection with such works do or permit anything which may result in the deposit of any polluting material on, in or over the Canal and must take such steps as 
MSCC reasonably require to avoid or make good any breach of its obligations under this .  
640  Paragraph 71(2)  provides that nothing in Paragraph 10 of Schedule 2 (discharge of water) 
authorises the discharge of surface drainage water into the Canal without the consent of 
MSCC, which is not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.  
641  Paragraph 7 1(3) provides that the nominated undertaker must not in the construction of any 
specified or protective work deposit any other materials in the Canal save where the written consent of MSCC has been obtained. Where an unauthorised deposit has occurred, the 
nominated undertaker must take reasonable steps to make good any breach of obligation.  
642  Paragraph 71(4)  sets out conditions that might be impose by MSCC under Paragraph 71, 
including conditions requiring the reimbursement of expenses which MSCC would not have 
otherwise incurred but for the discharge and additional dredging costs.  
69 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 643  Paragraph 72(1)  provides that MSCC may inspect specified works during their construction.  
644  Paragraph 72(2)  provides that the nominated undertaker is required to supply information to 
MSCC which is reasonably required regarding any specified work and the method of 
construction.  
645  Paragraph 73 makes provision for MSCC to construct alterations and additions to the Canal 
that are reasonably required in order to avoid detriment to the Canal in consequence of the 
construction of the specified works. MSCC must give notice to the nominated undertaker of 
the intention to construct such works and the nominated undertaker may make 
representations to MSCC. The cost of such alterations and additions is to be incurred by the 
nominated undertaker. 
646   Paragraph 74(1)  makes provision that on completion of the construction of the specified 
works all temporary works in, on or over the Canal must be removed.  
647   Paragraph 74(2)  provides that the removal of temporary works must be undertaken so as to 
cause as little detriment as possible to the Canal and as little interference as possible to the safe passage of vessels along the Canal.  
648   Paragraph 74(3)  provides for the making good of any damage by the nominated undertaker 
and the payment of compensation to MSCC arising from detriment to the Canal or interference with any vessels on the Canal that is caused by the failure to remove temporary 
works.  
649   Paragraph 74(4)  provides that MSCC may remove temporary works in the event of any failure 
by the nominated undertaker to remove those works within a reasonable period after being 
given notice by MSCC to remove temporary works that have not been removed in accordance 
with sub-paragraph (1).  
650   Paragraph 75 provides that MSCC, following completion of the construction of a specified 
work, may give notice to the nominated undertaker of the state of maintenance of the work not being a work vested in MSCC, which is causing or likely to cause detriment and which 
requires the nominated undertaker to take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to put 
the specified work in such a state of repair that does not give rise to such detriment.  
651   Paragraph 76  makes provision for the recovery of costs by MSCC arising in connection with 
the construction of protective works and bringing the construction of specified works or 
protective works to the attention of canal users.  
652   Paragraph 77  provides that in the event of any detriment to the Canal being caused by, or as a 
result of the construction or failure of a specified work or a protective work, the nominated 
undertaker (or MSCC at the nominated undertaker’s expense) must make good such 
detriment and pay the reasonable expenses to which MSCC is put together with reasonable 
compensation for any losses sustained by MSCC in making good or otherwise by reason of 
any such detriment.  
653   Paragraph 78 provides for MSCC to be indemnified from claims, damages and demands 
which may be made against, or recovered from MSCC arising from the construction of any 
specified work or protective work or any act or omission of the nominated undertaker 
including any contractor, agent or employee engaged on the works and extends to costs 
reasonably incurred in making good such detriment. Paragraph 78 is subject to Paragraph 79 . 
654   Paragraph 79(1)  provides that nothing in Paragraph 78 creates a liability for the nominated 
70 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 undertaker to the extent that any claim, damages or demands are attributable to the 
negligence of MSCC or any contractor or agent of MSCC.  
655   Paragraph 79(2)  provides that nothing in Paragraph 78  creates any liability for the nominated 
undertaker as a direct or indirect result of any interference under Part 6  of Schedule 3 4 with a 
public right of navigation.  
656   Paragraph 79(3)  provides that things done by MSCC on behalf of the nominated undertaker 
does not excuse the nominated undertaker from liability under Paragraph 78 (save where there 
is negligence on the part of MSCC).  
657   Paragraph 79(4 ) provides that notice of claims and demands  made against MSCC under 
Paragraph 78 to be given to the nominated undertaker which has to give consent for MSCC to 
settle any claim or demand, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed. In 
addition,  the nominated undertaker may elect under this sub -paragraph to have sole conduct 
of any settlement, compromise or the taking of proceedings to resist a claim or demand. If consent to settle a claim or demand is not given by the nominated undertaker, the sub - 
paragraph requires MSCC to diligently defend the claim or demand.  
658  
 Paragraph 80(1)  provides that disputes arising between the nominated undertaker and MSCC 
should be referred to arbitration if both parties agree or the dispute relates to the amount of 
compensation payable. Otherwise, the dispute must be determined by a person appointed by 
the Secretary of State for Transport.  
659   Paragraph 80(2)  provides that any person appointed by the Secretary of State for Transport 
must have regard to any such matters specified by the Secretary of State when the 
appointment is made.  
Clause 45: Existing agreements  
660  Subsection (1)  provides that the agreements listed in S ubsection (2)  apply in relation to the 
exercise of the powers conferred by the Bill in the same way as they apply in relation to the 
exercise of the powers conferred by the High Speed Rail (London –  West Midlands) Act 2017.  
661  Subsection (2)  lists the agreements as the undertaking given on 25 February 2015 by the 
Secretary of State for Transport to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission; and the 
undertaking given on 1 April 2015 by the Secretary of State for Transport to the Archbishops’ 
Council of Church House.  
662  Subsection (3)  defines the terms used in this Clause.  
Part 11: Reinstatement and environmental works  
Clause  46: Compulsory acquisition of land for relocation of an undertaking  
663  Subsections (1)  and (2) enable the Secretary of State to acquire land compulsorily to relocate the 
whole or part of an undertaking where, due to the use of any powers of the Bill, the former 
site of the undertaking, or part of it, is no longer reasonably capable of being used for the 
undertaking.  
664  Under Subsection (3) , the powers of compulsory purchase can be used by means of a 
compulsory purchase order to which the procedure under the Acquisition of Land Act 1981 
applies. That procedure provides for publication of the proposed order, for affected persons to 
be given notice and to have the opportunity to make objections and for such objections to be 
71 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 considered at a public inquiry or hearing.  
665  Subsection (4)  provides that specified provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 
will apply to a compulsory acquisition under this Clause , subject to modifications as set out in 
4(a), (b) and (c). 
666  Subsection (5)  applies the provisions mentioned in (4)(b) to acquisitions by the Secretary of 
State by agreement, if the acquisitions are made for purposes mentioned in Clause 46. 
667  Subsections (6), (7) and (8) provide that the power of compulsory acquisition includes the 
power to acquire or create easements or other rights over land. Such rights may be acquired 
by the Secretary of State for the benefit of another person and the same modifications of 
compulsory purchase legislation apply to the acquisition or creation of such rights as where 
rights are acquired or created by local authorities compulsorily under Part 9 of the 1990 Act.  
668  Subsection (9)  provides that when “undertaking” is used in Clause  46, it includes a business or 
facility.  
Clause  47: Power to carry out reinstatement works  
669  Clause  47 Subsection (1) allows the nominated undertaker to carry out reinstatement works 
within the Act limits. This applies where all or part of an undertaking’s operation or use has 
been discontinued or substantially impaired by the use of the powers in the Bill.  
670  Under Subsection (2) , “reinstatement works” means works for the purposes of or in connection 
with the reinstatement of the undertaking in question.  
671  Subsection (3)  allows this power to be used to provide temporary reinstatement works, 
followed by permanent reinstatement works.  
672  Subsection (4)  provides that for the purpose of Clause  47 “undertaking” includes a business or 
facility.  
Clause  48: Planning permission: works involving reinstatement of undertaking  
673  Where the nominated undertaker carries out such reinstatement works, planning permission  
is granted under Clause 17 and is accordingly subject to the conditions specified in Schedule 17.  
However, under  Subsection (4) the Secretary of State may direct that this permission does not 
apply, and where this is done, under S ubsection (5)  the Secretary of State may further direct 
that planning permission is deemed to be granted under Part 3 of the Town and Country 
Planning Act 1990 for the works subject to conditions tailored for the development concerned. 
Where a direction has been given to that effect, the Secretary of State may also direct that a 
person other than the nominated  undertaker may carry out the works.  
674  By virtue of S ubsection (4) , where such a planning direction is given, the planning permission 
is treated for the purposes of most provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 as 
granted on an application referred to the Secretary of State under section 77 of that Act, and 
under Subsection (7) the time limit in Clause  20 is applied to it as if the reinstatement works 
were scheduled works. 
675  By virtue of S ubsection (6),  a planning direction under S ubsection (3)  may not be made by the 
Secretary of State where the reinstatement works may have significant effects on the 
environment, unless they have been appropriately environmentally assessed in the 
environmental statement for the Bill . 
676  Subsection (7)  requires planning directions under S ubsection (4)  to be published and copies 
72 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 distributed to the local planning authority and the owners and occupiers of the land 
concerned.  
677  Subsection (8)  provides that where someone other than the nominated undertaker carries out 
the reinstatement works, that person is responsible for any compensation for injurious affection which may become payable, in place of the nominated undertaker.  
678  Subsection (9)  enables directions to be revoked and varied. 
679  Subsection (10)  defines the terms used in this Clause.  
 
Clause  49: Enforcement of environmental covenants  
680  Clause  49 Subsection (1) states the circumstances in which the section applies. This is where, in 
England, covenants are made by agreement between a landowner  and the Secretary of State, 
entailing an obligation , prohibition or restriction  relating to relevant environmental works in 
that land .  
681  Subsection (2)  defines relevant environmental works, which are broadly works of 
environmental mitigation or enhancement.  
682  Subsection (3)  disapplies Part 7 of the Environment Act 2021  which provides for a separate 
regime governing conservation covenants . 
683  Subsection (4)  states that the Secretary of State or an authorised  person may enforce the 
provisions of an environmental covenant, or any ancillary obligations, prohibitions or 
restrictions against both the original landowner and persons to whom the land is transferred 
or leased.  
684  Subsections (5)  and (6) define and clarify the terms used in Clause  49. 
685  Subsection (7)  stipulates certain details which must be part of any agreement made under this 
Clause . 
686  Subsection (8)  provides that where another person enforces  the covenant , notice must be give n 
to the landowner  
687  Subsection (9)  provides that an environmental covenant is to be a local land charge . 
688  Subsections (10)  to (12) set out how a court may award exemplary damages if it thinks is 
appropriate to do so.  
Part 12: Further High Speed Rail Works  
Clause  50: Power to apply Act to further high speed rail works  
689  Clause  50 makes provision to facilitate authorisation of further adjustments or minor 
extensions of Phase 2b  (Crewe – Manchester)  by means of an order under the Transport and 
Works Act 1992 (“TWA order”).  
690  Subsections (1)  to (3) provide that a TWA order which relates to “a relevant Phase 2b (Crewe –  
Manchester) matter” may apply any provision of the Bill, with or without modifications, to 
anything authorised by the order.   
691  A relevant Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) matter is defined by S ubsection (2)  and includes 
73 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 works to be carried out for Phase 2b (Crewe –  Manchester) purposes.     
692  Subsection (4)  disapplies section 13(2) of the Transport and Works Act 1992, which gives the 
Secretary of State a discretion not to make a TWA order in the cases of utility diversions, if the 
objects of the order sought could be achieved by other means.  
693  Subsection (5)  provides that a TWA order cannot apply the provisions in the Bill which enable 
the Secretary of State to extend the time limit for the exercise of compulsory purchase powers  
(Section 9(2)  and Schedule 13) , or which modify legislation relating to listed buildings or 
ancient monuments  (Schedules 18  and 19). 
694  Subsection (6)  states that in this section, the term “TWA order” means an order under section 1 
of the Transport and Works Act 1992.  
Part 1 3: The Crown  
Clause  51: Application of powers to Crown land 
695  Clause  51 relates to Crown land. With the consent of the relevant Crown authority, subsection 
(1) permits the authorised works to be carried out by the nominated undertaker, and the 
exercise of a right of entry for those purposes , in relation to Crown land.  
696  Subsection (2)  provides, amongst other matters, that this consent can be given subject to 
conditions.  
697  Subsection (3) sets out that, in relation to the land in Subsection (5) , the consent of the Crown 
authority is deemed to be given for works and temporary possession and use of land . This is 
land held by the Crown as bona vacantia (broadly , land which is held by the Crown in 
default, in the absence of any other owner of the land).  
698  Subsection ( 4) define s ‘Crown land’.  
699  Subsection (5)  defines the land in relation to which deemed consent is given under subsection 
(3). 
700  Subsection ( 6) indicates who the ‘Crown authority’ is for the purposes of granting consent to 
the nominated undertaker. This will, in practice, be a Government department, the Crown 
Estate Commissioners or the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster  or a person appointed by 
the Duke of Cornwall , dependent on the land in question.   
701  Subsection ( 7) provides that, if there is a question about which body is the ‘Crown authority’, 
the matter is to be decided by the Treasury.  
702  Subsection (8)  provides that , where deemed consent is given under S ubsection (3), this does not 
constitute taking possession of the land, or a waiver of the Crown’s right to disclaim 
ownership of the land or notice to Crown that the land may be vested in the Crown ( i.e. 
anything which would prejudice the Crown’s right to disclaim an interest in the land).  
703  Subsection (9) makes clear that nothing in this section is to affect the exercise of the power in this Bill in relation to land which becomes  subject to escheat. Accordingly, no consent from a 
Crown authority is required in relation to the use of such land . 
704  Subsections ( 10) and (11) apply the same provision s relating to  deemed consent  and in relation 
to land that becomes subject to escheat,  to the High Speed Rail (London –  West Midlands) Act 
2017 and the High Speed Rail (West Midlands –  Crewe) Act 2021.  
74 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 705  Subsections (12) and (13) contain transitional provisions in relation to the operation of  
Subsections (10) and  (11).  
Clause  52: Highways for which the Secretary of State is highway authority  
706  Clause  52 concerns highways for which the Secretary of State is the highway authority.  This 
Clause  provides that the powers of the Bill with respect to works may be exercised in relation 
to such highways with the Secretary of State’s consent.  
Clause  53: Crown Estate  
707  Certain restrictions apply to the disposal of Crown land held by the Crown Estate 
Commissioners. Clause  53 contains provisions similar  to those in the High Speed Rail (London 
– West Midlands) Act 2017 and the High Speed Rail (West Midlands -  Crewe) Act 2021, 
removing the restrictions on disposal of land held by the Commissioners which they consider 
may be required for Phase 2b purposes.  
Part 14: Deposited Plans and Sections  
Clause  54: “Deposited plans” and “deposited sections”  
708  Clause  54 defines the meaning of “deposited plans” and “deposited sections” for the purposes 
of the Bill.   
Clause  55: Correction of deposited plans  
709  Clause  55 contains provisions for correcting the plans or book of reference to the plans which 
have been deposited in Parliament with this Bill, should this be required. These provisions are 
normal for hybrid Bills.  
710  Under Subsection (1) , corrections may be made if the plans are incorrect in describing the land 
to be taken, or its ownership or occupation. In these cases, the Secretary of State can apply to 
have these corrected by two justices who have jurisdiction over the land. This can be done 
after giving 10 days’ notice to the owners or occupiers of the land.  
711  Subsections (2)  to (5) provide for the justices to certify that such an error in the plans was made 
by a mistake or inadvertence, and, in such a certificate, state in what respect the plans or book 
of reference are incorrect. The certificate must then be deposited in Parliament and with each 
local authority in whose area any of the land concerned is situated. Once this has occurred, 
the plans or book of reference are to be treated as corrected, and the Secretary of State may act 
as though the deposited plans had always been as corrected.  
712  Subsection (6)  provides that, if the land in question is situated in two judicial areas, a justice of 
the peace with jurisdiction in one of the areas may act with regard to land in either area.  
713  Subsection (7)  defines “local authority”.  
 Clause  56: Obstruction of construction of works  
714  Clause  56, Subsection (1)  provides that a person commits an offence, if without reasonable 
excuse, the person (a) obstructs a relevant undertaker or person acting under the undertaker’s 
authority in setting out the lines of the relevant works, constructing any relevant works, or 
taking any steps reasonably necessary for the purposes of facilitating, or in connection with 
the construction of relevant works, or (b) interferes with, moves  or removes any apparatus 
which relates to the construction of any relevant works and belongs to a person specified in 
75 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Subsection (3) .  
715  Subsection (2)  provides that a person found guilty under this section is liable on summary 
conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.  
716  Subsection (3) defines a person to whom Subsection (1)(b) applies as a relevant undertaker or a 
statutory undertaker or a person acting under the authority of either a relevant undertaker or 
a statutory undertaker.  
717  Subsection (4) defines relevant works as any works authorised under the Bill, the High Speed 
Rail (London - West Midlands) Act 2017 (the 2017 Act) and the High Speed Rail (West 
Midlands – Crewe) Act 2021 (the 2021 Act).   
718  Subsection (5)  defines “relevant undertaker” as the nominated undertaker as specified in the 
2017 and 2021 Acts and in respect of this Bill, it means the nominated undertaker.  
719  Subsection (6)  defines “statutory undertaker “as a person coming within Part 11 of the Town 
and Country Planning Act 1990.  
720  Subsections (7) and (8) removes  the offence under section 24 of the 1845 Railways Clause s 
Consolidation Act from application to the 2017 and 2021 Acts.  
721  Clause  56 is based on the offence in the model Clause  38 of the Model Clause s for Railways in 
Schedule 1 of the Transport and Works (Model Clause s for Railways and Tramways) Order 
2006.  
 
Part 15: Miscellaneous and General  
Clause  57: Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations: miscellaneous   
722  Clause  57 provides that where a building not forming part of the Phase 2b (Crewe – 
Manchester) works authorised by the Bill (say, a building over a station) is built to replace a 
building demolished or substantially demolished under  the Bill, the planning application for 
that replacement building must be accompanied by an environmental assessment where the 
conditions in S ubsection (1)  are met .  
723  Where Subsection (2) applies, the final condition of S ubsection (1)  does not need to be met for 
an environmental assessment to be needed. This provision is intended to ensure that all the 
direct and indirect environmental effects of development authorised by the Bill are properly 
assessed at the appropriate stage.  
Clause  58: Arbitration  
724  Clause  58 provides how disputes which are to be determined under the Bill by arbitration are 
to be dealt with. Subsection (1)  provides that such arbitration shall be settled by a single 
arbitrator to be agreed between the parties or, where the parties cannot agree, by a person 
appointed by the President of the Institute of Civil Engineers (the ICE).  
725  However, it is accepted that in some cases, notably where the dispute involves railway 
industry matters, it may not be appropriate for an arbitrator to be appointed by the President 
of the ICE. If the President should decline to make an appointment, then S ubsection (3) makes 
provision that such an arbitrator may be appointed by the Office of Rail and Road (ORR).  
726  Subsection (4)  provides that an employee of the ORR may be appointed as an arbitrator in the 
76 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 circumstances set out in S ubsection (3) . 
727  Subsection s (5) to (8) enable the Secretary  of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for 
Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, acting jointly, to make procedural rules governing 
arbitration. In Scotland, such rules would be made by the Secretar y of State for Transport in 
consultation with Scottish Ministers. Such rules will be made by statutory instrument under 
the negative procedure.  
Clause  59: Notices and other documents  
728  Clause  59 relates to the service of notices or other documents on any person where that is 
required or authorised under the Bill.  
729  Subsection (1)(a) allows a document to be served by email or other electronic means where the 
recipient has agreed to the electronic method of service. Under Subsection (3)  a person who 
receives a document by electronic means may request a hard copy within 7 days and the other 
party must then provide the hard copy as soon as reasonably practicable.  
730  Subsections (1)(b) to (d) and (2) provide for serving documents by delivery or by post. They 
include provision specifying where a document may be served on individuals, bodies corporate and partnerships.  
731  Subsection (4) provides that S ubsection (5) applies where a document is required or authorised 
to be given to a person for the purposes of the Bill where that person is the owner of an 
interest in, or occupier of the land and that person’s name and address cannot be ascertained 
after reasonable inquiry.  
732  Subsection (5)  contains provisions to deal with cases where a document is required to be 
served under the Bill on a person as the owner or occupier of land and the person’s name or 
address cannot be determined, and provides the means by which documents can still be served.  
733  Subsection (6) provides that any notice for the purposes of this Bill is to be in writing.  
734  Subsection (7)  defines the terms used in this Clause .  
Clause  60: Vocational Qualifications  
735  Clause  60 consolidates the requirements of the High Speed Rail (Preparation) Act 2013 and the 
High Speed Rail (London –  West Midlands) Act 2017 to provide reports on the number of 
vocational qualifications obtained each year in connection with HS2 construction.  
Clause  61: Resumption of previous use of land  
736  Clause  61 applies where temporary use of land under in accordance with the deemed planning 
permission under Clause  18(1) or 48(3)(a) of this Bill comes to an end and allows the previous 
use of the land to be resumed without an application for planning permission.   
737  Subsection (4)  disapplies section 57(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act which makes 
similar provisions under the normal planning regime but is not appropriate  in relation to the 
cessation of use under the provisions within this Bill.  
Part 16: Interpretation  
Clause  62: “Phase 2b (Crewe  – Manchester ) purposes”  
738  Clause  62 defines the phrase “Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) purposes” as used in this Bill, as 
77 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 purposes of or in connection with: works authorised by the Bill; trains all or part of whose 
journey takes place on Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester)  of High Speed 2; or otherwise in 
connection with Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester)  of High Speed 2 or any high speed railway of 
which Phase 2b (Crewe – Manchester) of High Speed 2 forms or is to form part.  
Clause  63: Interpretation  
739  Clause  63 contains a number of definitions of terms and the ways in which they should be 
applied in relation to this Bill. For any which refer to another Act, please see the definition in 
the relevant piece of legislation.  
Part 17: Final  
Clause  64: Scotland  
740  Clause  64 introduces Schedule 34, which modifies various provisions of the Bill in relation to 
their application to works in Scotland.  
Schedule 3 3: Scottish modifications  
741  Schedule 3 3 modifies various provisions of the Bill to reflect law in Scotland.  
742  Paragraph 1  sets out that Schedule 3 3 applies to both land and works in Scotland.  
743  Paragraph 3  modifies Clause  4 which relates to the compulsory purchase of land by omitting 
those elements of Clause 4 which relate only to England, and Paragraph 3  adds reference to a 
number of consequential amendments incorporating the relevant  Scottish legislation.  
744  Paragraph 4  modifies Clause 5  to reflect the Scottish regime for acquisition of rights and 
imposition of restrictive covenants.  
745  Paragraph 5 inserts a number of new provisions after Clause  5 dealing with the compulsory 
acquisition of rights over land in Scotland, including the procedure for executing general 
vesting declarations in respect of the acquisition of rights and the creation of real burdens 
over land and the acquisition of servitudes or other rights over land.  
746  Paragraph 6 modifies Clause 6 which excludes the acquisition of airspace from the scope of 
provisions to establish material detriment to the remainder of land subject to such acquisition 
powers so that the Secretary of State cannot be required to acquire a greater interest in the 
land, to refer to Paragraph 3  of this Schedule, the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1973 , and 
the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997  in relation to notice to treat procedure 
and general vesting declarations in Scotland.  
747  Paragraph 7 provides for similar modifications to be made to Clause  7 in relation to the 
acquisition of subsoil and the under surface of land . 
748  Paragraph 8 modifies Clause 8 in relation to the acquisition of highway subsoil to refer to the 
Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1963  and a later section of the New Roads and Street 
Works Act 1991 in relation to compensation.  
749  Paragraph 9  modifies Clause 9 , which deals with the termination of powers to acquire land , to 
refer to the Lands Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845,  the Town and Country Planning 
(Scotland) Act 1997,  and Paragraph 3 of this Schedule in connection with land in Scotland .  
750  Paragraph 10 modifies Clause 11  in relation to the extinguishment of rights of statutory 
undertakers to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997.  It also modifies 
78 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997  to include authoris ation  by the High 
Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Act 2022.  
751  Paragraph 11 modifies Clause  12 in relation the exclusion of the creation of new rights of way  
so that, in relation to Scotland, references to a “right of way” are instead references to a 
“servitude”.  
752  Paragraph 12  modifies Clause  14, which deals with the use of roads,  to refer to the Land 
Compensation (Scotland) Act 1963 in connection with the use of roads for Phase 2b (Crewe –  
Manchester) purposes.  
753  Paragraph 13  modifies Clause 15  which deals with the use of cranes for construction purposes 
to refer to the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1963 and to the Railways Clause s 
Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845  for the acquisition of land.  
754  Paragraph 14 modifies Clause 16 , which deals with the enforcement of controls over land, to 
make adjustment to the use of the term “a covenant” as “a deed”, and to omit Subsection (3)  of 
that Clause.  
755  Paragraph 15 modifies Clause 17  to refer to the compensation for injurious affection in the 
Railways Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845 , and substitutes the phrase “acquiring 
authority” with “the company” and “nominated undertaker”.  
756  Paragraph 16 modifies Clause 18  to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 
1997, the Town and Country Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) (Scotland) Regulations 2017 and the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (Scotland) Order 1992  regarding deemed planning permission.  
757  Paragraph 17 modifies Clause 19  to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 
1997 regarding the duration of deemed planning permission.  
758  Paragraph 18 modifies Clause 20 to refer to the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted 
Development) (Scotland) Order 1992  regarding the power to disapply deemed planning 
permission.  
759  Paragraph 19  modifies Clause  23, which deals with burial grounds affected by works,  to 
substitute “ecclesiastical law” for  “any deed or agreement”.  
760  Paragraph 20 modifies Clause 26  to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 
1997. Clause 26 deals with the treatment of trees. 
761  Paragraph 21 modifie s Clause 43  relating to extension of planning permission for statutory 
undertakers , to reflect the T own and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) 
(Scotland) Order 1992 .  
762  Paragraph 22  modifies Clause 46  to apply the Acquisition of Land (Authorisation Procedure) 
(Scotland) Act 1947 for the compulsory acquisition of land for the purpose of relocating an 
undertaking. Other subsections are modified to refer to the relevant sections of the Town and 
Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997  and the Lands Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 
1845.  
763  Paragraph 23 modifies Clause  48 in relation to planning permission for reinstatement works to 
refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 , the Town and County Planning 
(Environmental Impact Assessment) (Scotland) Regulations 2017 , the Local Government etc. 
(Scotland) Act 1994 , and the Railway Clauses Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845.  
79 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 764  Paragraph 24 provides a substitution for the provisions in Clause 49, allowing for the 
enforcement of environmental covenants provision to have similar effect in Scotland. It 
provides that a real burden created in favour of the Secretary of State in relation to 
environmental works is to be treated as a ‘conservation burden’ under the Title Conditions 
(Scotland) Act 2003.  
765  Paragraph 25 modifies Clause  51 to reflect the roles of the Scottish Administration, Scottish 
Ministers and the Scottish Crown Estate in relation to Crown land.  
766  Paragraph 26 disapplies specific provisions of the Scottish Crown Estate Act 2019  in relation to 
the disposal of Crown land, to follow similar provisions which apply in England under Clause  
53. 
767  Paragraph 27 modifies Clause 55  to refer to “a sheriff” instead of “justices” or “a justice of the 
peace”.  
768  Paragraph 28 modifies Clause 57  to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Environmental 
Impact Assessment) (Scotland) Regulations 2017 . 
769  Paragraph 29 modifies the definition of ‘secretary’ in Clause  59.  
770  Paragraph 30 modifies Clause 6 1 to refer to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 
1997.  
771  Paragraph 31 modifies Clause 6 3 in relation to definitions of terms, for example “allotment”, to 
better reflect relevant Scottish legislation.  
772  Paragraph 32 clarifies the terms used in the Bill.  
773  Paragraph 33  modifies Schedule 2  to reflect the role of Sheriffs in Scotland, and to refer to the 
Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 and other Scottish legislation relating to land 
and works.  
774  Paragraph 34 modifies Schedule 5  in relation to local authorities in Scotland, consultation with 
Scottish Ministers, and various Scottish legislation relating to highways.  
775  Paragraph 35 modifies Paragraph 8 of Schedule 13. Schedule 13 makes provision for an owner to 
sell land to the Secretary of State where powers of compulsory purchase are extended under 
Clause  9. Paragraph 35 amends references in P aragraph 8 of Schedule 13 to the Compulsory 
Purchase Act 1965 and the Compulsory Purchase (Vesting Declarations) 1981 to references to 
the Lands Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845 and the Town and Country Planning 
(Scotland) Act 1997. Paragraph 34 also amends references to sections 4(3) and 4(4) to sections 
4B(1) and 4I(2),  which are introduced in P aragraph 3  of this Schedule . 
776  Paragraph 36 modifies Schedule 14, which provides for rights to be extinguished over land, to 
refer to “the imposition of restrictive covenants” as “the creation of real burdens” (to reflect 
the meaning in the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003) and to “easements” as “servitudes”. 
References to legislation are modified to refer to the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1963, 
the Lands Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845, the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, 
the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997.  
777  Paragraph 37 modifies Schedule 15, which provides for the temporary possession of land, to 
refer to “ the imposition of restrictive covenants” as “the creation of real burdens” (to reflect 
the meaning in the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003) and to “easements” as “servitudes”. 
References to legislation are modified to refer to the Land Compensation (Scotland) Act 1963, 
80 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 the Lands Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845, the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, 
the Railways Clause s Consolidation (Scotland) Act 1845, the Town and Country Planning 
(Scotland) Act 1997, the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2000.  
778  Paragraph 38 modifies the provisions dealing with planning conditions in  Schedule 17 to refer 
to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997, consultation with Scottish Ministers, 
and Scottish bodies equivalent to those in England.  
779  Paragraph 39 modifies Schedule 18 in relation to heritage matters  to refer to Historic 
Environment Scotland , and to legislation including the Planning (Listed Buildings and 
Conservation Areas)(Scotland) Act 1997 , the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997  
780  Paragraph 40 modifies Schedule 19 in relation to ancient monuments to refer to Historic 
Environment Scotland , as opposed to the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for 
England  
781  Paragraph 41 modifies Schedule 20 which addresses burial grounds affected by works in 
relation to ecclesiastical law, to provide for the Secretary of State for Transport to consult 
Scottish Ministers on matters set out in the Schedule, and to reflect differences in the court 
system between England and Scotland.  
782  Paragraph 42 modifies Schedule 21 to disapply elements of the Water Environment (Controlled 
Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 in relation to the works authorised by this Bill.  
783  Paragraph 43 modifies Schedule 22 to refer to the application in Scotland of building regulations 
made under the Building (Scotland) Act 2003.  
784  Paragraph 44 modifies Schedule 24 in to refer to the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 and Part 4 of the 
New Roads and Street Works Act 1991, in relation to the impact of the execution of Street 
Works in Scotland,  in place of the highways and street works legislation which applies in 
England . 
785  Paragraph 45 modifies Schedule 26 to provide for the Secretary of State for Transport to consult 
Scottish Ministers on matters set out in the Schedule.  
786  Paragraph 46 modifies Schedule 2 8 to refer to the Railway Clauses Consolidation (Scotland) Act 
1845 instead of the equivalent Act which applies in England .  
787  Paragraph 47 modifies Schedule 31, dealing with the permitted development rights of statutory 
undertakers, to refer to the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) 
(Scotland) Order 1992 . 
Clause  65: Financial provision  
788  Clause  65 contains provisions about the funding of expenditure incurred by the Secretary of 
State under the Bill, and provides that such expenditure will be funded out of money 
provided by Parliament. The Clause  also provides that where the Bill results in an increase in 
the sums payable under other legislation out of money provided by Parliament, those sums 
will also be funded by Parliament.  
Clause  66: Commencement and short title   
789  Clause  66 describes when the Act comes into force, and how it may be cited.  
81 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Commencement  
790  The provisions of this Bill will come into force upon Royal Assent , with the exception of 
Clause  56, which will come into force two months after Royal Assent . 
Financial implications of the Bill  
791  The Proposed Scheme received a multi -year capital settlement in Spending Review 2020. The 
Proposed Scheme received a CDEL settlement of £1,146m (2019 prices) up to 2024/25 and 
RDEL for one year of £133m for 2021/22. This reflects the ongoing development of the 
Proposed Scheme, enabling design refinement and cost estimates to be developed ahead of 
setting a Funding Envelope. The project will  initially be funded through RDEL  up to  the point 
of second reading of the bill, which will trigger the capitalisation point of the project where 
CDEL will be utilised for spending from this point.    
792  At Spending Review 2021 an additional £29m (2019 prices) of RDEL funding for 2022 -23 was 
allocated to enable the passage of the bill through Parliament.   
Parliamentary approval for financial costs or for 
charges imposed  
793  A money resolution is required for the Bill, to cover potential expenditure by the Secretary of 
State for Transport under various provisions of the Bill. A number of provisions contemplate 
the payment of compensation where the Secretary of State’s powers of compulsory acquisition 
are exercised. The Bill also confers a range of functions on the nominated undertaker 
(including the power to construct and maintain the main works for the construction of Phase 
2b of HS2, and other miscellaneous obligations to pay compensation).  Since the Secretary of 
State is the nominated undertaker until someone else is appointed, the exercise of such functions may involve expenditure by the Secretary of State. This Bill was previously 
introduced to Parliament on 24 January 2022 and was considered by the Standing Orders 
Committees of both the House of Commons and the House of Lords. The Bill was carried over  
and reintroduced  into the next Parliamentary session on 1 1 May 2022 and then again on 8 
November 2023 . The Bill was re -introduced to Parliament on 25 July 2024.  
794  The Bill also gives rise to additional functions for the Office of Rail and Road (previously the 
Office of Rail Regulation). The Office was established by section 15 of the Railways and 
Transport Safety Act 2003. Paragraph 15 of Schedule 1 to that Act provides for expenditure incurred by the Office in connection with the performance of its functions to be paid out of 
money provided by Parliament, to the extent that the Office’s expenditure is not met by its 
other income. The exercise of the additional functions conferred on the Office by the Bill may 
lead to an increase in the Office’s expenditure and, as a result, an increase in the payments to 
the Office out of money provided by Parliament under the 2003 Act.  
Compatibility with the European Convention on 
Human Rights  
795  Section 19 of the Human Rights Act 1988 requires the Minister in charge of a Bill in either 
82 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 House of Parliament to make a statement, before S econd Reading, about the compatibility of 
the provisions of the Bill with the Convention rights (as defined by section 1 of the Act). The  
Secretary of State has made the following statement: “In my view, the provisions of the High 
Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill are compatible with the Convention rights.”  
796  The High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill provides powers for the Secretary of State to 
purchase property compulsorily, and for a nominated undertaker to construct and operate a 
new high speed railway between the Crewe and Manchester (Phase 2b of an intended high speed network called “HS2”).  
797  As a hybrid bill, the Bill necessarily involves interference with property rights and homes. The 
potential for such effects engages, in particular, Article 1 of Protocol 1 (the right to peaceful 
enjoyment of possessions), Article 8 (the right to respect for private and family life) and, to the 
extent that any places of assembly or places used for religious purposes are affected, Article 9 
(the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion). I n particular, the Bill contains 
provisions for compulsory acquisition of land for building the new railway, and rights of 
entry to carry out surveys and works on people’s land. Furthermore, the railway would, by 
causing noise, vibration, light pollution and visual intrusion, unavoidably reduce the 
enjoyment which owners of neighbouring land have over their property.  
798  Mitigation of the impact of such interference is provided by the compensation provisions 
relating to compulsory acquisition and injurious affection to properties under existing 
legislation, which are applied to the Crewe –  Manchester section of HS2  by the Bill and by 
additional compensation provisions in the Bill and also by a range of policies relating to 
hardship, land acquisition, business relocation and to mitigate construction impacts of the 
scheme. Taking into account the public and other benefits that will arise from development, 
and mitigation by the arrangements that have been provided, the Secretary of State is of the 
view that the Bill strikes a fair balance between the private interests of owners of property on 
or near the route, and the wider public interest in generating additional capacity on, and 
improved connectivity through, the national rail network. Furthermore, he considers that any 
remaining interference with property and other rights is proportionate and can be and in the 
circumstances is, justified.  
799  The Bill contains provisions that provide for the determination of disputes by arbitration. In 
the light of the applicability of standard procedures for arbitration and the availability of 
judicial review in relation to any decisions of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State is of 
the view that the Bill is compliant with the requirement of Article 6 (the right to a fair trial).  
800  The Bill contains a provision which makes it an offence, without reasonable excuse, to obstruct 
the construction of the works comprising, or any acts which facilitate the works, or interfere 
with any apparatus used in the works. The penalty on conviction is a level 3 fine. The 
Secretary of State is of the view that, as this offence will not in any way prevent or impede 
peaceful , non- obstructive  protests against the works, that the Bill is also compliant with article 
10 (freedom of expression) and article 11 (freedom of assembly and association).  
Environment Act 2021  
801  The Secretary of State has made a statement under sections 20(2)(a) and (3) of the 
Environment Act 2021 . This states that the Bill contains provision which, if enacted, would be 
environmental law, and that the Bill will not have the effect of reducing the level of 
environmental protection provided for by any existing environmental law.  
83 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Related documents  
802  Further information about the Bill and the Crewe –  Manchester section of HS2 can be found at 
Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.  
84 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
  
Annex A - Territorial extent and application in the 
United Kingdom  
 
Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Works 
Clause 1  Yes  No No Yes No No No 
Clause 2 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 3 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Compulsory acquisition of rights  
Clause 4 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 5 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 6 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 7 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 8 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 9 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Extinction and exclusion of rights over land  
Clause 10 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 11 Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Clause 12 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Temporary possession and use of land  
Clause 13 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 14 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 15 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 16 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 17 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Planning 
Clause 18 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 19 Yes No No Yes No No No 
85 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Clause 20 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 21 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Deregulation  
Clause 22 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 23 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 24 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 25 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 26 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 27 Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Clause 28 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 29 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 30 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 31 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 32 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 33 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 34 Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Railway matters 
Clause 35 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 36 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 37 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 38 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 39 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 40 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Traffic  
Clause 41 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Nominated undertaker  
Clause 42 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Statutory undertaker  
Clause 43 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 44 Yes No No Yes No No No 
86 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Clause 45 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Reinstatement and environmental works  
Clause 46 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 47 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 48 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 49 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 50 Yes No No Yes No No No 
The Crown  
Clause 51 Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Clause 52 Yes No No Yes No No NO 
Clause 53 Yes No No No No No No 
Deposited plans and sections  
Clause 54 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 55 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 56 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 57 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 58 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 59 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 60 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 61 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 62 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 63 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 64 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Final  
Clause 65 No No No Yes Yes No No 
Clause 66 Yes No No Yes No No No 
Clause 67  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedules  
Schedule 1 (Scheduled works)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
87 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Schedule 2 (works)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 3 (overhead line 
diversions)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 4 
(Manchester tram 
works)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 5 
(highways)  Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Schedule 6 (acquisition of land)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 7 (acquisition of land: 
CPO)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 8 
acquisition of rights 
or restrictive 
covenants)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 9 (acquisition of land: 
CPO legislation)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 10 
(acquisition of land: 
Sch 2A)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 11 (land: 
sub-surface 
acquisition)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 12 (highways; 
restrictions on 
subsoil)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 13 (right to require acquisition)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 14 (extinction of rights)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 15 (Temporary 
possession of land)  Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Schedule 16 (table 
of land)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
88 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Schedule 17 (Deemed planning 
permission: 
conditions)  Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Schedule 18 (listed buildings)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 19 (ancient 
monuments)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 20 (burial 
grounds)  Yes No No Yes Yes No No 
Schedule 21 (water)  Yes   No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 22 (buildings)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 23 (party walls)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 24 (street works)  Yes No  No Yes Yes No No 
Schedule 25 (lorries)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 26 (noise)  Yes No No Yes No No No  
Schedule 27 (local acts)  Yes No No Yes No No No  
Schedule 28  (railway 
legislation)  Yes  No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 29  
(arbitration)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 30  (traffic 
regulation)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 31  
(statutory 
undertakers)  Yes No No Yes No No No  
Schedule 32  
(protective provisions)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
Schedule 33  
(Environmental Permitting 
Regulations)  Yes No No Yes No No No 
89 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill  as introduced to the House of 
Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6). This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, 
details on the cover in the table of corrections ( published 2 August 2024).  
 Provision  England  Wales Scotland  Northern Ireland  
Extends 
to E & W 
and 
applies to England?  Extends to E & W 
and 
applies to Wales?  Legislative Consent 
Motion 
process engaged?  Extends 
and applies 
to Scotland?  Legislative 
Consent 
Motion process 
engaged?  Extends and 
applies to Northern Ireland?  Legislative Consent Motion 
process 
engaged?  
Schedule 34 (Scottish 
modifications)  No No No Yes Yes No No 
 
 
Subject matter and legislative competence of devolved 
legislatures  
803  Although the subject matter of the Bill is a reserved matter (the construction of a cross border 
railway) some of its provisions will touch on the executive competence of the Scottish 
Government. For example, provisions relating to the treatment of street works, the stopping 
up of highways, the making of rules concerning arbitration of disputes and directions 
regarding the giving of planning permission, would ordinarily be dealt with by Scottish 
Ministers where the issue arises in Scotland.  
804  Under the Bill, the Secretary of State will make the necessary determinations under the above 
and other similar powers, in consultation with Scottish Ministers. Where the legislative or 
executive competence of Scottish Ministers is engaged and a legislative consent motion is 
required, these are set out in the table above.  
 
 
 
 
 
This is an updated version of the Explanatory Notes containing revised text, details on the cover in the 
table of corrections (Published 2 August 2024).  
Bill 6–EN (Corrected)  59/1  
 HIGH SPEED RAIL 
(CREWE- MANCHESTER) BILL    
EXPLANATORY NOTES 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the High Speed Rail (Crewe- Manchester) Bill Introduced in House 
of Commons  on 25 July 2024 (Bill 6 ). (Re-printed 2 August 2024)  
 
__________________________________________________________  
Ordered by House of Commons  to be p rinted, 25 July 2024  
__________________________________________________________  
 
© Parliamentary copyright 2024  
 
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence which is 
published at www.parliament.uk/site -information/copyright  
 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF HOUSE OF COMMONS



Highways  Act 1980  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of Highways  Act 1980 
2 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
59/1 Bill 86 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  section  58 of the Highways  Act 1980  to restrict  the defences  available 
to highway  authorities;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of Highways  Act 1980 
(1) Section  58 (special  defence  in action  against  a highway  authority  for damages 
for non-repair  of highway)  of the Highways  Act 1980  is amended  as follows. 
(2) 
5In subsection  (1), omit  “such  care as in all the circumstances  was reasonably 
required”  and insert  “all possible  steps”. 
(3) For subsection  (2), substitute— 
“(2) For the purposes  of a defence  under  subsection  (1) above,  the court 
shall  in particular  have  regard  to— 
(a) 
10whether  the highway  authority  had,  within  the previous  six 
months,  carried  out a full survey  of the condition  of the 
highway  to which  the action  relates; 
(b) the date on which  that section  of the highway  was last repaired; 
(c) the date  on which  that section  of the highway  was last subject 
to surface  dressing. ” 
15 (4) After  subsection  (2), insert— 
“(2A) A highway  authority  seeking  to use the special  defence  set out in 
subsection  (1) above  must  provide  to a claimant  within  28 days  of the 
receipt  of any claim  all the documentary  and other  evidence  upon 
which  the highway  authority  seeks  to rely in its defence. ” 
20 2 Extent,  commencement  and citation 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Highways  Act 1980  (Amendment)  Act 2025. 
59/1 Bill 86 1 Highways  Act 1980  (Amendment)  Bill 
Highways  Act 1980  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  section  58 of the Highways  Act 1980  to restrict  the defences  available  to highway 
authorities;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 86



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee
  Special Report of Session 2024–25
Holocaust Memorial 
Bill
HL Paper 68Available online at https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/735
© Parliamentary Copyright House of Lords 2025
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is 
published at www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright

Ordered to be printed 15 January 2025 and published 21 January 2025
Published by the Authority of the House of LordsHOUSE OF LORDS
Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee
Special Report of Session 2024–25
HL Paper 68Holocaust Memorial 
Bill
Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee
The Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee provides individuals and bodies directly and 
specially affected by the Bill with the opportunity to object to the Bill’s specific provisions and 
to seek its amendment.
Membership
The Members of the Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee are :
Lord Etherton (Chair) Lord Jamieson
Lord Faulkner of Worcester Baroness Scott of Needham Market
Lord Hope of Craighead
Declaration of interests
See Appendix 9.
A full list of Members’ interests can be found in the Register of Lords’ Interests:  
https://members.parliament.uk/members/lords/interests/register-of-lords -interests
Publications
All publications of the Committee are available at:  
https:/ /committees.parliament.uk/committee/735/
Parliament Live
Live coverage of debates and public sessions of the Committee’s meetings are available at:  
http://www.parliamentlive.tv
Committee staff
The staff who worked on this Committee were Chris Salmon Percival (Clerk), Ché Diamond 
(Assistant Counsel to the Chairman of Committees), Mike Wright (Private and Hybrid 
Legislation Manager) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations Officer).
Contact details
All correspondence should be addressed to  Clerk of the Select Committee on the Holocaust 
Memorial Bill, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London SW1A 0PW. Telephone 020 7219 
2468. Email: hlprivatebills@parliament.uk
The image on the front cover is from the design and access statement produced by Adjaye 
Associates as part of the planning application and is publicly available on Westminster City 
Council’s website.
Chapter 1: The Background 3
The origins  3
Planning application  3
Legislative setting of the Holocaust Memorial Bill  5
Proceedings in the House of Commons  5
Proceedings in the House of Lords  6
After the Committee has reported 7
Acknowledgment  7
Chapter 2: Right to be heard 8
Petitioners found to have standing  11
London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust 11
Descendants of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton and the Treasurer 
 and Trustee of the Thomas Fowell Buxton Society  11
The Thorney Island Society and Residents of Westminster  11
Sir Peter Bottomley and Baroness Bottomley of Nettlestone 12
Viscount Eccles  12
Lord Hamilton of Epsom 12
Lord Strathclyde and his co-petitioners who inhabit a residence  
in the vicinity of VTG  12
Lord Blencathra  12
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff  12
Baroness Deech and Holocaust survivors 12
Lord Sassoon 13
Lord Carlile of Berriew  13
Petitioners found not to have standing  13
Lord Hodgson of Astley Abbotts  13
Lord Griffiths of Burry Port  13
Lord Russell of Liverpool  13
Jardentome Ltd  13
Lord Inglewood  14
Chapter 3: Principle and Scope 15
Chapter 4: Petitioners’ Amendments  18
The Playground and access  18
The Kiosk  20
Siting of structures for a Holocaust memorial and learning centre 
within VTG  21
Design of the proposed HMLC  22
Proposed Learning Centre and the Parliamentary Education  
Centre  22
Height, size and bulk of a Holocaust Memorial  22
View of the Palace of Westminster from VTG  23
The setting of the Buxton Memorial and other memorials  23
Closure dates  24
Continuing application of section 8 of the 1900 Act to VTG  24
Security  25
Operating costs and financial sustainability  27CONTENTS
Page
2 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
Separate entities for managing the proposed HMLC and the 
remaining parts of VTG  27
Restoration and Renewal of the Palace of Westminster  27
General  28
Appendix 1: Image of the proposed HMLC 29
Appendix 2: Plan of VTG after construction 30
Appendix 3: Town and Country Planning (Inquiries Procedure) 
(England) Rules 2000 31
Appendix 4: Petitioners 32
Appendix 5: Brief summary of assurances, recommendations and  
an undertaking 33
Appendix 6: Plan referenced in Assurance 7 38
Appendix 7: Right to be heard restrictions 39
Appendix 8: Lord Carlile’s proposed amendments related to  
security  40
Appendix 9: List of members and declarations of interests 41
Holocaust Memorial Bill
CHAPTER 1:  THE BACKGROUND
 The origins 
1. The Holocaust Memorial Bill concerns the building of a Holocaust memorial 
and learning centre. The project began with the launch in January 2014 of 
the Holocaust Commission by the then Prime Minister (the Rt Hon. David 
Cameron MP). The Commission published a report a year later, Britain’s 
Promise to Remember , recommending that there should be a
“… striking new memorial to serve as the focal point of national 
commemoration of the Holocaust. It should be prominently located in 
Central London to make a bold statement about the importance Britain 
places on preserving the memory of the Holocaust”.
2. The Commission also recommended that the memorial should be co-located 
with “a world-class Learning Centre” and that an endowment fund should 
be established to secure the long-term future of Holocaust education.
3. The Prime Minister accepted the Commission’s recommendations and set 
up the United Kingdom Holocaust Memorial Foundation (“UKHMF”) to 
take them forward. In January 2016, following a recommendation by the 
UKHMF, the Prime Minister announced that the memorial would be built 
in Victoria Tower Gardens (“VTG”). Later that year, it was confirmed that 
the learning centre would be co-located with the memorial.
4. A design competition was then launched. In October 2017 it was announced 
that Adjaye Associates, Ron Arad Architects and the landscape architects 
Gustafson Porter + Bowman had been selected.
5. The selection of VTG as the location for the memorial and learning centre 
gave rise to controversy. Its critics considered, among other things, that the 
selection was based on a non-transparent and flawed process and without 
adequate public consultation. The design of the memorial also proved to be 
controversial. The controversy on these issues has not gone away. Many of 
those who appeared before the Committee as petitioners and as witnesses 
took the opportunity to make their views known. We listened carefully to 
what they had to say. But, for reasons that will be explained later in this 
Report, it is not open to us to adjudicate on these issues. This is not a public 
inquiry, and we have not heard both sides of the argument. Accordingly, 
the Committee must refrain from expressing a view about them, one way or 
another.
 Planning application 
6. In December 2018 the then Secretary of State for Housing, Communities 
and Local Government applied to Westminster City Council for planning 
permission. Special handling arrangements were made in the Ministry to 
create a functional separation, which has been called an “ethical divide”, 
between the Secretary of State, as the applicant for planning permission, and 
those responsible for determining the application. In November 2019 the 
planning application was called in by the then Housing Minister. A planning 
4 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
inquiry was held in October and November 2020. The Planning Inspector 
heard evidence over 20 days. His report to the Housing Minister, which ran 
to 243 pages, recommended that the application be approved and planning 
permission granted.1 The Housing Minister agreed and granted planning 
permission in July 2021.
7. A coloured representation of the greater part of the proposed Holocaust 
Memorial and Learning Centre (“the proposed HMLC”) is at Appendix 1 .  
A plan showing the location of the proposed HMLC and other elements of 
the final project within VTG when completed is at Appendix 2 .
8. In September 2021 London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust made an 
application in the High Court for statutory review of the grant of planning 
permission. One of the grounds for the ensuing judicial review concerned 
the Inspector’s failure to address the significance of section 8 of the London 
County Council (Improvements) Act 1900 (“the 1900 Act”), the relevant 
provisions of which are as follows:
“(1) The lands lying to the eastward of the new street described in this 
Act as consisting in part of widenings of Abingdon Street and Millbank 
Street which is in this section called “the new street” and between 
the said street and the new embankment wall shall be laid out and 
maintained in manner herein-after provided for use as a garden open to 
the public and as an integral part of the existing Victoria Tower Garden 
subject to such byelaws and regulations as the Commissioners of Works 
may determine: 
…
(8)  The Commissioners shall maintain the garden so laid out and the 
embankment wall and kerb and railings enclosing it: …”
9. The Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton quashed the decision to grant planning 
permission.2 She said (paragraph 76) that: 
“… section 8(1) of the 1900 Act imposes an enduring obligation to lay 
out and retain the new garden land for use as a garden and integral part 
of the existing Victoria Tower Gardens.”
10. She further held that the potential impediment to delivery of the scheme 
was a material consideration which was not considered by the Minister and 
should have been. In July 2022, the Court of Appeal refused permission to 
appeal her judgment. 
11. The approval of the Minister having been quashed, the planning application 
remains to be re-determined. The same handling arrangements and “ethical 
divide” continue to operate within the Ministry. It will be a matter for the 
Minister making the re-determination to decide whether to re-open the 
planning inquiry or to receive written representations.  Mr Katkowski KC, 
lead counsel representing the Secretary of State, who is the Promoter of the 
Holocaust Memorial Bill and the applicant for planning permission,  drew the 
Committee’s attention to a letter dated 2 October 2024 in which interested 
1 https://assets.publishing. service.gov.uk/media/6102679e8fa8f50428d10083/Combined_DL_IR_R_
to_C_Victoria_Tower_Gardens.pdf
2 https://www.judiciary.uk/ wp-content/uploads/2022/07/LHPGT-v-Minister-for-Housing-
Judgment- 080422.pdf
5 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
parties were invited to make written representations to the decision-making 
Minister about issues relating to the Bill and the implications of the decision 
of the High Court on the timing of the delivery of the project. The letter also 
stated that the decision-making Minister would invite further representations 
before making a re-determination of the grant of planning permission 
following a re-activation of the planning application under Rule 19 of the 
Town and Country Planning (Inquiries Procedure) (England) Rules 2000 
(the relevant provisions of which are set out at Appendix 3 ).
 Legislative setting of the Holocaust Memorial Bill 
12. The purpose of the Holocaust Memorial Bill is, in effect, and as appears 
from the Explanatory Notes accompanying the Bill, to remedy the finding of 
the High Court by removing the obstacle in section 8(1) and (8) of the 1900 
Act to the building of the proposed HMLC in VTG.
13. The Bill is a hybrid bill. This means that it is a public bill which adversely 
affects the private interests of certain individuals and organisations. For this 
reason, while a hybrid bill proceeds for the most part as a public bill, certain 
private bill procedures also apply, enabling those whose property or interests 
are directly and specially affected by the bill to petition against it and to have 
their petitions considered by a select committee. The second reading affirms 
the “principle” of the bill.
 Proceedings in the House of Commons 
14. The Holocaust Memorial Bill was introduced to the House of Commons on 
23 February 2023. After second reading, a Select Committee was appointed 
with an instruction agreed by the House setting out the principle of the Bill. 
The instruction stated:
“(1) That the Committee treats the principle of the Bill, as determined 
by the House on the Bill’s second reading, as comprising the matters 
mentioned in paragraph (2); and those matters shall accordingly not be 
at issue during proceedings of the Committee.
(2) The matters referred to in paragraph (1) are—
(a) the Secretary of State may incur expenditure for or in connection 
with (i) a memorial commemorating the victims of the Holocaust, 
and (ii) a centre for learning relating to the memorial; and
(b) section 8(1) and (8) of the London County Council 
(Improvements) Act 1900 are not to prevent, restrict or otherwise 
affect the construction, use, operation, maintenance or improvement 
of such a memorial and centre for learning at Victoria Tower Gardens 
in the City of Westminster.
(3) Given paragraph (2) and as the Bill does not remove the need for 
planning permission and all other necessary consents being obtained 
in the usual way for the construction, use, operation, maintenance and 
improvement of the memorial and centre for learning, the Committee 
shall not hear any petition against the Bill to the extent that the petition 
relates to—
(a) the question of whether or not there should be a memorial 
commemorating the victims of the Holocaust or a centre for learning 
6 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
relating to the memorial, whether at Victoria Tower Gardens or 
elsewhere; or
(b) whether or not planning permission and all other necessary 
consents should be given for the memorial and centre for learning, 
or the terms and conditions on which they should be given.
(4) The Committee shall have power to consider any amendments 
proposed by the member in charge of the Bill which, if the Bill were 
a private bill, could not be made except upon petition for additional 
provision.
(5) Paragraph (4) applies only so far as the amendments proposed by 
the member in charge of the Bill fall within the principle of the Bill as 
provided for by paragraphs (1) and (2) above.”
15. Ten petitions were deposited (although two later withdrawn) and, following 
public hearings in which the Promoter and petitioners were able to present 
their cases, the Committee reported in April 2024. The Committee did not 
amend the Bill but raised several matters of concern in its Special Report.3 
The remaining public bill stages in the House of Commons took place on 22 
May. It was passed with no amendments.
 Proceedings in the House of Lords 
16. The Bill was introduced to the House of Lords on 23 May 2024, shortly 
before the dissolution of Parliament on 30 May. As a result of dissolution, 
the petitioning period, which began the day after introduction, was extended 
to 17 July. Eighteen petitions were deposited. The petitioners are set out 
in Appendix 4 . Following second reading on 4 September, the Bill was 
committed to this Select Committee, the House of Lords Select Committee 
on the Holocaust Memorial Bill, to consider those petitions. Unlike the 
position in the House of Commons, no instruction to the Committee was 
passed setting out the principle of the Bill. 
17. The Committee considered the petitions in three stages. These were, briefly, 
as follows:
Standing:  In contrast to the stance taken by the Promoter in the House of 
Commons, where the Promoter did not challenge the right of any petitioner to 
be heard, in this House the standing of the majority of them was challenged. 
Accordingly, the first task of the Committee was to consider the right to be 
heard of all those petitioners whose standing was contested by the Promoter. 
The Committee decided that some petitioners had standing, and some did 
not. The Committee announced its decisions on 13 November. They are 
explained in Chapter 2 of this Report.
Principle and scope: The Committee then proceeded to consider the principle 
and scope of the Bill. These are addressed in Chapter 3 of this Report. The 
Committee announced its provisional findings on principle and scope at a 
hearing on 19 November. In coming to its view, the Committee took into 
account the submissions of parties present on 19 November. It also invited 
submissions on principle and scope from those who were not present that day 
but appeared later. The Committee did not however amend its provisional 
findings, and they are explained in Chapter 3 of this Report.
3  House of Commons, First Special Report , (Session 2023-24, HC 121) 
7 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
Substantive issues raised in petitions : The Committee finally considered the 
substantive issues raised in the petitions of those who had standing and 
what remedies might be appropriate. These are set out in Chapter 4 of this 
Report. A summary of recommendations by the Committee and assurances 
and an undertaking given to the Committee by the Promoter in response to 
requests by the Committee are set out in Appendix 5  (and associated plan 
in Appendix 6 ).
18. It is apparent both from the second reading debate as well as the submissions 
made to the Committee by or on behalf of some of the petitioners that many 
members of the House are unaware of the constraints on the Committee 
both as to which petitioners are entitled to be heard by the Committee and 
as to the arguments petitioners who have standing can advance. Those 
constraints are addressed in detail in Chapter 2 paragraphs 21 to 38 (right to 
be heard) and Chapter 3 paragraphs 62 to 73 (limitation on arguments). A 
very brief summary of those constraints is contained in Appendix 7.
 After the Committee has reported
19. Once the Bill has been reported from the Committee, it is re-committed to 
a Committee of the whole House or a Grand Committee. It will then follow 
the usual public bill procedure of report and third reading. Some of the 
restrictions which we have had to accept will no longer apply.
 Acknowledgment
20. The project for the erection of the proposed HMLC in VTG has given rise 
to strong feelings on both sides, and for many of those who addressed us the 
proceedings have been unfamiliar and challenging. The Committee would 
like to thank all those who participated in the Committee’s proceedings.
8 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
CHAPTER 2:  RIGHT TO BE HEARD
21. The starting point on the question whether a petitioner has the right to be 
heard is that, contrary to some of the submissions we heard on behalf of the 
petitioners, the Committee does not have an unfettered discretion to allow 
a petitioner to speak to their petition. We reject as plainly unsustainable the 
proposition advanced by at least one of the petitioners that each opposed 
private or hybrid bill select committee has a completely free hand as to which 
petitions it will consider.
22. Generally speaking, a petitioner has a right to be heard if they prove that their 
property or interests are directly and specially affected by the bill: Erskine 
May (25th edition, 2019), paragraph 44.5.
23. In addition, the Private Business Standing Orders of the House specify 
various circumstances in which a petitioner has the right to have their 
petition considered (Standing Orders 115, 117A, 119 and 120) and other 
cases where the committee has a discretion to consider a petition (Standing 
Orders 117 and 118).
24. In the present case the only Standing Orders that are relevant are 117(2) 
and 118. Standing Order 117(2) provides that where any society, association 
or other body, sufficiently representing amenity, educational, travel or 
recreational interests, petitions against a bill, alleging that the interests they 
represent will be adversely affected to a material extent by the provisions 
contained in the bill, it shall be competent for the select committee, if they 
think fit, to permit petitioners to have their petition considered by the 
committee on such allegations against the bill or any part of it.  Standing 
Order 118 states that it is competent for the select committee, if they think 
fit, to permit petitioners, being the local authority of any area the whole or 
part of which is alleged in the petition to be injuriously affected by a bill or 
any provisions of it, or being any of the inhabitants of such area, to have their 
petition against the bill or any provisions of it considered by the committee.
25. Standing Order 114 says that the committee shall decide on the rights of the 
petitioners to have their petitions considered.
26. Proceedings in a select committee on a hybrid bill are, generally speaking, 
the same as for a select committee on a private bill: Erskine May (25th 
edition, 2019), paragraph 30.67. It is well established that the only role of 
the select committee in the case of a hybrid bill is to ensure appropriate 
protection of “private” interests affected by the bill. The House considers 
the impact on the public and wider public issues in the usual stages of the 
legislative process. 
27. If the petitioner cannot prove that they have a right to be heard and they do 
not satisfy one or more of the grounds in the Standing Orders, then they do 
not have standing to speak in support of their petition.
28. Contrary to the view expressed to us by some of the petitioners, a member 
of the House of Lords does not have the right either by convention or under 
the Standing Orders to have their petition considered simply because this is 
a select committee of the House of Lords. This is in contrast to MPs who are 
expressly entitled under Standing Order 117A to have their petition against a 
9 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
bill or any provisions of it considered by the committee if their constituencies 
are directly affected by the works proposed by the bill.
29. In 1988 a report by the Joint Committee on Private Bill Procedure (HL 
Paper 97, HC 625) said at paragraph 101:
“… it is a fundamental principle of private legislation procedure that 
only parties specially affected should be entitled to be heard and that 
the rules of locus standi must be upheld. If they are allowed to lapse, 
more of Members’ time will be taken up in Private Bill Committees. 
[We] recommend that promoters should be encouraged to police the 
rules of locus standi and that Private Bill Committees should not treat a 
reasonable but unsuccessful challenge as a point of prejudice”.
30. Counsel for the Promoter advanced in argument the following further 
limitations on the general conventional right to be heard. He said that the 
petitioner had to show some adverse impact of the bill on a property interest 
of the petitioner or something in the bill which, but for the bill, would have 
entitled the petitioner to bring a private law claim. He quoted, in support, the 
following passage from a ruling by the House of Lords Select Committee on 
the High Speed Rail (London-West Midlands) Bill, chaired by Lord Walker 
of Gestingthorpe, of 13 June 2016 (Session 2016-17, HL Paper 83, Appendix 
2, paragraph 8):
“… an individual petitioner’s right to be heard as a right…depends on 
that petitioner establishing the prospect of direct and material detriment 
to his or her property interests, either by compulsory acquisition or by 
interference with his or her property rights which amounts to a common 
law nuisance, or some other interference which would be actionable if 
not authorised by Parliament.”
31. He also emphasised the passages in another ruling of the Select Committee 
on the High Speed Rail (London-West Midlands) Bill of 21 June 2016 in 
which Lord Walker said (at paragraphs 15 and 16) that depreciated property 
value constituting non-statutory blight was not and had never been treated 
as a ground for petition. 
32. Counsel for the Promoter also said that there was a limitation on the discretion 
of a select committee under Standing Order 118 to permit participation by 
an inhabitant of the area alleged in the petition to be adversely affected by 
a bill. He contended that individual inhabitants are not normally treated as 
covered by Standing Order 118. He said that Standing Order 118 is directed 
at groups of persons who are petitioning as representatives of inhabitants of 
the area and that, to qualify for the exercise of discretion under Standing 
Order 118, an individual resident would need to be properly and sufficiently 
representative of the inhabitants of the area generally.  He said that this 
convention was based on 150 years of established practice and produced 
various precedents, including 19th century cases. 
33. We do not accept the arguments of the Promoter as to the narrow confines 
of entitlement to be heard and of the exercise of discretion under Standing 
Order 118 in the present case. We are not bound by precedents in the same 
way as a court of law. While it is clear that the Select Committee does not 
have an unlimited and unfettered discretion to hear any petitioner it chooses, 
the approach of a select committee on standing, that is the right to be heard, 
10 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
depends upon the particular facts under consideration. This is reflected in the 
introductory words – “Generally speaking” – in Erskine May’s explanation 
of an entitlement to be heard quoted above. A great number of the cases to 
which we were referred as precedents concern the compulsory acquisition of 
land from the petitioner.
34. We do not accept that we are bound in the present case to apply the very 
narrow proposition stated by Lord Walker in the High Speed Rail (London-
West Midlands) Bill quoted above that, in order for a petitioner to be entitled 
to have their petition heard by an opposed private or hybrid bill committee, 
the petitioner must establish a direct and material detriment to their property 
interest, either by compulsory acquisition or by interference with their 
property rights which amounts to a common law nuisance, or some other 
interference which would be actionable if not authorised by Parliament. In 
that case, as in so many others cited to us by counsel for the Promoter, what 
was in issue concerned to a large extent the compulsory acquisition of land.  
Of the 414 (of 821) petitions against that Bill where standing was challenged 
in the House of Lords, only 17 proceeded to a full hearing. The construction 
of a railway and property rights were central to the arguments on the right 
to be heard.
35. The present case, which counsel for the Promoter accepted is unique, 
concerns the removal of the statutory protection of VTG as a “garden open 
to the public” under section 8(1) of the 1900 Act and an amenity currently 
enjoyed. It is about the use of land, not the acquisition of property. The 
context and the facts of the two bills are strikingly different. For that reason, 
and because what is in dispute before us in terms of precedent concerns the 
application of conventions, we consider that we are able to take an approach 
to standing in respect of the petitions where standing is challenged which 
is more flexible and liberal than as specified by Lord Walker. In the case of 
the Holocaust Memorial Bill and entitlement to be heard, the unique subject 
matter and implications of the Bill affect personal interests. A central issue 
is what constitutes a sufficiently affected personal interest in the way the 
Gardens are used to give rise to an entitlement to be heard.
36. So far as concerns the discretionary power under Standing Order 118 to hear 
a petitioner, as an inhabitant of an injuriously affected area, the Standing 
Order does not expressly qualify the discretion in any of the respects argued 
on behalf of the Promoter. Insofar as convention requires an inhabitant to 
be sufficiently representative of all the inhabitants of the area, we are not 
aware of any ground for saying that the considerable number of individual 
petitioners or co-petitioners in the present case who reside near to VTG 
could not satisfy this requirement.
37. On the other hand, we reject the proposition, advanced by some of the 
petitioners, that working in the Palace of Westminster or in the vicinity of 
VTG, whether with or without a view of the Gardens, or with or without 
enjoyment of the amenity of the Gardens, is sufficient to confer a right to 
be heard. Further, we do not accept the proposition advanced by one of 
the petitioners that a person who works in the Palace of Westminster is an 
“inhabitant” within Standing Order 118.
38. We also reject the proposition, advanced particularly forcefully on behalf of 
Lord Inglewood, that it is permissible for the Select Committee to hear a 
petitioner just on the ground that they have expertise and knowledge enabling 
11 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
them to highlight matters which might not otherwise be considered. To hear 
a petition on that ground falls neither within the convention on the right to 
be heard nor within the Standing Orders, so it lies outside our powers. His 
petition, however, has drawn attention to a gap in the House’s procedure, as 
hearing from petitioners who can demonstrate that they have those qualities 
could be of significant value in some cases such as this one where there are 
matters that deserve such attention. We suggest that the introduction of a 
new or revised Standing Order to confer a discretion to hear them should be 
considered by the relevant House authorities.
 Petitioners found to have standing 
39. We decided that the following petitioners have standing.
 London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust
40. This is an amenity society and registered charity which has an interest in 
preserving VTG as a Grade II Listed Public Park. It took an active part 
in the application for planning permission for the proposed HMLC. The 
Promoter has not objected to us considering the Trust’s petition. In the 
exercise of our discretion under Standing Order 117(2) we have considered 
the Trust’s petition. 
 Descendants of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton and the Treasurer and Trustee of the 
Thomas Fowell Buxton Society 
41. These petitioners are concerned with the Buxton Memorial, a monument 
in VTG. The memorial commemorates the work of Thomas Fowell Buxton 
and others in the abolition of slavery.
42. The Promoter has not objected to us considering this petition. In the 
exercise of our discretion under Standing Order 117(2) we have considered 
the petition. The petition is stated to be submitted on behalf of the treasurer 
and trustee of the Society, and four members of the family of Thomas Fowell 
Buxton. The treasurer and trustee, Dr John Fannon, represents the Society, 
in whose favour we have exercised our discretion under Standing Order 
117(2). The four members of the Buxton family are entitled to be heard by 
virtue of the direct and special impact of the Holocaust Memorial Bill on 
their interest in the Buxton Memorial and their forebear.
 The Thorney Island Society and Residents of Westminster 
43. The Society is a local amenity society which is concerned with an area which 
includes VTG and the Palace of Westminster. One of the Society’s purposes 
is to secure the preservation, protection, development and improvement of 
features of historic or public interest in the old Westminster village. Twenty 
individuals are also named as petitioners in the Society’s petition. Some 
live near VTG. Others live further away but within the SW1P and SW1V 
postcodes.
44. The Promoter has not objected to the standing of the Society to petition 
against the Bill. In the exercise of our discretion under Standing Order 117(2) 
we have considered the Society’s petition. The Promoter has not expressly 
opposed the individual co-petitioners. Insofar as it is necessary to comment 
on their standing separately from the Society, the interests of such of them 
as live in the vicinity of VTG are directly and specially affected by the Bill.
12 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
 Sir Peter Bottomley and Baroness Bottomley of Nettlestone
45. Sir Peter and Baroness Bottomley have established an entitlement to have 
their petition considered by virtue of having lived very near VTG for many 
years and the fact that they have always enjoyed regular use of the amenity of 
VTG. Their interests are directly and specially affected by the Bill.
 Viscount Eccles
46. Viscount Eccles has established an entitlement to have his petition considered 
by virtue of living at, and having a property interest in, a flat very near VTG 
and enjoying the amenity of the Gardens on a regular and frequent basis 
over many years. His interests are directly and specially affected by the Bill.
 Lord Hamilton of Epsom
47. Lord Hamilton has established an entitlement to have his petition considered 
by virtue of owning and living in a flat very near VTG and enjoying the 
amenity of the Gardens on a regular and frequent basis. His interests are 
directly and specially affected by the Bill.
 Lord Strathclyde and his co-petitioners who inhabit a residence in the vicinity of 
VTG 
48. Lord Strathclyde and those of his co-petitioners who inhabit a residence in 
the vicinity of VTG have established an entitlement to be heard as local 
residents who regularly use the amenity of the Gardens. Their interests are 
directly and specially affected by the Bill. 
 Lord Blencathra 
49. Lord Blencathra is a resident in the area.  In his oral evidence he said that, 
if successful, the proposed HMLC might affect the value of his property 
due to large numbers of buses, car parking and demonstrations. That was a 
change from his petition in which he said that he did not think that the value 
of his property would be affected. The Committee, nevertheless, considered 
that he established his right to have his petition considered as he is a resident 
in the vicinity of VTG and enjoys the use of the Gardens. His interests are 
directly and specially affected by the Bill. 
 Baroness Finlay of Llandaff 
50. Baroness Finlay established her right to have her petition considered as a 
resident in the vicinity of VTG who enjoys the use of the Gardens. Her 
interests are directly and specially affected by the Bill. 
 Baroness Deech and Holocaust survivors
51. Baroness Deech’s petition is on her own behalf, as a descendant of Holocaust 
survivors, and also on behalf of six Holocaust survivors (one of whom was 
not in a concentration camp but was hidden by foster parents).
52. We consider that in the exceptional, probably unique, circumstances of the 
present case, Baroness Deech and the others mentioned in her petition are 
significantly personally affected by the Bill and are entitled to be heard. In 
reaching this conclusion we are not persuaded by the assertion that Holocaust 
survivors feel that they may be blamed and will incur public disapproval 
and criticism for any adverse consequences of the Promoter’s plans for 
13 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
the proposed HMLC in VTG. Rather, we consider that the interests of 
the petitioners, by virtue of their particular personal experiences of the 
Holocaust either directly or as members of the families of Holocaust victims 
or survivors, are specially and directly affected by the proposed HMLC in 
a way and to an extent that marks them out as a group distinct from other 
members of the public.
 Lord Sassoon
53. Lord Sassoon has established a right to have his petition considered on the 
same grounds as Baroness Deech, namely his family connections with those 
who were victims of the Holocaust. In his case, there is the added feature of 
closely related members of his family who helped to save Jews at the time of 
the Holocaust. 
 Lord Carlile of Berriew 
54. Lord Carlile has established a right to have his petition considered on the 
same grounds as Baroness Deech and Lord Sassoon, namely his family 
connection with Holocaust survivors and victims.
 Petitioners found not to have standing 
55. We decided that the following do not have standing on the basis of the general 
principles we have set out above. 
 Lord Hodgson of Astley Abbotts 
56. Lord Hodgson is not an inhabitant of the area and said that his use of VTG 
has been infrequent. He said that his petition is about the increased difficulty 
of access to the Palace of Westminster for people going to the Palace of 
Westminster during and after construction of the proposed HMLC. These 
concerns do not confer an entitlement to be heard and, as he does not claim 
to be an inhabitant of the area near to VTG, the Standing Orders do not 
confer on us any discretion to consider his petition.
 Lord Griffiths of Burry Port 
57. Lord Griffiths is not an inhabitant of the area. He based his right to petition 
on human rights and as a member of the public. These are matters which 
concern the public at large and not his personal interests. He does not fall 
within the convention of the right to be heard or within any Standing Order 
which confers a discretion to hear a petitioner.
 Lord Russell of Liverpool 
58. Lord Russell’s petition does not give any indication that he is an inhabitant 
of the area near to VTG, so there is no Standing Order which confers a 
discretion to hear him. Working in Parliament is an insufficient ground for 
entitlement to a right to be heard.
 Jardentome Ltd
59. Jardentome Ltd owns a property near to VTG. Employees and others who 
work there have had regular and frequent enjoyment of the Gardens. There 
is nothing in the petition and we heard no evidence that any part of the 
property is a residence. As in the case of parliamentarians who work in the 
Palace of Westminster, irrespective of whether or not they have a view of 
14 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
VTG from their office windows or they have enjoyed the amenity of VTG, 
working in the vicinity of VTG together with enjoyment of VTG is an 
insufficient ground for an entitlement to be heard. Nor is there any Standing 
Order which confers on us a discretion to hear the petition. 
 Lord Inglewood 
60. Lord Inglewood claims that his petition should be considered in the 
Committee’s general discretion, as “a master of its own procedure”, because 
of his special interest, different from the public generally, as a former 
Government Minister with responsibility for architectural heritage and 
conservation, as a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and as President of 
Historic Buildings and Places (previously the Ancient Monuments Society). 
He claims a special expertise in relation to the impact of the Holocaust 
Memorial Bill and the proposed memorial on the significance, setting and 
views of the many historic buildings and structures in the vicinity on both 
the north and south sides of the River Thames. He also relies on the fact 
that he works in the Palace of Westminster and No. 1 Millbank, in offices 
overlooking VTG, and VTG is important to him, his staff and his visitors 
as a resource which is available for, among other things, calm reflection, 
discussion, debriefing after meetings and a place for visitors to wait. Lord 
Inglewood put in evidence a letter from Historic Buildings and Places in 
support of his petition, including the amendments to the Bill which he seeks.
61. As we have stated above, the Committee does not accept that it has 
a completely free hand as to which petitions it considers or that it has a 
discretion to entertain a petition solely because the petitioner has special 
knowledge which may assist the Committee. Lord Inglewood is not a society, 
association or other body within Standing Order 117(2). The petition is in 
Lord Inglewood’s name. It is not a petition of Historic Buildings and Places. 
He is not an inhabitant of a residence in the vicinity of VTG within Standing 
Order 118.  Accordingly, there is no Standing Order which confers on the 
Committee a discretion to consider his petition.  Further, as we have also 
said, working in Parliament, whether with or without a view of VTG, and 
whether or not VTG has been enjoyed as an amenity, is insufficient to found 
a right to be heard.
15 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
CHAPTER 3:  PRINCIPLE AND SCOPE
62. In the second reading debate several members of the House appeared to view 
the role of the Select Committee as extending to a wide review of the merits 
of the proposed HMLC for which the Secretary of State, as Promoter, has 
been seeking planning permission.
63. This is a fundamental misunderstanding of the function of the Select 
Committee. The function is not to conduct a roving investigation into general 
merits: 1948 report by the House of Commons Select Committee on Hybrid 
Bills (Procedure in Committee) (Session 1947-48, HC 191, paragraph 19). 
Rather, it is to protect private interests, but subject to a number of constraints. 
As mentioned earlier, objections based on public policy are reserved for 
subsequent stages of the legislative process – committee, report and third 
reading.
64. The Committee has no power, in the absence of express authority from the 
House, to hear any evidence other than that tendered by any party entitled 
to be heard: Standing Order 124.  It cannot, therefore, call expert or other 
evidence on its own initiative.
65. It is a long-standing convention that the Committee cannot consider any 
amendments that are destructive of the “principle” of the Bill:  High Speed 
Rail (London-West Midlands) Bill (Session 2016-17, HL Paper 83, paragraph 
20).
66. For the principle of the Bill reference must be made to clauses 1 and 2, which 
are as follows so far as relevant. 
1 Expenditure relating to a Holocaust Memorial and Learning Centre  
(1) The Secretary of State may incur expenditure for or in connection 
with—
(a) the construction on, over or under any land of—
(i) a memorial commemorating the victims of the Holocaust, and
(ii) a centre for learning relating to the memorial,
(b) the carrying out of any work ancillary to, or associated with, 
anything falling within paragraph (a), and
(c) the use, operation, maintenance or improvement of the memorial 
and the centre for learning.
(2) ... 
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), “construction” includes 
erection, extension, alteration and re-erection.
2 Removal of restrictions in relation to certain land
Section 8(1) and (8) of the London County Council (Improvements) Act 
1900 does not prevent, restrict or otherwise affect the carrying out of any of 
the activities described in paragraphs (a) to (c) of section 1(1) on, over, under 
or otherwise in relation to the land described in section 8(1) of that Act.
16 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
67. Clause 3 provides that the Act extends to England and Wales. Whereas 
clause 1 has no geographical restriction other than England and Wales 
(“any land”), clause 2 is specifically directed at VTG as it removes from 
VTG the requirement in section 8(1) and (8) of the 1900 Act that VTG is 
to be maintained for use as a garden open to the public. That requirement is 
removed to the extent necessary for the carrying out of any of the activities 
described in paragraphs (a) to (c) of clause 1(1) of the Bill on, over, under 
or otherwise in relation to VTG. Expressed in more colloquial terms, the 
principle of clause 2 is that section 8 of the 1900 Act is not to stand in the 
way of or obstruct the building and subsequent operation of a Holocaust 
memorial and learning centre in VTG. 
68. Mr  Brian Doctor KC, counsel for four of the petitioners, relying on the word 
“a” in the long title (“a Holocaust Memorial and Learning Centre”) and in 
clause 1(1)(a)(i) and (ii) (“a memorial”, “a centre for learning”), maintained 
that the proposed HMLC for which the Secretary of State had applied for 
planning permission was irrelevant to the principle of the Bill as it is not 
mentioned at all in the Bill. This seems to us to be overly legalistic and 
unrealistic. We bear in mind that we are not a court of law but a committee 
of the House of Lords guided by convention. Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the 
Explanatory Notes accompanying the Bill as well as the opening speech of 
Lord Khan of Burnley, Under-Secretary of State in the Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and Local Government, at second reading, indicate that one 
of the main purposes of the Bill is to remove the obstacle of the 1900 Act to 
the construction and operation of the Government’s project.
69. Those paragraphs of the Explanatory Notes are as follows.
“7. An application for planning consent was made by the then Secretary 
of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government in December 
2018 for a Holocaust Memorial and accompanying underground 
Learning Centre. Following a public inquiry in 2020, planning consent 
was granted in July 2021. Subsequently in a statutory review of the 
planning decision the High Court concluded that certain sections of 
the London County Council (Improvements) Act 1900 (‘the 1900 Act’) 
which extended the existing Victoria Tower Gardens southwards and 
required the Commissioner of Works to maintain the land as a ‘garden 
open to the public’ were an obstacle to constructing the Holocaust 
Memorial and Learning Centre in the Gardens. The High Court 
quashed the decision to grant planning consent. 
8. The Government intends to disapply the relevant sections of the 
1900 Act so that they do not constitute an obstacle to construction and 
operation of the Holocaust Memorial and Learning Centre.”
70. As to the suggestion that, on the revival of the current planning application, 
a very different project might be put forward by the Government, this again 
seems unrealistic. A significant change in the project would require a new 
planning application, whereas it is the existing planning application which 
the Government intends to pursue.  The fact that the Government attaches 
much importance to securing completion of this project while some of the 
Holocaust survivors are still alive suggests that it will not wish to encounter 
the delay which would result if significant changes were to be made . 
17 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
71. Nevertheless, in view of the debate between counsel that took place before 
us, we shall in the alternative consider each proposed amendment without 
reference to the current project. 
72. In the House of Commons the Select Committee was given an instruction 
on the Bill following second reading which specified matters that could not 
be investigated by the Committee. Those included matters that had been or 
could be addressed in the planning process. No instructions have been given 
in the House of Lords to this Committee.
73. The Committee cannot make an amendment that is outside the scope of the 
Bill. The scope of a bill is described by Erskine May (25th edition, 2019), 
paragraph 28.81, as the reasonable limits of its collective purposes, as defined 
by its existing clauses and schedules. Erskine May also states that when, as 
is the case here, a bill has one or two purposes, “only amendments relating 
to those purposes, or touching on matters closely connected with them, fall 
within the scope of the bill”.
74. We heard considerable argument as to whether or not the Committee 
could and should consider amendments relating to planning matters.  Mr 
Katkowski maintained that all planning matters are out of scope because 
they are addressed by an independent body at a different stage to the removal 
of the obstacles to the construction and operation of the project addressed 
in the Bill. Mr McCracken KC, counsel for Lord Inglewood, argued that 
all such matters are in scope as they relate to limitations on the lifting of the 
protection of section 8 of the 1900 Act. Rather than express a general view 
here, we will consider planning, if and so far as necessary, in relation to each 
proposed amendment to the Bill. 
75. In addition to all the above constraints, the Committee has an overriding 
discretion not to accept an amendment to the Bill even if it is not destructive 
of the principle of the Bill and not outside the scope of the Bill.
18 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
CHAPTER 4:  PETITIONERS’ AMENDMENTS
76. Having heard the submissions of Mr Katkowski, Mr Doctor and Lord 
Carlile on scope and principle, we reached the provisional view that it 
would be contrary to the principle of the Bill, even without regard for the 
Government’s currently intended project, for any petitioner to argue that 
there should not be a Holocaust memorial and learning centre in VTG, that 
a Holocaust memorial should not be co-located with a learning centre in 
VTG and that any learning centre should not be underground. Our view was 
provisional only to the extent that any other unrepresented petitioner would 
be entitled to argue that our provisional view was incorrect. Most petitioners 
revised their request for amendments to take account of those limitations. In 
the event, other than the further submission of Lord Carlile mentioned in 
the next paragraph, no petitioner challenged our provisional view.
77. Lord Carlile subsequently submitted that clause 1 of the Bill is nothing 
more than an expression of intention or hope and therefore brings within 
scope the three areas which the Committee provisionally considered would 
be destructive of the principle of the Bill. He relied particularly on the 
Cabinet Manual 2011 paragraphs 3.2-3.32.  Mr Katkowski responded with 
reference to another doctrine applicable to public expenditure, the “Baldwin 
Concordat”. We do not consider it is necessary to set out and analyse here the 
opposing arguments in detail. It is sufficient to say that we are not persuaded 
by Lord Carlile’s argument.
78. Aside from the three matters mentioned in paragraph 76 above, we were 
asked by petitioners to make various other amendments to the Bill or to 
secure from the Promoter undertakings or assurances to the same effect or, 
at the least, to raise them or their subject matter in this Report. Breach of 
undertakings (see Standing Order 130) and assurances to the Committee 
would have parliamentary and practical consequences. 
79. The issues raised were as follows.
 The Playground and access 
80. It was contended that the size of the children’s playground should not be 
reduced, that it should not be moved closer to the road, that the access to 
the playground should not be affected and that the playground should not be 
located near to any Holocaust memorial and learning centre. If regard is had 
to the Government’s currently intended project but the location and size of 
the playground were to stay the same, it seems that the consequence would be 
to move the proposed HMLC northwards and so leave even less of the open 
space of the Gardens. This would be destructive of the principle of the Bill. 
If the current project is not taken into account, we do not have the technical 
expertise, evidence or resources to be able to say to what extent, and in what 
way, this would have an impact on the construction of a Holocaust memorial 
and learning centre.
81. We agree, however, with some of the petitioners that the current proposals 
for use of, and access to, the playground and indeed VTG generally by those 
who wish to enjoy the Gardens, rather than visit the proposed HMLC, are 
unclear and inadequate. The position has to be judged before and after 
construction.
19 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
82. The playground is popular with local residents, who have young children and 
grandchildren. We sought an assurance that during construction interference 
with the playground is kept to a minimum. The Promoter has responded with 
an assurance  (Assurance 1) to the Committee that, during construction of 
the proposed HMLC, closures of and other interference with the children’s 
playground at the south end of VTG will be kept to a minimum by the 
Promoter and its contractors adopting the following measures:
(a) throughout the construction of the proposed HMLC the playground 
will be kept open at all times when it is practicable and safe to do so;
(b) during the construction phase, reasonable care will be taken to avoid 
any mud or dust reaching the playground from the construction site 
and for most of that phase the main construction work will take place 
behind hoardings;
(c) whenever the playground is open during the construction phase, level 
access will be maintained from the gate at the northern end of VTG 
(via the riverside path) as well as access via the steps at the south of 
VTG on the western end of Lambeth Bridge; and
(d) during the construction phase the Promoter will require contractors to 
share with users of VTG and the local community information about 
the progress of construction, with planned closures of the playground 
notified to them in advance.
83. Although it is the Promoter’s intention that step-free access will be maintained 
from the gate at the northern end of VTG (via the riverside path), this is a 
very lengthy route for those coming from the south.  In relation to this point 
the Promoter has given to the Committee an assurance  (Assurance 2) that 
both during and after construction of the proposed HMLC:
(a) although closure of the southern gate from Millbank into VTG will be 
required at some points during the construction stage for the proposed 
HMLC, the Promoter will seek to maintain safe access through that 
gate for as much time during construction as possible; and
(b) after the construction period the Promoter has no intention of closing 
any of the existing gates providing access to VTG.  Visitors to the 
playground will therefore be able to enter VTG at the step-free southern 
gate from Millbank, directly into the playground.
84. So far as concerns the use of VTG generally for normal recreational use 
during the construction period, the Promoter has given to the Committee an 
assurance  (Assurance 3) that during construction of the proposed HMLC 
the Promoter will ensure, so far as reasonably practicable and health and 
safety considerations allow, but excepting factors beyond the Promoter’s 
control (such as adverse weather conditions), that restrictions on access by 
the public to VTG will be kept to a minimum and that, in particular, the 
Promoter will keep a footpath along the River Thames of at least 1.5 metres 
in width open whenever reasonably practicable and where The Royal Parks 
(responsible for managing VTG) are content. The Promoter will require any 
contractor appointed to construct the proposed HMLC to adhere to this 
assurance.
20 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
85. It is also a matter of concern that, after construction of the currently proposed 
project, those wishing to gain access to, and use, the playground will have 
to mingle with very large numbers of people visiting and exiting from the 
proposed HMLC (estimated in the current planning application to be as 
many as 10,000 each day). The same is true of those who wish to use VTG 
for ordinary recreational purposes but cannot navigate steps and so will have 
to mingle with very large numbers of people visiting the proposed HMLC 
at the northern entry point, especially if visitors to the proposed HMLC 
are required to queue on any of the paths. We are particularly concerned 
that insufficient attention has been devoted to the issue of young children 
in the playground being in close proximity to adults visiting the proposed 
HMLC, whether exiting from HMLC or using the public toilets and the 
proposed kiosk. In response to our concerns, the Promoter has given to the 
Committee the following assurances . The first assurance  (Assurance 4) 
is that a review will be carried out with the design team of the arrangements 
proposed for the southern end of VTG, with a view to ensuring an appropriate 
separation of the playground from other visitors to VTG, including visitors 
to the proposed HMLC.  Measures to be considered during that review will 
include:
(a) very clear delineation of the boundaries of the playground, using the 
Spicer Memorial, hedges and other planting to make the playground 
space clearly separate from the area around the proposed HMLC;
(b) ensuring that visitors to the proposed HMLC have no need to pass 
through the playground; and
(c) ensuring that visitors to VTG, whether visiting the proposed HMLC 
or not, have no need to pass through the playground in order to access 
either the public toilets or the refreshment kiosk. 
The second assurance  (Assurance 5) is that, after the construction period, 
there is no intention of the proposed HMLC requiring closure of any of the 
existing gates providing access to VTG, and so visitors to the playground will 
be able to enter VTG at the step-free southern gate from Millbank, directly 
into the playground; and similarly, visitors to VTG who are not intending to 
use the playground or to visit the proposed HMLC will be free to enter via 
any of the gates from Millbank, as now.
86. We were informed by the Promoter’s Parliamentary Agents that security 
checks will take place only on visitors wishing to access the entrance pavilion 
at the proposed HMLC, and that there is no intention to restrict access to 
other areas of VTG or to carry out security checks on users of VTG who are 
not intending to visit the proposed HMLC.  On this issue, the Promoter has 
given to the Committee an assurance  (Assurance 6) that the Promoter has 
no intention to request or arrange for security checks to be carried out on 
visitors to VTG who do not intend to enter the proposed HMLC, and that it 
has no intention to request or arrange for access by members of the public to 
other areas of VTG to be restricted on security grounds. 
 The Kiosk 
87. The plans for the proposed HMLC show a kiosk at the southern end of 
VTG, near to the children’s playground. There is currently a kiosk further 
north which, we were informed, was previously operated under a franchise 
issued by The Royal Parks for many years, was closed in the autumn of 2019, 
21 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
reopened for the summer season in 2021, and closed again in September 
2021.  It has remained closed since then. Some petitioners said that there 
should be no food and drink sales anywhere in VTG if a memorial is sited 
there, not only because the sale of snacks would be deeply disrespectful in 
the vicinity of a memorial to people who starved to death, but also because 
of litter and crowding. Those are not only matters of public policy, outside 
our remit but, by extending the restriction to the whole of VTG, lie outside 
the scope of the Bill.
88. Our principal concern about the proposed new kiosk is rather different: the 
congregation of very large numbers of visitors to the proposed HMLC at the 
proposed new kiosk immediately adjacent to the playground. This raises child 
safety issues.   Unless there is some overriding necessity for the proposed 
new kiosk, we recommend  (Recommendation 1) that the Secretary of State 
should remove it from the present plans.
 Siting of structures for a Holocaust memorial and learning centre 
within VTG 
89. On this issue the Promoter was willing to give the following assurance  
(Assurance 7) to the Committee:
(1) Although clause 2 of the Bill applies to the whole of VTG, the 
Promoter will only site the permanent buildings and other permanent 
structures comprising a Holocaust memorial and learning centre and 
its ancillary facilities (the permanent elements) on, under and over the 
land (a) permitted by any planning permission that is granted by the 
Secretary of State shown coloured blue and edged in blue on the plan 
in Appendix 6; or (b) permitted by any planning permission for an 
extended, altered, modified or replacement scheme for a Holocaust 
memorial and learning centre.
(2) In paragraph (1)(b), “planning permission” means a planning 
permission granted under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, 
a planning permission changed in accordance with section 96A of that 
Act (power to make non-material changes to planning permission), 
or a planning permission modified by a further planning permission 
granted under section 73 or 73A of that Act (in relation to which 
certain consultation and publicity obligations on the local planning 
authority arise).
(3) The Promoter will require any contractor appointed to construct a 
Holocaust memorial and learning centre to adhere to the assurance 
given in paragraph (1).
90. The Committee appreciates that paragraph 1(b) is capable of negating the 
assurance in (1)(a) but, in the absence of any willingness on the part of the 
Promoter to limit it to, for example, non-material extensions, modifications 
and alterations, there is nothing more that the Committee can do. The 
Committee does not have the knowledge or expertise to fix where the 
permanent buildings and other structures should be sited within VTG. The 
Committee, therefore, accepts the assurance as proffered but with regret 
that a more satisfactory undertaking, from the perspective of those residents 
using VTG for recreation, could not be secured from the Promoter. 
22 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
 Design of the proposed HMLC 
91. Criticism was made of the design of the proposed HMLC as well as its 
association with the designer Sir David Adjaye. These are matters of public 
policy, outside the remit of the Committee, and not private interests, whose 
protection is the principal concern of the Committee. 
 Proposed Learning Centre and the Parliamentary Education Centre 
92. Considerable concern was expressed about the proposed Learning Centre. 
In particular, it was said that it would not be in keeping with the way young 
people learn today. It was also said that the proposed Learning Centre would 
bear no relationship to the original understanding in Prime Minister David 
Cameron’s 2015 Holocaust Commission report. That report recommended 
that the memorial should be co-located with a world-class and substantial 
learning centre at the heart of a campus driving a network of national 
educational activity. The currently proposed Learning Centre is said to be 
much diminished, and without the most important educational elements that 
were originally recommended. One petitioner, by contrast, said both that 
only a fraction of school children would visit a physical building and also 
that the present limited proposal for a video learning centre was out of date 
even in 2015. Again, by contrast, it was said by at least one petitioner that the 
Learning Centre should not engage in any activities on its own but should 
be an enabling institution supporting existing research and educational 
institutions which study the Holocaust and related subjects.
93. It was also said that there should be an amendment providing for an annual 
index-linked budget starting at £50 million for continuous and up-dated 
teaching of the 1940s Holocaust and countering antisemitism sweeping the 
United Kingdom. There was also a criticism that the project has wrongly 
been diverted into a project about British values and the ‘trite message’ 
that democracy will protect against genocide - a monument to British self-
reflection, not a memorial and learning centre. All of the above are matters 
of public policy rather than private interests, and so outside the scope of the 
Committee.
94. It was contended that the Parliamentary Education Centre could be the 
site of an appropriate Holocaust learning centre. If regard is had to the 
Government’s currently intended project, this would plainly be destructive 
of the principle of the Bill. If that project is not taken into account, we lack 
the expertise, evidence and resources to express a view on the viability and 
appropriateness of the use of the Education Centre as a Holocaust learning 
centre. In any event, the evidence was that during the period of Restoration 
and Renewal of the Palace of Westminster (R&R) the Education Centre 
would have to be given up in its present location and would, potentially, be 
relocated within the Palace, possibly underground. 
 Height, size and bulk of a Holocaust Memorial 
95. It was contended that a memorial should be of a height, size and bulk no 
greater than any of the existing memorials in VTG. If regard is had to the 
Government’s currently intended project, this would plainly be destructive 
of the principle of the Bill. If that project is not taken into account, the 
argument would still significantly restrain the powers of the Secretary of State 
under clauses 1 and 2 of the Bill. Nor do we have the expertise, evidence or 
resources to say whether it would be viable to have above ground a memorial 
23 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
which does not exceed the height, size and bulk of the other memorials in 
VTG with an underground learning centre below it.
96. There is a further proposed amendment along similar lines to provide that 
any Holocaust memorial and learning centre should not (a) result in the 
raising of the current ground level or (b) exceed 9.62 metres in height above 
the current ground level. Our view on this proposal is the same as for the 
amendment considered in the preceding paragraph. Our comments below 
on proposed amendments relating to the Buxton Memorial are also relevant. 
97. It was also contended that any memorial and learning centre should not 
occupy a surface area greater than 1,429 sq. metres, including in that total 
area any entrance pavilion, courtyard and ramp into the learning centre, 
associated hard standing, service access, new access paths, the parts of the 
mound not accessible to the public and areas enclosed to ensure the security 
of the memorial and learning centre. We were told that this was the wording 
of the assurance given by Baroness Scott of Bybrook in her Parliamentary 
Answer to HL6914 tabled on 28 March 2023 (amended on 12 April 2023) 
regarding the proposed size of the land to be taken from VTG. We do not 
consider that it is appropriate for us to make such an amendment. The 
measurement is extremely precise. We do not know whether it accords or will 
accord with what the Promoter seeks in the revived planning application. It 
leaves no leeway for any extension as permitted by clause 1(3) of the Bill. 
 View of the Palace of Westminster from VTG 
98. It was contended that a Holocaust memorial should not cause harm to 
the view of the Palace of Westminster from VTG. If regard is had to the 
Government’s currently intended project, such a restriction would plainly be 
destructive of the principle of the Bill. If no account is taken of that project, 
we do not have the expertise, evidence or resources to assess the extent to 
which the powers under clauses 1 and 2 of the Bill would be constrained. 
That constraint would clearly be considerable. 
 The setting of the Buxton Memorial and other memorials 
99. An amendment was proposed by a number of petitioners that the construction 
and operation of a Holocaust memorial and learning centre should preserve 
or enhance any other memorial or the setting of such a memorial in VTG. 
We address in detail below the impact on the Buxton Memorial of the present 
Government proposals, which is the subject of the Buxton petition. So far as 
other memorials are concerned, the consequences for them of clause 2 of the 
Bill is a matter of public policy rather than private interests, which are the 
primary concern of this Committee. Further, so far as concerns the Spicer 
Memorial, leaving it in its present position would be inconsistent with the 
Government’s present proposals and so would be destructive of the principle 
of the Bill. If no regard is paid to the presently proposed HMLC, we do 
not have the expertise, evidence or resources to say how much the powers 
in clause 2 of the Bill would be constrained if the Spicer Memorial were to 
remain in its present location. 
100. The Buxton Memorial, a Grade II* building in VTG, commemorates Sir 
Thomas Fowell Buxton and other slavery abolitionists, whose campaign 
led to the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. It is an important national memorial, 
which was erected in 1865-1866 in Parliament Square and moved to VTG 
in 1957. 
24 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
101. The Buxton petitioners and other petitioners are concerned that the proposed 
HMLC should not damage the Buxton Memorial or its setting. The Planning 
Inspector acknowledged that the planning application would cause great 
and important harm to the setting of the Buxton Memorial, albeit less than 
substantial harm, carrying considerable weight in the heritage balance. The 
Inspector concluded, however, that the heritage balance nevertheless clearly 
and demonstrably weighs in favour of the planning proposals.
102. The Buxton petitioners are particularly concerned that there will only be 
a gap of 1.5-2 metres between the Buxton Memorial and security fencing 
that is to be installed around the proposed HMLC.  They contend that 
it would be difficult for people to appreciate the Buxton Memorial from 
that distance, and it would also result in a real pinch point on the adjoining 
pathway. The petitioners suggest a greater separation distance between the 
Buxton Memorial and the proposed HMLC and any security fencing to 
enable easier passage and better viewing of the Buxton Memorial by those 
visiting VTG. In response to these concerns, the Promoter has given the 
Committee an assurance  (Assurance 8) that detailed consideration will be 
given to the question of how easily visitors to the proposed HMLC, and 
to VTG generally, will be able to pass by and view the Buxton Memorial, 
including by considering the location, nature, specification and design of 
paths, fencing and other boundary treatments.
103. The Buxton petitioners also  seek an amendment to the Bill that the 
construction and use of a Holocaust memorial and learning centre, including 
the one presently proposed, must not cause any harm to the fabric or setting 
of the Buxton Memorial. So far as concerns the presently proposed HMLC, 
such an amendment is inevitably destructive of the principle of the Bill as the 
Planning Inspector concluded that the setting of the Buxton Memorial will 
be harmed. More generally, unlike the Planning Inspector, we do not have 
the expertise, evidence or resources to understand precisely what impact 
such an amendment would have on the location, configuration and size of 
any Holocaust memorial and co-located learning centre and access to them.
 Closure dates 
104. Some petitioners wish the Bill to be amended to set a limit on the amount of 
time that VTG can be closed to the public in any one year in consequence 
of events associated with the proposed HMLC. This is a matter which 
particularly affects residents who habitually visit and use VTG for relaxation 
and enjoyment. The limitation of closure dates seems to us to be a 
reasonable request. It is not appropriate for an amendment to the Bill or an 
undertaking but is probably best addressed in byelaws applicable to VTG.  
We recommend  (Recommendation 2) that this be taken forward by The 
Royal Parks, which is and will be the body responsible for maintenance of 
those parts of VTG outside the perimeter of the proposed HMLC. 
 Continuing application of section 8 of the 1900 Act to VTG 
105. We agree with the view expressed by some petitioners that the protection of 
VTG by the 1900 Act should continue to apply to any part of the Gardens 
not taken up with a Holocaust memorial and learning centre, including 
the current proposed project, after it has been fully completed and open 
to the public. The Promoter’s view is that no amendment is necessary to 
address this issue because the Bill, as drafted, does not remove the existing 
protection of the 1900 Act across the whole of VTG, except in relation to 
25 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
the construction, maintenance and operation of a Holocaust memorial and 
learning centre, so that protection will otherwise continue to apply without 
any amendment. Clause 1(3) provides that the word “construction” in clause 
1(1)(a) includes extension, alteration and re-erection, and the Promoter has 
sought to address this at paragraph (1)(b) of its assurance in paragraph 89 
above. We have described, in paragraph 90, that part of its assurance as 
unsatisfactory but, for the reasons given there, we have no alternative but to 
accept the assurance as proffered.
106. We do not consider it appropriate that we should amend the Bill to include, 
as requested by some petitioners, a provision that clause 2 will cease to have 
effect at the end of 2029, except for the use, maintenance and operation of 
any buildings already completed or under construction pursuant to clause 2. 
We heard no expert evidence on the time needed to complete the proposed 
HMLC. There is no allowance in the proposed amendment for delays due 
to matters beyond the control of the Promoter. Further, it is impossible to 
predict the full practical consequences of such a provision, which could 
result in unusable structures left in VTG.
 Security 
107. We agree with the anxiety about security expressed by a number of petitioners. 
This concerns private interests as well as public policy as it particularly 
affects local residents who habitually take advantage of VTG whether alone 
or with children.  In particular, we take note of the evidence of Lord Carlile 
of Berriew, the Independent Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation from 2001-
2011 and a private sector consultant on terrorism issues. He said that the site 
proposed at VTG for the currently proposed HMLC presents a very real 
terrorism risk. He elaborated in his petition as follows: 
“11. Recent events in Israel/Palestine cannot be ignored. They have 
heightened the danger of action against Jewish interests in London, and 
may have diluted public support for placing the proposed centre so close 
to the Palace of Westminster. Recent terrorism arrests associated with 
the Stock Exchange provide an example of the changing landscape of 
London terrorism. 
…
16. In sum, in my judgement there is a real and present and serious 
prospect that the site would be regarded as iconic and tempting by both 
Islamist and right-wing extremists, given its proximity to the Palace of 
Westminster, the lack of any secure or meaningful perimeter, and its close 
proximity both to busy public highways and the river. I am astonished 
that this has not been seen to be a real problem, and believe the time has 
come when this warning should be taken seriously. Much has changed 
on the security risk front since the original planning application was 
determined.
17. I agree that we should be prepared to stand up to terrorism; but in 
this instance the doubly iconic nature of the site would render the risk 
disproportionate.
18. I do not wish to be the person saying ‘I told you so’ in the foreseeable 
event of a terrorism outrage or attempt.”
26 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
108. We accept the view of Lord Carlile and other petitioners that it is imperative 
to recognise that the threat of terrorism activity here and abroad is much 
greater than when the Planning Inspector wrote his report, and that much of 
what was said about security to the Inspector will now be out of date. 
109. Mr Katkowski was emphatic that, on the revival of the planning application, 
the Promoter would be bound to take into account any changes in security 
considerations, especially the increase in terrorism threats. Lord Carlile has 
prepared possible security amendments to this Bill set out in Appendix 8  to 
this Report. His draft amendments are important as, among other things, 
they will enable parliamentarians, who are extremely concerned about 
potential terrorist activities in or near to VTG, to see the security proposals 
(subject to removal from sight of matters which cannot be disclosed for 
reasons of confidentiality and sensitivity) before the Act is brought into 
force. We recommend  (Recommendation 3) that the Secretary of State 
gives serious consideration to those amendments or something similar. The 
Promoter has agreed  that will be done.
110. In addition, the Promoter has given the following undertaking:
(1) Following re-activation by the Secretary of State of the planning 
process in relation to the current planning application, the Promoter 
will make representations to the Secretary of State in relation to 
security considerations and in so doing will provide updated evidence 
on security considerations with the aim of ensuring that the Secretary 
of State continues to regard security considerations as a main issue in 
determination of the application.
(2) Before submitting to the Secretary of State any representations on 
security considerations, the Promoter will consult with the Corporate 
Officer of the House of Commons and the Corporate Officer of 
the House of Lords, Community Security Trust, the Metropolitan 
Police, the National Protective Security Authority and Westminster 
City Council, and will have regard to any comments they may make 
to the Promoter on security considerations and the Promoter will 
forward those comments to the Secretary of State when making any 
representations on security considerations.
(3) The Promoter will make available to MPs and to members of the House 
of Lords the Promoter’s representations to the Secretary of State in 
relation to security considerations, including the Promoter’s updated 
evidence, by depositing in the Library of the House of Commons and 
the Library of the House of Lords all such representations except any 
that are confidential or which should not be placed in the public domain 
for security reasons. 
(4) In this undertaking, the reference to the Secretary of State is a reference 
to the Minister of State determining the application under delegation 
from the Secretary of State and in accordance with the functional 
separation arrangements in place. 
111. The Promoter has also given an assurance  (Assurance 9) to the Committee 
that,  as soon as practicable following re-activation by the Secretary of State 
of the planning process in relation to the current planning application, 
the Promoter will publicise this and the anticipated timetable by notifying 
27 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
(a) MPs and members of the House of Lords, through the Library of the 
House of Commons and the Library of the House of Lords; (b) the London 
Historic Parks and Gardens Trust, the Thomas Fowell Buxton Society and 
the Thorney Island Society; and (c) organisations representing Holocaust 
survivors and refugees, and organisations engaged in Holocaust remembrance 
and education.  The Promoter will also take steps to notify local residents 
through the local press and other routes. The Promoter will similarly take 
steps to ensure that the availability of updated information relating to the 
planning application and submitted by the Promoter (including updated 
information relating to security, as far as such information can safely be 
placed in the public domain) is notified to the parties referred to in (b) and 
(c) above, and to local residents, once it has been published by the Secretary 
of State as part of the reactivated planning process.
 Operating costs and financial sustainability 
112. Some petitioners have asked for public reporting on the capital and operating 
costs of the currently proposed project and the financial sustainability of the 
body managing the project. This is outside the scope of the Committee as it 
relates to public policy and not the protection of private interests.
 Separate entities for managing the proposed HMLC and the 
remaining parts of VTG 
113. There is a reasonable concern that the interests of any Holocaust memorial 
and learning centre should not have preference over users of VTG. VTG 
is currently managed by The Royal Parks. Although it has been stated in 
a letter from the Promoter’s Parliamentary Agents that it is intended that 
an independent body will have responsibility for the proposed HMLC, no 
such body has yet been appointed or identified.  The Promoter has given the 
Committee an assurance  (Assurance 10) that the Promoter’s intention is for 
the remit of any permanent independent body that is established to operate 
and run the proposed HMLC to be limited to the area of VTG occupied and 
used by the proposed HMLC. 
114. The Thorney Island Society put forward a late proposed amendment that 
any body responsible for VTG shall consult in advance with local residents 
through the relevant local amenity societies with regard to any matter which 
may affect the free use of VTG as a garden open to the public. We do not 
have any evidence from The Royal Parks or the Department for Culture, 
Media and Sport (DCMS) (within whose remit The Royal Parks operates) 
on this issue and so do not consider we can amend the Bill to address it.  It 
is likely that it would be a matter to be addressed, if The Royal Parks or 
DCMS agreed, in the byelaws relating to VTG. 
 Restoration and Renewal of the Palace of Westminster 
115. Petitioners contended and gave evidence that the repair of Victoria Tower, 
R&R and the construction of the proposed HMLC would together make 
any use and enjoyment of VTG impossible in practice. This does not seem 
to have been raised before the Planning Inspector, although we were told by 
counsel for the Promoter that there are regular meetings between the project 
team for the proposed HMLC and also for R&R, at which information is 
shared and plans are co-ordinated.  We are not aware of anyone attending 
those meetings who is there to represent the interests of local residents who 
28 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
use and enjoy the Gardens. Moreover, no final decisions have yet been taken 
on the R&R programme and how it will go forward. 
116. Evidence was given to us that all the potential plans for R&R involve the use 
of a significant part of VTG as the main area for keeping all the equipment 
and for access to the Palace. The evidence was that a significant part of the 
area of VTG at its northern end would be affected.
117. There is plainly an important issue of the timing of the different projects as 
the evidence was that the main R&R works would not begin before 2029 at 
the earliest.   We do not have the expertise, evidence or resources to express 
a firm view about this issue, but we recommend  (Recommendation 4) 
that before the Promoter submits its representations (including updated 
evidence) to the Minister following re-activation of the planning process 
for the proposed HMLC detailed consideration is given by the Promoter as 
to how the construction and operation of the proposed HMLC and R&R 
will interact with each other, and accommodate the use of VTG by nearby 
residents and their children.
118. Finally, it is to be noted that the issue of access to, and use of, the proposed 
HMLC will remain even after the completion of the proposed HMLC if 
R&R will result in a significant part of the northern part of VTG being used 
for the storage of materials and other purposes associated with R&R. We 
heard evidence that, on one scenario, the use of the northern part of VTG 
for R&R might continue for as long as 30 years. 
 General 
119. All of the above assurances  and the  undertaking  given by the Promoter 
are understandably intended to supplement any steps required to be taken 
under conditions attached to any planning permission for the proposed 
HMLC rather than to replace them.  This means that, should there be any 
conflict between any assurance or undertaking and the requirements of any 
such planning condition, the requirements of the planning condition will 
take precedence. 
120. The Committee requested the Promoter to agree that all assurances  and the 
undertaking  in relation to the proposed HMLC will also apply to any other 
Holocaust memorial and learning centre in VTG. The Promoter was not 
willing to agree. Nor was the Promoter willing to agree a narrower request 
that all assurances and the undertaking in relation to the proposed HMLC 
will also apply to any other Holocaust memorial and learning centre in VTG 
unless there are planning or other practical difficulties in implementing 
them in the new scheme. The most that the Promoter is willing to agree 
is that the Promoter gives an assurance  (Assurance 11) to the Committee 
that, in the event the currently proposed scheme is not granted planning 
consent, in formulating any replacement proposal brought forward in place 
of the currently proposed scheme, the Promoter will, to the extent relevant 
to the replacement proposal, give careful attention to the issues highlighted 
by the Committee as reflected in the assurances and the undertaking given.
29 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 1:  IMAGE OF THE PROPOSED HMLC

30 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 2:  PLAN OF VTG AFTER CONSTRUCTION

31 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 3:  TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (INQUIRIES 
PROCEDURE) (ENGLAND) RULES 2000
Rule 19 
Procedure following quashing of decision 
19 (1) Where a decision of the Secretary of State on an application or appeal in 
respect of which an inquiry has been held is quashed in proceedings before any 
court, the Secretary of State—
(a) shall send to the persons entitled to appear at the inquiry who appeared 
at it a written statement of the matters with respect to which further 
representations are invited for the purposes of his further consideration 
of the application or appeal;
(b) shall afford to those persons the opportunity of making written 
representations to him in respect of those matters or of asking for the 
re-opening of the inquiry; and
(c) may, as he thinks fit, cause the inquiry to be re-opened (whether by the 
same or a different inspector) … 
32 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 4:  PETITIONERS
(1) Lord Carlile of Berriew 
(2) Lord Hamilton of Epsom 
(3) Lord Strathcarron 
(4) Lord Griffiths of Burry Port 
(5) Lord Russell of Liverpool 
(6) Lord Sassoon 
(7) Lord Hodgson of Astley Abbotts 
(8) Baroness Finlay of Llandaff 
(9) Lord Inglewood 
(10) Viscount Eccles 
(11) Baroness Deech and Holocaust survivors  
(12) London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust 
(13) Buxton Family and the Thomas Fowell Buxton Society 
(14) Lord Strathclyde and other members of the House of Lords 
(15) Thorney Island Society and residents of Westminster 
(16) Jardentome Ltd 
(17) Sir Peter Bottomley and Baroness Bottomley of Nettlestone 
(18) Lord Blencathra 
33 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 5:  BRIEF SUMMARY OF ASSURANCES, 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND AN UNDERTAKING
Paragraph numbers in parenthesis refer to paragraphs of this Report. 
 The Playground and access
 Assurance 1 (paragraph 82) 
We sought an assurance that during construction interference with the playground 
is kept to a minimum. The Promoter has responded with an assurance  to the 
Committee that, during construction of the proposed HMLC, closures of and 
other interference with the children’s playground at the south end of VTG will 
be kept to a minimum by the Promoter and its contractors adopting the following 
measures:
(a) throughout the construction of the proposed HMLC the playground 
will be kept open at all times when it is practicable and safe to do so;
(b) during the construction phase, reasonable care will be taken to avoid 
any mud or dust reaching the playground from the construction site 
and for most of that phase the main construction work will take place 
behind hoardings;
(c) whenever the playground is open during the construction phase, level 
access will be maintained from the gate at the northern end of VTG 
(via the riverside path) as well as access via the steps at the south of 
VTG on the western end of Lambeth Bridge; and
(d) during the construction phase the Promoter will require contractors to 
share with users of VTG and the local community information about 
the progress of construction, with planned closures of the playground 
notified to them in advance. 
 Assurance 2 (paragraph 83)
Although it is the Promoter’s intention that step-free access will be maintained 
from the gate at the northern end of VTG (via the riverside path), this is a very 
lengthy route for those coming from the south.  In relation to this point the 
Promoter has given to the Committee an assurance  that:
(a) although closure of the southern gate from Millbank into VTG will be 
required at some points during the construction stage for the proposed 
HMLC, the Promoter will seek to maintain safe access through that 
gate for as much time during construction as possible; and 
(b) after the construction period the Promoter has no intention of closing 
any of the existing gates providing access to VTG.  Visitors to the 
playground will therefore be able to enter VTG at the step-free southern 
gate from Millbank, directly into the playground. 
 Assurance 3 (paragraph 84)
So far as concerns the use of VTG generally for normal recreational use during 
the construction period, the Promoter has given the Committee an assurance  
that during construction of the proposed HMLC the Promoter will ensure, so far 
as reasonably practicable and health and safety considerations allow, but excepting 
factors beyond the Promoter’s control (such as adverse weather conditions), that 
restrictions on access by the public to VTG will be kept to a minimum and that, 
34 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
in particular, the Promoter will keep a footpath along the River Thames of at least 
1.5 metres in width open whenever reasonably practicable and where The Royal 
Parks (responsible for managing VTG) are content. The Promoter will require 
any contractor appointed to construct the proposed HMLC to adhere to this 
assurance.
 Assurance 4 (paragraph 85) 
The Promoter has given to the Committee an assurance  that a review will be 
carried out with the design team of the arrangements proposed for the southern 
end of VTG, with a view to ensuring an appropriate separation of the playground 
from other visitors to VTG, including visitors to the proposed HMLC. Measures 
to be considered during that review will include the following:
(a) very clear delineation of the boundaries of the playground, using the 
Spicer Memorial, hedges and other planting to make the playground 
space clearly separate from the area around the proposed HMLC;
(b) ensuring that visitors to the proposed HMLC have no need to pass 
through the playground; and
(c) ensuring that visitors to VTG, whether visiting the proposed HMLC 
or not, have no need to pass through the playground in order to access 
either the public toilets or the refreshment kiosk. 
 Assurance 5 (paragraph 85) 
The Promoter has given an assurance  to the Committee that, after the construction 
period, there is no intention of the proposed HMLC requiring closure of any of 
the existing gates providing access to VTG, and so visitors to the playground will 
be able to enter VTG at the step-free southern gate from Millbank, directly into 
the playground; and similarly, visitors to VTG who are not intending to use the 
playground or to visit the proposed HMLC will be free to enter via any of the 
gates from Millbank, as now.
 Assurance 6 (paragraph 86) 
The Promoter has given an assurance  to the Committee that the Promoter has no 
intention to request or arrange for security checks to be carried out on visitors to 
VTG who do not intend to enter the proposed HMLC and that it has no intention 
to request or arrange for access by members of the public to other areas of VTG to 
be restricted on security grounds.
 The Kiosk 
 Recommendation 1 (paragraph 88) 
The proposed new kiosk immediately adjacent to the playground raises child safety 
issues. Unless there is some overriding necessity for the proposed new kiosk, we 
recommend  that the Secretary of State should remove it from the present plans.
 Siting of structures for a Holocaust memorial and learning centre within 
VTG 
 Assurance 7 (paragraph 89) 
On this issue the Promoter was willing to give the following assurance  to the 
Committee: 
35 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
(1) Although clause 2 of the Bill applies to the whole of VTG, the 
Promoter will only site the permanent buildings and other permanent 
structures comprising a Holocaust memorial and learning centre and 
its ancillary facilities (the permanent elements) on, under and over the 
land (a) permitted by any planning permission that is granted by the 
Secretary of State shown coloured blue and edged in blue on the plan 
in Appendix 6; or (b) permitted by any planning permission for an 
extended, altered, modified or replacement scheme for a Holocaust 
memorial and learning centre.
(2) In paragraph (1)(b), “planning permission” means a planning 
permission granted under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, 
a planning permission changed in accordance with section 96A of 
that Act, or a planning permission modified by a further planning 
permission granted under section 73 or 73A of that Act (in relation 
to which certain consultation and publicity obligations on the local 
planning authority arise).
(3) The Promoter will require any contractor appointed to construct a 
Holocaust memorial and learning centre to adhere to the assurance 
given in paragraph (1).
 The setting of the Buxton Memorial and other memorials 
 Assurance 8 (paragraph 102) 
The Promoter has given the Committee an assurance  that  detailed consideration 
will be given to the question of how easily visitors to the proposed HMLC, and to 
VTG generally, will be able to pass by and view the Buxton Memorial, including 
by considering the location, nature, specification and design of paths, fencing and 
other boundary treatments.
 Closure dates 
 Recommendation 2 (paragraph 104) 
We recommend  that a limit on the amount of time that VTG can be closed to 
the public in any one year in consequence of events associated with the proposed 
HMLC, which is probably best addressed in byelaws applicable to VTG, be 
taken forward by The Royal Parks, as that is and will be the body responsible for 
maintenance of those parts of VTG outside the perimeter of the proposed HMLC.
 Security 
 Recommendation 3 (paragraph 109) 
We recommend  that the Secretary of State gives serious consideration to the 
proposed security amendments to the Bill prepared by Lord Carlile, which are set 
out in Appendix 8 to this Report or something similar. The Promoter has agreed 
that will be done.
 Undertaking (paragraph 110) 
In addition, the Promoter has given the following undertaking: 
(1) Following re-activation by the Secretary of State of the planning 
process in relation to the current planning application, the Promoter 
will make representations to the Secretary of State in relation to 
36 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
security considerations and in so doing will provide updated evidence 
on security considerations with the aim of ensuring that the Secretary 
of State continues to regard security considerations as a main issue in 
determination of the application.
(2) Before submitting to the Secretary of State any representations on 
security considerations, the Promoter will consult with the Corporate 
Officer of the House of Commons and the Corporate Officer of the 
House of Lords, Community Security Trust, the Metropolitan Police, 
the National Protective Security Authority and Westminster City 
Council, and will have regard to any comments they may make to the 
Promoter on security considerations. The Promoter will forward those 
comments to the Secretary of State when making any representations 
on security considerations.
(3) The Promoter will make available to MPs and to members of the House 
of Lords the Promoter’s representations to the Secretary of State in 
relation to security considerations, including the Promoter’s updated 
evidence, by depositing in the Library of the House of Commons and 
the Library of the House of Lords all such representations except any 
that are confidential or which should not be placed in the public domain 
for security reasons. 
(4) In this undertaking, the reference to the Secretary of State is a reference 
to the Minister of State determining the application under delegation 
from the Secretary of State and in accordance with the functional 
separation arrangements in place.
 Assurance 9 (paragraph 111) 
The Promoter has also given an assurance  to the Committee that,  as soon 
as practicable following re-activation by the Secretary of State of the planning 
process in relation to the current planning application, the Promoter will publicise 
this and the anticipated timetable by notifying (a) MPs and members of the House 
of Lords, through the Library of the House of Commons and the Library of the 
House of Lords; (b) the London Historic Parks and Gardens Trust, the Thomas 
Fowell Buxton Society and the Thorney Island Society; and (c) organisations 
representing Holocaust survivors and refugees, and organisations engaged in 
Holocaust remembrance and education.  The Promoter will also take steps to 
notify local residents through the local press and other routes. The Promoter will 
similarly take steps to ensure that the availability of updated information relating 
to the planning application and submitted by the Promoter (including updated 
information relating to security, as far as such information can safely be placed in 
the public domain) is notified to the parties referred to in (b) and (c) above, and to 
local residents, once it has been published by the Secretary of State as part of the 
reactivated planning process.
 Separate entities for managing the proposed HMLC and the remaining 
parts of VTG 
 Assurance 10 (paragraph 113) 
The Promoter has given the Committee an assurance  that the Promoter’s 
intention is for the remit of any permanent independent body that is established to 
operate and run the proposed HMLC to be limited to the area of VTG occupied 
and used by the proposed HMLC. 
37 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
 Restoration and Renewal of the Palace of Westminster 
 Recommendation 4 (paragraph 117) 
We recommend  that before the Promoter submits its representations (including 
updated evidence) to the Minister following re-activation of the planning process 
for the proposed HMLC detailed consideration is given by the Promoter as to how 
the construction and operation of the proposed HMLC and R&R will interact 
with each other, and accommodate the use of VTG by nearby residents and their 
children.
 General (paragraph 119) 
All of the above assurances  and the undertaking  given by the Promoter are 
intended to supplement any steps required to be taken under conditions attached 
to any planning permission for the proposed HMLC rather than to replace them; 
and therefore should there be any conflict between any assurance or undertaking 
and the requirements of any such planning condition, the requirements of the 
planning condition will take precedence.
 Assurance 11 (paragraph 120) 
The Committee requested the Promoter to agree that all assurances and the 
undertaking in relation to the proposed HMLC will also apply to any other 
Holocaust memorial and learning centre in VTG. The Promoter was not willing to 
agree. Nor was the Promoter willing to agree a narrower request that all assurances 
and the undertaking in relation to the proposed HMLC will also apply to any 
other Holocaust memorial and learning centre in VTG unless there are planning 
or other practical difficulties in implementing them in the new scheme. The most 
that the Promoter is willing to agree is that the Promoter gives an assurance  to 
the Committee that, in the event the currently proposed scheme is not granted 
planning consent, in formulating any replacement proposal brought forward in 
place of the currently proposed scheme, the Promoter will, to the extent relevant 
to the replacement proposal, give careful attention to the issues highlighted by the 
Committee as reflected in the assurances and the undertaking given.
38 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 6:  PLAN REFERENCED IN ASSURANCE 7
SMITH SQUARE
HORSEFERRY ROAD
Plant building
Cafe to replace existing with similar footprint Main Holocaust Memorial building Basement footprint (including pile foundations)ABINGDON STREET
GREAT COLLEGE STREET
ABINGDON STREET GARDENSLITTLE COLLEGE STREET
GREAT PETER STREET
DEAN STANLEY STREET
MILLBANK

39 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 7:  RIGHT TO BE HEARD RESTRICTIONS
 Restrictions on the right to be heard
1. Generally speaking, a person who is petitioning against a private or hybrid 
bill has a right to be heard if they prove that their property or interests are 
directly and specially affected by the bill: Erskine May (25th edition, 2019), 
paragraph 44.5.
2. In addition, the Private Business Standing Orders of the House specify 
various circumstances in which a petitioner has the right to have their 
petition considered (Standing Orders 115, 117A, 119 and 120) and other 
cases where the committee has a discretion to consider a petition (Standing 
Orders 117 and 118).
3. In the present case the only Standing Orders that are relevant are 117(2) 
and 118. Standing Order 117(2) confers a discretion on the Committee to 
consider the petition of a society, association or other body, which sufficiently 
represents amenity, educational, travel or recreational interests, alleging that 
the interests they represent will be adversely affected to a material extent 
by the provisions contained in the bill.  Standing Order 118 confers on the 
Committee a discretion to consider petitions against the bill or any provisions 
of it by inhabitants of the area. 
4. If the petitioner cannot prove that they have a right to be heard and they do 
not satisfy one or more of the grounds in the Standing Orders, then they do 
not have standing to speak in support of their petition.
 Restrictions on the arguments that can be advanced by those who have a 
right to be heard 
5. The only role of the select committee in the case of a hybrid bill is to ensure 
appropriate protection of “private” interests affected by the bill. The House 
considers the impact on the public and wider public issues in the usual stages 
of the legislative process – committee, report and third reading.
6. The Committee’s function is not to conduct a roving investigation into 
general merits. As mentioned above, objections based on public policy are 
reserved for subsequent stages of the legislative process.
7. The Committee has no power, in the absence of express authority from the 
House, to hear any evidence other than that tendered by any party entitled 
to be heard: Standing Order 124.  It cannot, therefore, call expert or other 
evidence on its own initiative.
8. It is a long-standing convention that the Committee cannot consider any 
amendments that are destructive of the “principle” of the Bill. In the present 
case, for the principle of the Bill reference must be made to clauses 1 and 2.
9. The Committee cannot make an amendment that is outside the scope of the 
Bill. Where a bill has one or two purposes, only amendments relating to those 
purposes, or touching on matters closely connected with them, are relevant. 
10. The Committee may not amend the Bill in a way that would require an 
additional provision (Standing Order 73(2)). An additional provision is an 
amendment which extends the scope of a bill in such a way as to bring into 
play the application of Private Business Standing Orders (that is, notices, 
deposits etc.) in respect of that amendment.
40 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 8:  LORD CARLILE’S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS 
RELATED TO SECURITY 
Lord Carlile submitted the following amendments (with a caveat that they are 
subject to later discussion with the Public Bill Office). 
 After Clause 2 
After Clause 2, insert the following new Clause – 
(1) Within three months of the passing of this Act the Secretary of State 
will provide a report to both Houses of Parliament setting out the 
effects arising from the construction, presence and use of the Holocaust 
Memorial and Learning Centre on the chosen site. Such report shall 
include:
(a) A list of those bodies and individuals consulted (subject to 
redaction of names where necessitated by national security);
(b) A summary of the advice provided by each body and individual 
consulted;
(c) A full description with visual depictions of all road and traffic 
changes, at and near to the chosen site, proposed to be made 
during construction and following completion of the Memorial 
and Learning Centre;
(d) Proposals for the continuing assessment of the security of the site 
and nearby buildings.
(e) Such other security information as the Secretary of State considers 
to be relevant. 
(2) The Secretary of State may delegate the preparation of the report 
referred to in subsection 1 of this section to the Independent Reviewer 
of Terrorism Legislation.
(3) Prior to this Act coming into force the Secretary of State shall obtain a 
resolution from both Houses of Parliament approving the bringing of 
the Act into force following the report referred to in this section.
 Clause 3 
Clause 3, page 1, line 21, after “beginning” leave out “with the day on which this 
Act is passed” and insert “with the day on which both resolutions described in 
section 3 of this Act have been passed”.
41 HOLOCAUST M EMORIAL B ILL
APPENDI x 9:  LIST OF MEMBERS AND DECLARATIONS OF 
INTERESTS
Members 
Lord Etherton (Chair) 
Lord Faulkner of Worcester 
Lord Hope of Craighead 
Lord Jamieson 
Baroness Scott of Needham Market  
Declarations of interest 
Lord Etherton 
No relevant interests declared 
Lord Faulkner of Worcester 
Lord Faulkner is a resident in a block of flats in Page Street, which was 
cited by a petitioner as a reason to petition. 
Lord Hope of Craighead 
No relevant interests declared 
Lord Jamieson 
No relevant interests declared 
Baroness Scott of Needham Market 
No relevant interests declared 
A full list of members’ interests can be found in the Register of Lords’ Interests: 
http://members.parliament.uk/members/lords/interests/register-of-lords-interests  
HOUSE OF LORDS
  Holocaust Memorial Bill Select Committee
  Special Report of Session 2024–25
Holocaust Memorial 
Bill
HL Paper 68Available online at https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/735
© Parliamentary Copyright House of Lords 2025
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is 
published at www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright



The Rt Hon Baroness Jacqui Smith  
Minister for Skills  
Department for Education Sanctuary Buildings 20 Great Smith Street London SW1P 3BT  
tel: 0370 000 2288  www.education.gov.uk/contactus/dfe   
  
 
 
  
 
The Baroness Whitaker  
 
By email: contactholmember@parliament.uk  
 
 
 
26 November 2024  
 
Dear  Janet , 
 
Further to the Home Education Registration and Support Bill second reading debate 
on 15th November, I’d like to thank you for your questions and write to you to provide 
more information on support for children and families in the Gypsy, Roma, and 
Traveller (GRT) Community, particularly those who are home educating.  
 
Every child, regardless of their background or family circumstances, deserves the 
opportunity to progress and succeed.   We recognise the issues faced by GRT 
children and young people – and how education can make a positive difference.  
 
As mentioned during the debate, my department’s  GRT stakeholder group continues 
to inform the department’s thinking, policy and delivery so that GRT children and 
young people can fully reap the benefits of our Opportunity Mission reforms, and the 
barriers they face are addressed.  
 
Out of school learning was discussed at the 12th July GRT stakeholder group 
meeting and group members were invited to submit any related questions or 
concerns they had on this subject to the secretariat to be passed onto relevant 
teams for consideration and a response.  
 
Engaging with the D epartment for Education  to ensure wider policies contribute to 
improving attainment for GRT children and young people is a key area of interest for 
the group and ensuring the best possible education for the many GRT who do not 
attend school can lead to better outcomes across the se communities.  
 
On your question about support for Open Doors Education and Training’s distance 
learning scheme, this scheme was previously funded by the Department for Levelling 
Up, Housing and Communities  (DLUHC)  (now the Ministry of Housing, Communities 
and Local Government). As part of a wider package of post -pandemic support, in 
2021/22 DLUHC partnered with Bradford, Central Bedfordshire, Essex, Hillingdon, 
and Surrey local authorities and Open Doors Education and Training organisation to 
deliver the £1.4m programme . This programme provided a wide range of targeted 
support for pre -school children, pupils in primary school and those transitioning to 
secondary school thereby reducing drop -out rates, supporting young people not in 
education, employment or training.  
This programme also helped adults needing literacy support and improved teachers’ 
cultural understanding and knowledge of GRT communities.  
 
Over 600 GRT children and young people, 150 schools, over 100 staff members and 
local authorities were supported and reached during the lifespan of the programme. 
It is now a matter for the local authorities to determine how they will mainstream the 
lesson s learnt, provide sustainable support to the GRT community in their areas and 
share knowledge with other local authorities.  
 
While the Department for Education currently has no plans to enter a new funding 
partnership with Open Doors Education and Training, we are committed to ensuring 
that all children and young people have access to a high standard of education and 
resources t o support this. The Department funds Oak National Academy which gives 
children and families access to free and adaptable high -quality digital curriculum 
resources to support improved pupil outcomes and a remote education contingency.  
 
Parents and pupils are free to use Oak's resources outside of the classroom. The 
level of supervision needed has been designed to be minimal (dependant on the 
individual child), and each lesson will have a pre -recorded video that guides children 
and parent s through each section step -by-step, making it a useful resource for all 
home educated children including those in the GRT community.  
 
As I mentioned in the debate, the government has committed to introducing a duty 
on local authorities to support home educating children (should their parents request 
it) as part of the Children Not in School proposals to be introduced in the future 
Childr en’s Wellbeing Bill. Where currently no such duty exists, this will ensure that 
more children benefit from support and advice to promote their education.  
 
Thank you for raising this matter; and I look forward to continuing to discuss how the 
government’s Children Not in School proposals can benefit the GRT community 
following introduction of the Children’s Wellbeing Bill. A copy of this letter will be 
deposi ted in the House Library.  
 
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
The Rt Hon Baroness Jacqui Smith  
Minister for Skills



House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Before  Clause  1 
LORD  TRUE 
_ Before  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Purpose 
The purpose  of this Act is to end the connection  between  the possession  of a 
hereditary  peerage  and obtaining  membership  of the House  of Lords. ” 
Clause  1 
THE  EARL  OF DEVON 
_ Clause  1, page  1, line 1, at end insert— 
“(A1) In section  1 of the House  of Lords  Act 1999  (exclusion  of hereditary  peers),  at end 
insert  “, except  for a child  or grandchild  of the Sovereign”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  invites  the House  to consider  the role of the hereditary  principle  within 
Parliament  and our constitution  in the context  of membership  of the House  of Lords. 
59/1 HL Bill 49—Running  List 31 January 
LORD  STRATHCLYDE 
LORD  NORTHBROOK 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ Clause  1, page  1, line 1, at end insert— 
“(A1) In section  1 of the House  of Lords  Act 1999  (exclusion  of hereditary  peers),  at end 
insert  “except  for the Earl Marshal  and the Lord  Great  Chamberlain”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  retain  the Earl Marshal  and the Lord  Great  Chamberlain  as members  of 
the House  of Lords  with the right  to sit and vote. 
LORD  LUCAS 
_ Leave  out Clause  1 and insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“By-elections  and life peerages  for hereditary  peer  vacancies 
(1) Section  2 of the House  of Lords  Act 1999  (exception  to exclusion  of hereditary 
peers  from  membership  of House  of Lords)  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (2), after  “time”  insert  “no more  than”. 
(3) For subsection  (4), substitute— 
“(4) In any case where  a person  excepted  from  section  1 dies or ceases  to be a 
member  of the House  of Lords,  an election  must  be held  in which  anyone 
on the register  of electors  anywhere  in the United  Kingdom  may  stand, 
and in which  all members  of the House  of Lords  may  vote. 
(4A) Any  person  selected  as a result  of an election  held  under  subsection  (4) 
must  be recommended  by the Prime  Minister  for a life peerage. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to probe  whether  hereditary  peer vacancies  could  be filled  by members  of 
the public  who would  be elected  by members  of the House  and recommended  to the Prime  Minister 
for a life peerage. 
LORD  LUCAS 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Lucas  to Leave  out Clause  1 
_ In subsection  (3), inserted  subsection  (4), after  “stand”  insert  “if they  have  been 
recommended  in accordance  with  procedures  to be determined  by the House  of Lords 
by a member  of the Council  of the Nations  and the Regions” House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 2 
LORD  TRUE 
BARONESS  FINN 
_ Leave  out Clause  1 and insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Exclusion  of remaining  hereditary  peers 
(1) Section  2 of the House  of Lords  Act 1999  (exception  from  section  1) is amended 
as follows. 
(2) For subsection  (2) substitute— 
“(2) No more  than  89 people  at any one time  shall  be excepted  from  section  1.” 
(3) For subsection  (4) substitute— 
“(4) Any  vacancy  resulting  from  the death,  retirement,  resignation  or expulsion 
of an excepted  person  under  subsection  (2) after  the day on which  the 
House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Act 2024  comes  into force  is not to be 
filled  by further  exception. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The purpose  of the amendment  is to prevent  any more  hereditary  peers  coming  to the House  of 
Lords  by virtue  of the 1999  Act in future.  However,  it allows  peers  who are already  serving  the 
House  to remain  as members  for life in the same  way as is allowed  to all other  Lords  Temporal. 
After  Clause  1 
LORD  NEWBY 
LORD  WALLACE  OF SALTAIRE 
LORD  STRATHCLYDE 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Duty  to take  forward  proposals  for democratic  mandate  for House  of Lords 
(1) It is the duty  of the Secretary  of State  to take forward  proposals  to secure  a 
democratic  mandate  for the House  of Lords. 
(2) In pursuance  of the duty  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must  carry 
out the steps  set out in subsections  (3), (4), (5) and (6). 
(3) Within  12 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  each  House  of Parliament  a consultation  paper  on methods  for 
introducing  directly  elected  members  in the House  of Lords. 
(4) After  laying  the consultation  paper  under  subsection  (3), the Secretary  of State 
must  seek  the views  on the matters  covered  by that paper  of— 
(a) each  party  and group  in the House  of Lords, 
(b) each  political  party  represented  in the House  of Commons, 
(c) the Scottish  Government, 
(d) the Welsh  Government, 
(e) the Northern  Ireland  Executive, 3 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
(f) local  authorities  in the United  Kingdom, 
(g) representative  organisations  for local  authorities  in the United  Kingdom, 
and 
(h) such  other  persons  and bodies  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
appropriate. 
(5) Within  16 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  each  House  of Parliament  a report  on responses  to the consultation. 
(6) Within  18 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  each  House  of Parliament  a draft  Bill containing  legislative 
proposals  on the matter  mentioned  in subsection  (3).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  imposes  a duty  on Ministers  to take forward  proposals  to secure  a democratic 
mandate  for the House  of Lords  through  introduction  of directly  elected  members. 
LORD  NEWBY 
LORD  WALLACE  OF SALTAIRE 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Life peerages  not to be conferred  against  recommendation  of the House  of Lords 
Appointments  Commission 
(1) The Life Peerages  Act 1958  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  1 (power  to confer  life peerages),  after  subsection  (1) insert— 
“(1A) The power  under  subsection  (1) may  not be exercised  in relation  to a person 
if the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  has written  to the Prime 
Minister  to recommend  that a peerage  should  not be conferred  on that 
person. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  would  prevent  a life peerage  being  conferred  on a person  if the House  of Lords 
Appointments  Commission  has recommended  against  the appointment. 
LORD  HARRIES  OF PENTREGARTH 
BARONESS  GARDEN  OF FROGNAL 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“15 year  terms  for life peers 
(1) A member  of the House  of Lords  who  has sat in the House  by virtue  of a life 
peerage  for 15 years  or more  ceases  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the 
end of that Session  of Parliament,  subject  to subsection  (2). 
(2) A member  of the House  of Lords  who  has sat in the House  by virtue  of a life 
peerage  for 15 years  or more  may  apply  to the House  of Lords  Appointments 
Commission  for reappointment  for a further  five or more  years  up to a maximum House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 4 
of 15 years,  but no member  may  sit in the House  of Lords  by virtue  of a life peerage 
for more  than  30 years  in total. ” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Harries  of Pentregarth  to After  Clause  1 
_ In subsection  (2) at beginning  insert  “Until  the conclusion  of the Parliament  in which  this 
Act is passed  but not beyond,” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Harries  of Pentregarth  to After  Clause  1 
_ In subsection  (2) leave  out from  “five”  to end and insert  “years” 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Retirement  from  the House  of Lords  at 80 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  reaches  the age of 80 during  a Session  of 
Parliament  ceases  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the end of that Session. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for a retirement  age in ascending  order.  According  to 
analysis  of Library  figures,  this could  remove  327 peers  by 2029. 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Retirement  from  the House  of Lords  at 85 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  reaches  the age of 85 during  a Session  of 
Parliament  ceases  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the end of that Session. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for a retirement  age in ascending  order.  According  to 
analysis  of Library  figures,  this could  remove  185 peers  by 2029. 5 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Retirement  from  the House  of Lords  at 90 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  reaches  the age of 90 during  a Session  of 
Parliament  ceases  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the end of that Session. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for a retirement  age in ascending  order.  According  to 
analysis  of Library  figures,  this could  remove  78 peers  by 2029. 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Attendance  requirement  of 20% 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  attended  fewer  than  20% of possible  sittings 
in the 2019–2024  Parliament  must  retire  from  the House  of Lords  within  two 
months  of the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for requiring  peers  who have made  little  recent 
contribution  to the work  of the House  to retire.  According  to analysis  of Library  figures,  requiring 
a minimum  attendance  of 20%  of sittings  between  2019  and 2024  could  remove  154 peers. 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Attendance  requirement  of 15% 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  attended  fewer  than  15% of possible  sittings 
in the 2019–2024  Parliament  must  retire  from  the House  of Lords  within  two 
months  of the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for requiring  peers  who have made  little  recent 
contribution  to the work  of the House  to retire.  According  to analysis  of Library  figures,  requiring 
a minimum  attendance  of 15%  of sittings  between  2019  and 2024  could  remove  118 peers. House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 6 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Attendance  requirement  of 10% 
A member  of the House  of Lords  who  attended  fewer  than  10% of possible  sittings 
in the 2019–2024  Parliament  must  retire  from  the House  of Lords  within  two 
months  of the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
Alongside  other  amendments  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra,  this amendment  has been tabled  to 
permit  the House  to vote on three  options  for requiring  peers  who have made  little  recent 
contribution  to the work  of the House  to retire.  According  to analysis  of Library  figures,  requiring 
a minimum  attendance  of 10%  of sittings  between  2019  and 2024  could  remove  70 peers. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  “who”  insert  “, in the absence  of good  reason  or other  special  circumstances  or 
having  been  granted  leave  of absence,” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ Leave  out “10%”  and insert  “1%” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  “Parliament”  insert  “for which  that peer  was eligible  to attend” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ At end insert— 
“(2) Subject  to subsection  (3) a member  of the House  of Lords  who  without  good  cause 
attends  fewer  than  10% of the sittings  of a Parliament  after  the Parliament  in which 
this Act is passed  for which  that peer  was qualified  to attend  must  retire  at the 
conclusion  of that period. 
(3) Subsection  (2) does  not apply  if the House  of Lords  resolves  that there  was good 
cause  for that peer’s  non-attendance. ” 7 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“House  of Lords  participation  requirement 
(1) Standing  Orders  may  make  provision  for a member  to cease  to be a member  of 
the House  of Lords  if they  have  not met a reasonable  level  of participation  based 
on requirements  other  than  attendance. 
(2) A peer  who  does  not meet  the level  of participation  required  may  be notified  and 
given  six months  to do so before  the provision  set out in subsection  (1) takes 
effect. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to ensure  that members  who attend  but then say or do little or nothing 
are removed  from the House.  The intention  would  be for the Procedure  Committee  to devise  criteria 
which  would  measure  the participation  of peers. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ In subsection  (1) after  “if” insert  “, not having  been  granted  leave  of absence  and in the 
absence  of other  good  reason,” 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Removal  of peers  with  a criminal  conviction 
Any  peer  convicted  of a criminal  offence  on indictment  ceases  to be a member  of 
the House  of Lords  within  seven  days  of the conviction,  or the loss of appeal  if 
the peer  appeals  the conviction. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  intends  to ensure  that peers  who have committed  a serious  offence  are removed 
from  the House,  using  an indictable  offence  to provide  a clear  threshold. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  “indictment”  insert  “and  who  has received  an immediate  custodial  sentence  or a 
suspended  sentence  of more  than  six months” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Blencathra  to After  Clause  1 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 8 
_ Leave  out “conviction”  and insert  “sentence  being  handed  down” 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
Revised  version  of the amendment  printed  on 13 December  2024 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Legislating  for changes  to the composition  of the House  of Lords 
(1) Where  a resolution  of the House  of Lords  establishes  or changes— 
(a) the age at which  peers  must  retire, 
(b) a minimum  attendance  requirement, 
(c) a participation  requirement,  or 
(d) a type  of criminal  conviction  which  results  in expulsion  from  the House, 
a relevant  Minister  must,  within  12 months,  take the action  set out in subsection 
(2). 
(2) Where  a resolution  is passed  by the House  of Lords  in accordance  with  subsection 
(1) (a “relevant  resolution”),  a relevant  Minister  must,  by regulations  made  by 
statutory  instrument,  amend  this Act in order  to translate  the relevant  resolution 
into statute. 
(3) The regulations  must  use the wording  of the relevant  resolution,  without  any 
alteration. 
(4) The relevant  Ministers  are the Leader  of the House  of Lords  and the Leader  of the 
House  of Commons,  by whatever  titles  they  are then  known. 
(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be made 
unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution 
of, each  House  of Parliament ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to establish  changes  regarding  the composition  of the House  in law, while 
allowing  the House  flexibility  to change  them. 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Lords  Spiritual 
(1) A maximum  of five Church  of England  bishops  may  sit in the House  of Lords. 
(2) Of those  five bishops,  one must  be the Archbishop  of Canterbury,  one must  be 
the Archbishop  of York,  and the remaining  three  must  be nominated  by the Synod 
of the Church  of England. 
(3) No bishop  may  sit in the House  of Lords  beyond  the end of the Parliamentary 
Session  in which  they  turn  70 years  old.” 9 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  reduces  the number  of bishops  sitting  in the House  of Lords  from  26 to five. 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
Revised  version  of the amendment  printed  on 17 December  2024 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Lords  Spiritual  and faith  representatives 
(1) A maximum  of five Church  of England  bishops  may  sit in the House  of Lords. 
(2) Of those  five bishops,  one must  be the Archbishop  of Canterbury,  one must  be 
the Archbishop  of York,  and the remaining  three  must  be nominated  by the Synod 
of the Church  of England. 
(3) There  must  be five other  faith  representatives  appointed  as members  of the House 
of Lords,  namely— 
(a) a representative  of the Roman  Catholic  Church, 
(b) a representative  of the Methodist  Church, 
(c) a person  nominated  by the Chief  Rabbi, 
(d) a Muslim  cleric  nominated  by the Home  Office,  and 
(e) a person  nominated  by the Free  Churches  Group. 
(4) No person  who  is a member  of the House  of Lords  by virtue  of this section  may 
sit in the House  of Lords  beyond  the end of the Parliamentary  Session  in which 
they  turn  70 years  old. 
(5) If the House  of Lords  agrees  a resolution  to change  the numbers  or denominations 
set out in this section,  a relevant  Minister  must,  within  12 months,  take the action 
set out in subsection  (6). 
(6) Where  a resolution  is passed  by the House  of Lords  in accordance  with  subsection 
(5) (a “relevant  resolution”),  a relevant  Minister  must,  by regulations  made  by 
statutory  instrument,  amend  subsections  (1) to (3) of this section  accordingly. 
(7) The regulations  must  use the wording  of the relevant  resolution,  without  any 
alteration. 
(8) The relevant  Ministers  are the Leader  of the House  of Lords  and the Leader  of the 
House  of Commons,  by whatever  titles  they  are then  known. 
(9) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be made 
unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution 
of, each  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  reduces  the number  of bishops  sitting  in the House  of Lords  and requires  the 
inclusion  of other  faith representatives. House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 10 
LORD  LUCAS 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
LORD  TRUE 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Rights  of life peers  to sit in the House  of Lords 
(1) Section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958  (power  to confer  life peerages)  is amended 
as follows. 
(2) At the end of subsection  (1) insert  “, and,  as the case may  be, the incidents  specified 
in subsection  (2A)  of this section”. 
(3) Omit  from  “and”  in subsection  (2)(a)  to the end of subsection  (2)(b). 
(4) After  subsection  (2), insert— 
“(2A) A peerage  conferred  under  this section  may,  if the letters  patent  so state, 
during  the life of the person  on whom  it is conferred,  entitle  him,  subject 
to subsection  (4) of this section,  to receive  writs  of summons  to attend  the 
House  of Lords  and sit and vote  therein  accordingly,  and shall  expire  on 
his death. ”” 
LORD  LUCAS 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“No majority  for one party  in the House  of Lords 
After  section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958,  insert— 
“1A No majority  for one party  in the House  of Lords 
(1) An appointment  may  not be made  to the House  of Lords  if it would  have 
the effect  of taking  the total  number  of peers  from  parties  forming  part of 
the government  to more  than  40% of the total  members  of that House. 
(2) If at any time  the number  of peers  from  parties  forming  part of the 
government  exceeds  40% of the total  members  of the House  of Lords,  no 
appointments  to the parties  forming  part of the Government  may  be made 
until  that number  is reduced  below  40% either  by resignation,  new 
appointments  or leave  of absence. ”” 11 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
LORD  LUCAS 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Declaration  of minimum  attendance 
Leave  out section  2 of the House  of Lords  Reform  Act 2014,  and insert— 
“2 Commitment  to attend  a minimum  number  of days 
(1) At the start  of each  Session  of Parliament,  a member  of the House  of Lords 
who  is a peer  must  sign a declaration  of intent  to attend  more  than  a certain 
proportion  of sitting  days  during  that Session. 
(2) The proportion  of sitting  days  in subsection  (1) is to be determined  by 
standing  orders. 
(3) A member  of the House  of Lords  who  is a peer  who  does  not attend  for 
as many  days  as in the declaration  of intent,  ceases  to be a member  of the 
House  at the beginning  of the following  Session. 
(4) Subsection  (3) does  not apply  to a peer  in respect  of attendance  during  a 
Session  if— 
(a) the peer  was disqualified  from  sitting  or voting  in the House,  or 
suspended  from  its service,  for the whole  or a substantial 
proportion  of the Session,  or 
(b) the House  resolves  that subsection  (3) should  not apply  to the peer 
by reason  of special  circumstances. ”” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Lucas  to After  Clause  1 
_ In inserted  subsection  (1), after  “peer”  insert  “and  has not been  granted  leave  of absence” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Lucas  to After  Clause  1 
_ In inserted  subsection  (4)(b),  at beginning  insert  “on the application  of the peer  to whom 
subsection  (3) might  otherwise  apply,” House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 12 
LORD  LUCAS 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Declaration  of minimum  participation 
After  section  2 of the House  of Lords  Reform  Act 2014,  insert— 
“2A Commitment  to participate  in committees  of the House 
(1) At the start  of each  Session  of Parliament,  a member  of the House  of Lords 
who  is a peer  must  sign a declaration  of intent  to participate  actively  in 
committees  of the House  during  that Session. 
(2) The definition  of ‘participate  actively’  in subsection  (1) is to be determined 
by standing  orders. 
(3) Committees  includes— 
(a) select  committees; 
(b) domestic  committees; 
(c) Committee  of the Whole  House; 
(d) Grand  Committee  when  sitting  for committee  stage  of a bill. 
(4) At the end of each  Session  the House  must  publish  the statistics  of each 
peer’s  participation  in committees  of the House. 
(5) A member  of the House  of Lords  who  is a peer  whose  participation  in 
committees  of the House  falls below  the level  in the declaration  of intent, 
ceases  to be a member  of the House  at the beginning  of the following 
Session. 
(6) Subsection  (3) does  not apply  to a peer  in respect  of attendance  during  a 
Session  if— 
(a) the peer  was disqualified  from  sitting  or voting  in the House,  or 
suspended  from  its service,  for the whole  or a substantial 
proportion  of the Session,  or 
(b) the House  resolves  that subsection  (3) should  not apply  to the peer 
by reason  of special  circumstances. ”” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Lucas  to After  Clause  1 
_ In inserted  subsection  (1), after  “peer”  insert  “who  has not been  granted  leave  of absence” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Lucas  to After  Clause  1 13 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
_ After  inserted  subsection  (6)(b),  insert— 
“(c) the peer  has otherwise  participated  in the business  of the House; 
“business  of the House”  for the purposes  of this subsection  includes  all stages 
of a bill, oral questions  and statements  in the Chamber. ” 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission:  recommendations  for life peerages 
In the Life Peerages  Act 1958,  after  section  1(1) (power  to confer  life peerages) 
insert— 
“(1A) No recommendation  may  be made  to His Majesty  to confer  a life peerage 
except  by the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that life peerages  can only be conferred  by the King  on the advice 
of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  and not of the Prime  Minister.  (NB If future 
legislation  created  an electoral  college  to elect some  members  of the House  of Lords,  it would  need 
to amend  this provision.) 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of The Earl of Dundee  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  subsection  (1A),  insert— 
“(1B) No such  recommendation  may  be made  by the House  of Lords  Appointments 
Commission  unless  that Commission  is satisfied  that the person  to be 
recommended  is a fit and proper  person  to sit and vote  in the House  of 
Lords  and will participate  appropriately  in its business. ” 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
Revised  version  of the amendment  printed  on 7th January  2025 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“House  of Lords  Appointment  Commission:  statutory  basis 
(1) There  is to be a body  corporate  known  as the House  of Lords  Appointments 
Commission. 
(2) The object  of the Commission  is to make  recommendations  to the Crown  for the 
creation  of peerages  conferring  membership  of the House  of Lords  under  the Life 
Peerages  Act 1958. House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 14 
(3) The Commission  shall  consist  of 20 members  (“Commissioners”),  including  a 
Chair,  to be appointed  by the Prime  Minister. 
(4) The Prime  Minister  must  consult  the following  individuals  before  appointing 
Commissioners— 
(a) the Leader  of the House  of Lords, 
(b) the Shadow  Leader  of the House  of Lords, 
(c) the leader  of the third  largest  party-political  group  in the House  of Lords, 
and 
(d) the Convenor  of the Crossbench  Peers. 
(5) The Commissioners  must  be appointed  with  regard  to their  political  affiliation, 
ensuring  that they  represent  the different  political  groups  in the House  of Lords, 
according  to the numbers  specified  in this table— 
Number  of 
Commissioners Political  affiliation 
5 The governing  party 
5 The party  of the Official  Opposition  in the House  of 
Lords 
7 Independent,  unaffiliated  or non-party 
3 The party  of the third  largest  party-political  group  in 
the House  of Lords 
(6) The Chair  of the Commission  must  be independent  of any registered  political 
party. 
(7) Commissioners  may  serve  for a non-renewable  term  of seven  years. 
(8) The Commission  must  appoint  a chief  executive. 
(9) The Commission  may  appoint  other  staff. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to establish  the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  on a statutory 
basis  and specify  the political  affiliation  of its Commissioners. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of the Earl of Dundee  to After  Clause  1 
_ In the table  in subsection  (5), after  “non-party”  insert  “or from  a party-political  group  in 
the House  of Lords  not otherwise  identified  in this table” 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
Revised  version  of the amendment  printed  on 7th January  2025 15 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Future  composition  of the House  of Lords 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  Parliament  a draft  Bill containing  legislative  proposals  for— 
(a) conferring  power  on the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  to 
recommend  the appointment,  as crossbench  peers,  of one third  of the 
membership  of the House  of Lords  other  than  the Lords  Spiritual, 
(b) conferring  a duty  on the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  to 
recommend  the appointment  of faith  representatives  when  discharging 
their  power  under  paragraph  (a), 
(c) conferring  a duty  on the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  to 
consult  with  the Leader  of the House  of Lords,  the Shadow  Leader  of the 
House  of Lords,  the leader  of the third  largest  party-political  group  in the 
House  of Lords  and the Convenor  of the Crossbench  Peers,  on an ongoing 
basis,  when  discharging  their  power  under  paragraph  (a), 
(d) an electoral  college  to indirectly  elect  two thirds  of the membership  of the 
House  of Lords  other  than  the Lords  Spiritual, 
(e) ensuring  that elections  under  paragraph  (d) are conducted  with  integrity, 
fairness  and transparency,  including  placing  a duty  on a Secretary  of State 
to uphold  the integrity,  fairness  and transparency  of the elections,  and 
establishing  an independent  advisor  to support  the Secretary  of State  in 
discharging  that duty, 
(f) providing  that when  life peers  (who  were  appointed  before  the 
commencement  of the Act arising  from  the draft  Bill) die or leave  the 
House,  they  are replaced,  on the basis  of two deceased  or departed  life 
peers  being  replaced  by one new  member,  by members  appointed  on the 
recommendation  of the Appointments  Commission  (in one third  of cases) 
and elected  by the electoral  college  (in two thirds  of cases),  until  all the 
members  of the House  other  than  the Lords  Spiritual  have  been  so 
appointed  or elected, 
(g) the membership  of the House  of Lords  to be capped  at 620, from  the point 
at which  all members  of the House  other  than  the Lords  Spiritual  are 
appointed  on the recommendation  of the Appointments  Commission  or 
elected  by the electoral  college, 
(h) a retirement  age of 90 for members  of the House  of Lords  other  than  the 
Lords  Spiritual, 
(i) a term  limit  of 15 years  for members  of the House  of Lords  other  than  the 
Lords  Spiritual,  beginning  from  the point  at which  the relevant  provision 
comes  into force, 
(j) reducing  the number  of Lords  Spiritual  who  are members  of the House 
of Lords  to 20, 
(k) only  some  peerages  to confer  membership  of the House  of Lords. 
(2) The proposal  for an electoral  college  must  include  the following  membership— 
(a) some  members  of the House  of Commons, House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 16 
(b) some  members  of the Scottish  Parliament,  Senedd  and Northern  Ireland 
Assembly, 
(c) some  members  of local  authority  councils, 
(d) some  mayors  of combined  authorities, 
(e) some  members  of the Greater  London  Assembly, 
(f) such  other  persons  and representatives  of such  bodies  as the Secretary  of 
State  considers  appropriate. 
(3) The proposal  for an electoral  college  must  include  a method  of election  consisting 
of a quota  system,  according  to the proportions  in the following  table— 
Proportion,  out of the members 
elected  by the electoral  college Political  affiliation 
37.5% The governing  party 
37.5% The party  of the Official  Opposition  in the 
House  of Commons 
25.0% Other  political  parties  represented  in the 
House  of Commons 
(4) In preparing  the draft  Bill under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
the Leader  of the House  of Lords,  the Shadow  Leader  of the House  of Lords,  the 
leader  of the third  largest  party-political  group  in the House  of Lords  and the 
Convenor  of the Crossbench  Peers. 
(5) In preparing  the draft  Bill under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must  have 
regard  to the effect  of the proposals  on— 
(a) the relationship  between  HM Government  and Parliament  and— 
(i) the Scottish  Government,  the Welsh  Government  and the Northern 
Ireland  Executive, 
(ii) the Scottish  Parliament,  the Senedd  and the Northern  Ireland 
Assembly, 
(iii) local  authorities  in England, 
(b) the quality  of legislative  and government  scrutiny  that the House  of Lords 
provides, 
(c) the balance  of power  between  HM Government  and Parliament, 
(d) the examples  that the Parliament  of the United  Kingdom  sets to the 
Commonwealth,  member  states  of the Council  of Europe  and the rest of 
the world. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This would  require  a draft  Bill providing  for further  reforms,  including  an electoral  college  to elect 
two thirds  (or 400 out of 600) of the temporal  members  of the House.  The Appointments  Commission 
appointing  crossbench  peers  as one third  (or 200 out of 600) of the temporal  members  of the House, 
together  with the proportions  elected  by the electoral  college,  would  result  in a House  (other  than 
the 20 Lords  Spiritual)  comprising:  approximately  33%  crossbench  peers  (200 members),  25% 17 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
Government  peers  (150),  25%  Opposition  peers  (150),  and approximately  17%  from other  political 
parties  (100). 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Life peerages  not to be conferred  against  recommendation  of the House  of Lords 
Appointments  Commission  (2) 
In the Life Peerages  Act 1958,  after  section  1(1) (power  to confer  life peerages) 
insert— 
“(1A) The power  under  subsection  (1) may  not be exercised  in relation  to a person 
if the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  has written  to the Prime 
Minister  to recommend  that a peerage  should  not be conferred  on that 
person. 
(1B) The House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  shall  not write  a letter  of 
the kind  referred  to in subsection  (1A)  unless  it has given  to the person 
concerned  a detailed  summary  of the reasons  why  the Commission  is 
minded  to write  such  a letter,  and has afforded  to that person  an 
opportunity  to make  written  and oral representations  to the Commission. ”” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Exclusion  of bishops 
(1) No-one  shall  be a member  of the House  of Lords  by virtue  of being  a bishop  or 
archbishop  of the Church  of England. 
(2) No bishop  or archbishop  of the Church  of England  is entitled  to receive,  in that 
capacity,  a writ of summons  to attend,  or sit and vote  in, the House  of Lords. 
(3) Nothing  in this section  prevents  a person  who  is, or has been,  a bishop  or 
archbishop  of the Church  of England  from  receiving,  and exercising  the 
entitlements  under,  a peerage  for life in accordance  with  section  1 of the Life 
Peerages  Act 1958. 
(4) Nothing  in this section  prevents  a person  who  is, or has been,  a bishop  or 
archbishop  of the Church  of England  from  being  permitted  to enter  the House  of 
Lords  for the purpose  only  of leading  prayers  in accordance  with  arrangements 
made  by that House. 
(5) The provisions  of subsection  (1) do not apply  to any bishop  or archbishop  of the 
Church  of England  who  at the commencement  of this Act has a right  to sit and 
vote  in the House  of Lords,  and any such  person  may  continue  to sit and vote  in 
the House  of Lords  until  attaining  the age of 70.” House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 18 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Exclusion  of bishops:  consequential  amendments  etc. 
(1) In the House  of Lords  Precedence  Act 1539— 
(a) omit  section  3 (places  of the Archbishops  and Bishops); 
(b) in section  6 (place  of the King’s  Chief  Secretary)  omit  the words  after 
“aforemencioned”. 
(2) The Bishoprics  Act 1878  is repealed. 
(3) In the Welsh  Church  Act 1914,  omit  section  2(3) (writs  of summons  to be issued 
to bishops  not disqualified  by the 1914  Act for sitting  in the House  of Lords). 
(4) In the House  of Commons  Disqualification  Act 1975,  in section  1(1), omit  paragraph 
(za) (disqualification  of Lords  Spiritual). 
(5) In the Northern  Ireland  Act 1998,  in section  36(6),  omit  paragraph  (b) (a person 
is not disqualified  for membership  of the Assembly  by reason  only  that he is a 
Lord  Spiritual). 
(6) In the Scotland  Act 1998,  in section  16(1),  omit  paragraph  (b) (a person  is not 
disqualified  from  being  a member  of the Scottish  Parliament  because  he is a Lord 
Spiritual). 
(7) In the House  of Commons  (Removal  of Clergy  Disqualification)  Act 2001,  in section 
1, omit  subsection  (2) (Lords  Spiritual  disqualified  from  being  a Member  of the 
House  of Commons). 
(8) In the Constitutional  Reform  and Governance  Act 2010,  in section  41, omit 
subsection  (6)(b)  (members  entitled  to receive  writs  of summons  to attend  the 
House  of Lords  by virtue  of being  an archbishop  or bishop);  but this subsection 
is without  prejudice  to the continued  application  of that provision  in relation  to 
tax years  beginning  before  the commencement  of this Act. 
(9) In the House  of Lords  Reform  Act 2014,  in section  4(3), for “by virtue  of a hereditary 
peerage  or as a Lord  Spiritual”  substitute  “or by virtue  of a hereditary  peerage”. 
(10) The Lords  Spiritual  (Women)  Act 2015  is repealed. 
(11) In the enactment  formula  used  for Acts  passed  after  the passing  of this Act, where 
the phrase  “by and with  the advice  and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and 
Temporal,  and Commons”  appears,  the phrase  “by and with  the advice  and consent 
of the Lords  and Commons”  is to be used  instead. ” 19 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Retirement  age and term  limits 
(1) A member  of the House  of Lords  who  reaches  the age of 85 during  a Session  of 
Parliament  ceases  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the end of that Session. 
(2) A member  of the House  of Lords  who,  having  not attained  the age of 85, has sat 
in the House  by virtue  of a life peerage  for 15 years  ceases  to be a member  of the 
House  of Lords  at the end of the Session  of Parliament  in which  they  reached  15 
years  of such  membership  or, if they  have  already  sat in the House  by virtue  of a 
life peerage  for more  than  15 years  at the end of the Session  in which  this Act is 
passed,  they  cease  to be a member  of the House  of Lords  at the end of that Session. ” 
THE  EARL  OF DEVON 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission:  recommendations  for life peerages 
In the Life Peerages  Act 1958,  after  section  1(1) (power  to confer  life peerages) 
insert— 
“(1A) During  the period  of five years  following  the day on which  the House  of 
Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Act 2025  comes  into force,  the House  of Lords 
Appointments  Commission  may  recommend  to His Majesty  that up to 20 
life peerages  be conferred  on persons  who  intend  to sit in the House  of 
Lords  as independent,  unaffiliated  or non-party  Peers. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to encourage  the use of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  as 
the means  by which  members  of the Cross  Benches  are appointed  following  the removal  of Hereditary 
Peers. 
BARONESS  HARMAN 
LORD  BIRT 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Proposals  for removing  the Lords  Spiritual 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  two years  of the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  lay before  Parliament  a paper  setting  out proposals  to remove  the 
membership  of the Lords  Spiritual  from  the House  of Lords. 
(2) The paper  must  include,  but is not limited  to, proposals  to— 
(a) remove  the Lords  Spiritual  from  membership  of the House  of Lords, House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 20 
(b) remove  or replace  the functions  of the Lords  Spiritual  in the proceedings 
of the House  of Lords,  and 
(c) lay provisions  for consequential  changes  to legislation,  standing  orders 
and running  of the House  of Lords  to be made  following  the removal  of 
the Lords  Spiritual. 
(3) Nothing  in the proposals  may  prevent  a person  who  is, or has been,  a bishop  or 
Archbishop  of the Church  of England  from  receiving,  and exercising  the 
entitlements  under,  a peerage  for life in accordance  with  section  1 of the Life 
Peerages  Act 1958  (power  to confer  life peerages). ” 
LORD  TRUE 
BARONESS  FINN 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Life peerages  to be recommended  for all excepted  hereditary  peers 
On the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Prime  Minister  must  recommend  to 
His Majesty  the King  that all individuals  who  were  excepted  hereditary  peers  on 
the previous  day be granted  a life peerage  under  section  1 of the Life Peerages 
Act 1958. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Prime  Minister  to recommend  life peerages  for all excepted 
hereditary  peers  currently  serving  in the House  of Lords. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  True  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  “that”  insert  “50%  of” 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
As an amendment  to the above  amendment  in the name  of Lord  True  to After  Clause  1 
_ After  “that”  insert  “25%  of” 
LORD  INGLEWOOD 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review:  changes  to the composition  of the House  of Lords  in the future 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  review  the impact  of this Act and any subsequent  legislation  which  alters 
the composition  of the House  of Lords  on the process  by which  changes  are made 
in the future  to— 21 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
(a) appointments  to the House  of Lords; 
(b) the composition  of the House  of Lords. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  each  House  of Parliament  the report  of the 
review  within  one year  of the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(3) Thereafter,  the Secretary  of State  must  initiate  a review  of the subject  matter  in 
subsection  (1) within  the six months  after  any future  General  Election  and must 
lay before  each  House  of Parliament  the report  of the review  within  one year  of 
the day on which  the General  Election  took  place. ” 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF TREDEGAR 
LORD  KEEN  OF ELIE 
★_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“President  and Deputy  President  of the Supreme  Court 
(1) Omit  subsection  (3) of section  137 of the Constitutional  Reform  Act 2005 
(parliamentary  disqualification  for holders  of disqualifying  judicial  offices). 
(2) On the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Prime  Minister  must  recommend  to 
His Majesty  the King  that the President  and Deputy  President  of the Supreme 
Court  be granted  a life peerage  under  section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958 
(power  to confer  life peerages). 
(3) When  a person  is appointed  as President  or Deputy  President  of the Supreme 
Court,  the Prime  Minister  must  recommend  to His Majesty  the King  that the 
person  be granted  a life peerage  under  section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  ensure  the President  and Deputy  President  of the Supreme  Court  are 
granted  life peerages. 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF TREDEGAR 
LORD  KEEN  OF ELIE 
★_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Senior  members  of the judiciary 
(1) On the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Prime  Minister  must  recommend  to 
His Majesty  the King  that the Lord  Chief  Justice,  Master  of the Rolls  and Lord 
President  of the Court  of Session  be granted  a life peerage  under  section  1 of the 
Life Peerages  Act 1958  (power  to confer  life peerages). 
(2) When  a person  is appointed  to the position  of Lord  Chief  Justice,  Master  of the 
Rolls  or Lord  President  of the Court  of Session,  the Prime  Minister  must 
recommend  to His Majesty  the King  that the person  be granted  a life peerage 
under  section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958. ” House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 22 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  ensure  that the Lord  Chief  Justice,  Master  of the Rolls  and Lord  President 
of the Court  of Session  are granted  life peerages. 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF TREDEGAR 
LORD  KEEN  OF ELIE 
★_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Lord  Chancellor 
In the case of any person  who  holds  the office  of Lord  High  Chancellor  of Great 
Britain  who  is not currently  a member  of the House  of Lords,  the Prime  Minister 
must  recommend  to His Majesty  the King  that the person  be granted  a life peerage 
under  section  1 of the Life Peerages  Act 1958  (power  to confer  life peerages). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  ensure  that the Lord  Chancellor  is a member  of the House  of Lords,  as was 
the case for over two centuries  leading  up to the passage  of the Constitutional  Reform  Act 2005. 
Clause  2 
THE  EARL  OF DEVON 
_ Clause  2, page  1, line 8, at end insert— 
“(3) Claims  to hereditary  peerages  shall  hereafter  be determined  by the Judicial 
Committee  of the Privy  Council  (pursuant  to section  4 of the Judicial  Committee 
Act 1833)  and in exercising  such  jurisdiction  the Judicial  Committee  must  have 
regard  to principles  of gender  equality. 
(4) The Judicial  Committee  of the Privy  Council  must  publish  a statement  every  five 
years  stating  how  they  have  had regard  to principles  of gender  equality  under 
subsection  (3).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
In the light  of the fact that hereditary  peerages  often  pass to eldest  sons,  this amendment  seeks  to 
ensure  that the Judicial  Committee  of the Privy  Council,  when  exercising  its jurisdiction  to 
determine  peerage  claims,  does so in a manner  that is not gender  discriminatory  to the extent  that 
it is able, and reports  regularly  as to its success  in achieving  this. 
LORD  NORTHBROOK 
_ Clause  2, page  1, line 8, at end insert— 
“(3) Claims  to hereditary  peerages  shall  hereafter  be determined  by the Supreme  Court 
of the United  Kingdom. ” 23 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
After  Clause  2 
THE  EARL  OF DEVON 
_ After  Clause  2, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Report:  principles  of gender  equality 
(1) The Judicial  Committee  of the Privy  Council  must,  within  six months  of the day 
on which  this Act is commenced,  undertake  a consultation  on how  principles  of 
gender  equality  should  be applied  when  determining  hereditary  peerage  claims 
which  were  formerly  determined  by the House  of Lords. 
(2) The Committee  must  publish  a report  following  the conclusion  of the consultation 
which  must  address— 
(a) the expectations  of existing  heirs; 
(b) heirs  born  to unmarried  parents; 
(c) families  with  adopted  children. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
In the light  of the fact that hereditary  peerages  often  pass to eldest  sons,  this amendment  requires 
that the Judicial  Committee  of the Privy  Council  must,  within  six months  of the commencement 
of this Act, consult  on how principles  of gender  equality  should  be applied  when  determining 
hereditary  peerage  claims. 
LORD  LUCAS 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  2, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review:  impact  of this Act on the effectiveness  of the House  of Lords 
Within  two years  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  and annually  thereafter, 
the Secretary  of State  must  publish  a report  on the impact  of this Act on the 
effectiveness  of the House  of Lords  at discharging  its core functions. ” 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ After  Clause  2, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review 
(1) Within  12 months  of the day on which  this Act comes  into force,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  lay before  each  House  of Parliament  the report  of a review  detailing 
the effect  of this Act on— 
(a) the relationship  between  HM Government  and Parliament  and— 
(i) the Scottish  Government,  the Welsh  Government  and the Northern 
Ireland  Executive, House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 24 
(ii) the Scottish  Parliament,  the Senedd  and the Northern  Ireland 
Assembly, 
(iii) local  authorities  in England, 
(b) the quality  of legislative  and government  scrutiny  that the House  of Lords 
provides, 
(c) the balance  of power  between  HM Government  and Parliament, 
(d) the example  that the Parliament  of the United  Kingdom  sets to the 
Commonwealth,  member  states  of the Council  of Europe  and the rest of 
the world. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to produce  a report  on the effect 
of the provisions  of the Bill. 
THE  EARL  OF DEVON 
_ After  Clause  2, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of and consultation  on appropriateness  of name  of House 
The Secretary  of State  must,  within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  lay before  Parliament  a report  based  on a public  consultation  on the 
implications  of the provisions  in this Act for the appropriateness  of the name  of 
the House  of Lords. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  invites  consideration  of the suitability  of the name  “House  of Lords”  after the 
removal  of the Hereditary  Peers  from  Parliament. 
Clause  4 
LORD  LUCAS 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 15, at end insert— 
“(2A) This  section  and section  (Review:  impact  of this Act on the effectiveness  of the House 
of Lords ) come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 15, at end insert— 
“(2A) This  section,  section  (House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission:  recommendations  for 
life peerages ), section  (Future  composition  of the House  of Lords ), and section  (Review ) 
come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to commence  three  sections  (inserted  by other  amendments  in the name  of 
the Earl of Dundee)  on the day on which  the Act is passed. 25 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
LORD  NORTHBROOK 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 16, leave  out subsections  (3) and (4) and insert— 
“(3) This  section  comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(4) Sections  1 to 3 of this Act do not come  into force  until  the people  of the United 
Kingdom  have  approved  their  coming  into force  in a referendum  conducted  in 
accordance  with  the Political  Parties,  Elections  and Referendums  Act 2000. ” 
LORD  LUCAS 
THE  EARL  OF DUNDEE 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 16, at beginning  insert  “The  rest of” 
BARONESS  HAYTER  OF KENTISH  TOWN 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 16, leave  out from  “force”  to “which”  and insert  “on the day on” 
LORD  BLENCATHRA 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
LORD  DOBBS 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 16, leave  out “Session  of” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  remove  Exempted  Hereditary  peers  over a longer  timescale,  to permit  the 
House  to benefit  from  their  input  while  giving  them  more  time to seek alternative  employment. 
LORD  YOUNG  OF COOKHAM 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 16, after  “Parliament”,  insert  “after  the Session” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The purpose  of the amendment  is to postpone  implementation  of the Act. 
VISCOUNT  HAILSHAM 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 17, leave  out “this  Act is passed”  and insert  “the Secretary  of State 
has published  a draft  bill with  proposals  for stage  two of House  of Lords  reform. 
(3A) A “draft  bill with  proposals  for stage  two of House  of Lords  reform”  is a draft  bill 
which  includes  proposals  which  — 
(a) introduce  a mandatory  retirement  age for members  of the House  of Lords; 
(b) introduce  term  limits  not exceeding  15 years  for life peers; 
(c) change  the process  of appointment  of members  of the House  of Lords,  so 
as to limit  the discretion  of the Prime  Minister  and of the leaders  of any House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 26 
political  party  to secure  the appointment  of persons  to sit and vote  in the 
House  of Lords; 
(d) introduce  minimum  participation  requirements  for continued  membership 
of the House  of Lords; 
(e) remove  the automatic  right  of bishops  to sit and vote  in the House  of Lords; 
(f) reduce  the number  of members  entitled  to sit and vote  in the House  of 
Lords  to fewer  than  600 by the dissolution  of the Parliament  in which  any 
Act arising  from  the draft  bill would  be passed. ” 
LORD  NORTHBROOK 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 17, leave  out “this  Act is passed”  and insert  “the Secretary  of State 
has published  a draft  bill with  proposals  to implement  the remaining  changes 
recommended  in paragraphs  33 to 38 of the Executive  Summary  of the Royal  Commission 
on the Reform  of the House  of Lords” 
LORD  NORTHBROOK 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 17, leave  out “this  Act is passed”  and insert  “the Secretary  of State 
has published  a draft  bill with  proposals  to implement  the remaining  changes 
recommended  in the first report  of the Lords  Speaker’s  Committee  on the Size of the 
House” 
LORD  LUCAS 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 17, at end insert  “, or at the end of the Session  of Parliament  during 
which  the Secretary  of State  has published  a draft  bill with  proposals  for stage  two of 
House  of Lords  reform,  whichever  is later. 
(3A) A “draft  bill with  proposals  for stage  two of House  of Lords  Reform”  is a draft 
bill which  includes  proposals  which  either— 
(a) make  provision— 
(i) specifying  the proportion  of seats  in the House  of Lords  allocated 
to peers  affiliated  with  each  political  party  or with  no political 
party,  and bishops  of the Church  of England, 
(ii) regarding  the qualities  required  of persons  appointed  to the House 
of Lords,  and 
(iii) regarding  the maximum  size of the House  of Lords,  or 
(b) deliver  a more  radical  reform  of the composition  of the House  of Lords, 
in the view  of that House. ” 
BARONESS  HAYTER  OF KENTISH  TOWN 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 19, leave  out “after  that Session”  and insert  “from  the day on which 
this Act is passed” 27 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
LORD  YOUNG  OF COOKHAM 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 19, leave  out “that  Session”  and insert  “the Session  following  the 
Session  in which  this Act is passed” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The purpose  of the amendment  is to postpone  implementation  of the Act. 
Clause  5 
LORD  NEWBY 
LORD  WALLACE  OF SALTAIRE 
_ Clause  5, page  2, line 21, after  “Peers”  insert  “and  Proposals  for a Democratic  Mandate” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  change  the short  title of the Bill and is consequential  on Lord  Newby’s 
new Clause  after Clause  1 “Duty  to take forward  proposals  for democratic  mandate  for House  of 
Lords”. 
LORD  NEWBY 
LORD  WALLACE  OF SALTAIRE 
_ Clause  5, page  2, line 21, after  “Peers”  insert  “and  Appointments” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  change  the short  title of the Bill and is consequential  on Lord  Newby’s 
new Clause  after Clause  1 “Life  peerages  not to be conferred  against  recommendation  of the House 
of Lords  Appointments  Commission.” 
BARONESS  HARMAN 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
_ Clause  5, page  2, line 21, after  “Peers”  insert  “and  Lords  Spiritual” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on the new Clause  amendment  in the name  of Baroness  Harman. 
It would  amend  the short  title of the Bill. 
Title 
BARONESS  HARMAN 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
_ Title,  line 2, after  “Lords;”  insert  “to mandate  the development  of proposals  to remove 
the Lords  Spiritual  from  membership  of the House  of Lords;” House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 28 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on the new Clause  amendment  in the name  of Baroness 
Harman.    It would  amend  the long title of the Bill. 29 House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
House  of Lords  (Hereditary  Peers)  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
31 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 49—Running  List 31 January



House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
PART 1 
NOMINATIONS FOR PEERAGES 
1 Commission  to advise  on persons  nominated  for life peerages 
2 Prime  Minister  to refer  recommendations  to the Commission 
3 Principles  to be followed  in making  recommendations 
PART 2 
APPOINTMENTS COMMISSION 
4 Commission  membership 
5 Commission  to determine  rules  and procedure 
6 Nominations  for peerages 
7 Nominees  to meet  specific  criteria 
8 Guidelines 
9 Party  leaders  to furnish  information  to the Commission    
PART 3 
NON-JUSTICIABILITY OF COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS 
10 Non-justiciability  of Commission  recommendations 
PART 4 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
11 Commencement 
12 Extent 
13 Short  title 
59/1 HL Bill 36 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the appointment  of a Commission  to advise  the Prime 
Minister  on recommendations  to the Crown  for the creation  of life peerages; 
to establish  principles  to be followed  in making  recommendations;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
PART 1 
NOMINATIONS FOR PEERAGES 
1 Commission  to advise  on persons  nominated  for life peerages 
5There  is to be a House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  (“the 
Commission”)  to advise  the Prime  Minister  on recommendations  to the Crown 
for the creation  of peerages  under  the Life Peerages  Act 1958. 
2 Prime  Minister  to refer  recommendations  to the Commission 
(1) Before  recommending  any person  to the Crown  for a peerage,  the Prime 
Minister  must  refer  the name  of that person  to the Commission. 
10 (2) The Prime  Minister  may  not recommend  a person  to the Crown  for a peerage 
until  such  time  as the Commission  has advised  the Prime  Minister  as to 
whether  the person  meets  the criteria  for the conferment  of a peerage  specified 
in section  7. 
(3) 
15If the Commission  advises  the Prime  Minister  that a person  does  not meet 
the criteria  for nomination  specified  in section  7, the Prime  Minister  may  not 
submit  the name  of that person  to the Crown. 
(4) A Prime  Minister  may  re-submit  the name  of a person,  whose  name  has not 
been  submitted  to the Crown  by virtue  of subsection  (3), to the Commission 
20only  after  two years  have  elapsed  since  the date  on which  the Commission 
advised  the Prime  Minister  that the person  did not meet  the criteria  for the 
conferment  of a peerage. 
59/1 HL Bill 36 1 House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 
Part 1—Nominations  for peerages 
3 Principles  to be followed  in making  recommendations 
(1) In determining  whether  to recommend  to the Crown  the creation  of peerages, 
the Prime  Minister  must  have  regard  to the following  principles— 
(a) 
5not less than  20 per cent of the membership  of the House  of Lords 
shall  consist  of members  who  are independent  of any registered 
political  party, 
(b) no one party  may  have  an absolute  majority  of members  in the House 
of Lords,  and 
(c) 
10the membership  of the House  of Lords  must  be no larger  than  that of 
the House  of Commons. 
(2) For the purpose  of determining  the membership  specified  in subsection  (1)(a), 
a person  is deemed  to be independent  of any registered  political  party  if in 
the two years  prior  to his or her nomination  for a peerage  that person— 
(a) was not a member  of a registered  political  party, 
15 (b) had not given  public  support,  by way  of public  speaking  or 
appearance,  to a registered  political  party,  and 
(c) had not made  a financial  donation  to a registered  political  party. 
(3) In order  to achieve  the principle  specified  in subsection  (1)(c), the Prime 
20Minister  must,  other  than  under  the conditions  specified  in subsection  (4), 
have  regard  to recommendations  made  by the Commission  for reducing  the 
size of the membership  of the House. 
(4) Following  the appointment  by the Crown  of a Prime  Minister  at the start  of 
a Parliament,  where  that person  replaces  one who  led a political  party  other 
25than  the one headed  by the Prime  Minister,  the Prime  Minister  may 
recommend  peerages  on one occasion  only  without  reference  to the principle 
specified  in subsection  (1)(c), but the number  must  be no more  than  40. 
PART 2 
APPOINTMENTS COMMISSION 
4 Commission  membership 
30 (1) The Commission  must  consist  of nine  members. 
(2) The members  of the Commission,  including  the Chair,  must  be nominated 
jointly  by the Speaker  of the House  of Commons  and the Lord  Speaker. 
(3) In making  nominations  under  subsection  (2), the Speaker  and the Lord  Speaker 
may  consult  such  other  persons  or bodies  as they  deem  appropriate. 
35 (4) In making  nominations,  the Speaker  and the Lord  Speaker  must  have  regard 
to the need  to ensure  that,  of members  affiliated  with  registered  political 
parties,  the Commission  is politically  balanced. 
(5) At least  four  members  of the Commission  must  be independent  of any 
registered  political  party,  including  the Chair  of the Commission. House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 2 
Part 2—Appointments  Commission 
(6) At least  four  members  of the Commission  must  be Privy  Counsellors. 
(7) No-one  may  be nominated  under  subsection  (5) if at any time  in the preceding 
two years  that person— 
(a) has been  a member  of a registered  political  party, 
5 (b) has given  public  support,  by way  of public  speaking  or appearance, 
to a registered  political  party,  or 
(c) has made  a financial  donation  to any registered  political  party. 
(8) No-one  may  be nominated  who  is a Minister  of the Crown  or holder  of a 
national  office  in any registered  political  party. 
10 (9) Following  nomination  by the Speaker  and the Lord  Speaker  under  subsection 
(2), the members  may  be appointed  by the Crown. 
(10) Except  as provided  for in subsection  (11), a member  of the Commission  may 
serve  for a non-renewable  term  of seven  years. 
(11) 
15A member  of the Commission  may  be removed  by the Crown  on an address 
by both  Houses  of Parliament. 
5 Commission  to determine  rules  and procedure 
Except  as provided  for in this Part,  the Commission  may  determine  its own 
rules  and procedures. 
6 Nominations  for peerages 
20 (1) In addition  to considering  names  placed  before  it by the Prime  Minister  under 
section  2(1), the Commission  may  propose  to the Prime  Minister  persons  that 
the Commission  consider  merits  the conferment  of a peerage. 
(2) Persons  proposed  by the Commission  under  subsection  (1) must  have  no 
party-political  alignment. 
25 (3) To qualify  for the purposes  of subsection  (2) a person  must  not in the past 
two years— 
(a) have  been  a member  of a registered  political  party, 
(b) have  given  public  support,  by way  of public  speaking  or  appearance, 
to a registered  political  party,  or 
30 (c) have  made  a financial  donation  to a registered  political  party. 
(4) For the purpose  of proposing  names  under  subsection  (1), the Commission 
may  consider  persons  nominated  by members  of the public. 
7 Nominees  to meet  specific  criteria 
(1) 
35Any  person  whose  name  is considered  by the Commission  under  sections 
2(1) and 6(1) must  comply  with  the criteria  specified  in this section . 
(2) The principal  criteria  for the recommendation  for a peerage  are— 
(a) conspicuous  merit,  and 3 House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 
Part 2—Appointments  Commission 
(b) a willingness  and capacity  to contribute  to the work  of the House  of 
Lords. 
(3) The Commission  may  propose  additional  criteria  as it deems  appropriate. 
(4) 
5In proposing  additional  criteria,  the Commission  must  have  regard  to the 
diversity  of the United  Kingdom  population. 
(5) Criteria  proposed  by the Commission  under  subsection  (3) must  be laid before 
both  Houses  of Parliament  and are subject  to annulment  in pursuance  of a 
resolution  of either  House  of Parliament.    
(6) 
10Criteria  proposed  under  subsection  (3) may  not be varied  other  than  on a 
proposal  made  by the Commission  and subject  to the procedure  specified  in 
subsection  (5). 
8 Guidelines 
(1) The Commission  may  issue  guidelines  setting  out how  it will interpret  and 
apply  the criteria  established  under  section  7. 
15 (2) The guidelines  must  be publicised  by the Commission  in such  manner  as it 
deems  appropriate. 
(3) The guidelines  may  be reviewed  as the Commission  deems  appropriate. 
9 Party  leaders  to furnish  information  to the Commission    
(1) 
20Where  names  are submitted  to the Commission  by the Prime  Minister  acting 
as a party  leader,  or on behalf  of leaders  of other  political  parties  who  have 
been  invited  to propose  people  for the conferment  of peerages,  the leader 
responsible  for each  proposal  must  inform  the Commission  of the procedure 
and criteria  adopted  by the party  for the purposes  of selecting  the name  for 
submission. 
25 (2) Leaders  of political  parties  submitting  information  to the Commission  under 
subsection  (1) must  supply  such  other  information  as may  be requested  by 
the Commission. 
(3) The Prime  Minister,  where  acting  as Prime  Minister  and not as a party  leader 
30in making  a recommendation  for a peerage,  must  supply  such  information 
as may  be requested  by the Commission. 
PART 3 
NON-JUSTICIABILITY OF COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS 
10 Non-justiciability  of Commission  recommendations 
A court  or tribunal  may  not question— 
35 (a) the exercise  or purported  exercise  of the powers  referred  to in sections 
2, 3, 6 and 7, 
(b) any decision  or purported  decision  relating  to those  powers,  or House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 4 
Part 3—Non-justiciability  of Commission  recommendations 
(c) the limits  or extent  of those  powers. 
PART 4 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
11 Commencement 
5 This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  this Act is passed. 
12 Extent 
This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
13 Short  title 
10 This  Act may  be cited  as the House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Act 2024. 5 House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Supplementary  provisions 
House  of Lords  (Peerage  Nominations)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the appointment  of a Commission  to advise  the Prime  Minister  on 
recommendations  to the Crown  for the creation  of life peerages;  to establish  principles 
to be followed  in making  recommendations;  and for connected  purposes. 
Lord  Norton  of Louth 
Ordered  to be Printed,   12th  September  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 36



Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Import  prohibition 
2 Animals  to which  the import  prohibition  relates 
3 Supplementary  provision  about  the import  prohibition 
4 Advisory  Board  on Hunting  Trophies 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 47 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  prohibiting  the import  of hunting  trophies  into Great  Britain. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Import  prohibition 
(1) It is prohibited  to bring  a hunting  trophy  into Great  Britain  where— 
(a) the hunting  trophy  is of an animal  to which  this Act applies, 
(b) 
5the hunting  trophy  is brought  into Great  Britain  by or on behalf  of 
the hunter, 
(c) the hunting  trophy  is brought  into Great  Britain  in the course  of 
transferring  it from  the place  where  the animal  was hunted  to a place 
where  the hunter  resides,  and 
(d) 
10the animal  was hunted  on or after  the day on which  this section  comes 
into force. 
(2) In this Act “hunting  trophy”  means  the body  of an animal,  or a readily 
recognisable  part or derivative  of an animal,  that— 
(a) is obtained  by a person  (“the  hunter”)  through  hunting  the animal, 
and 
15 (b) is obtained  for the hunter’s  personal  use (which  does  not include 
consumption), 
whether  or not the body,  part or derivative  has been  processed  in any way. 
(3) Nothing  in the Wildlife  Trade  Regulations  operates  to prohibit,  or impose 
20restrictions  or conditions  on, bringing  a hunting  trophy  into Great  Britain  in 
circumstances  where  that is prohibited  under  subsection  (1). 
(4) In subsection  (3) “the Wildlife  Trade  Regulations”  means— 
(a) Council  Regulation  (EC)  No. 338/97  of 9 December  1996  on the 
protection  of species  of wild  fauna  and flora  by regulating  trade  therein 
(in this Act, the “Principal  Wildlife  Trade  Regulation”); 
25 (b) Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No. 865/2006  of 4 May  2006; 
(c) Commission  Implementing  Regulation  (EU)  No. 792/2012  of 23 August 
2012; 
59/1 Bill 47 1 Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Bill 
(d) Commission  Implementing  Regulation  (EU)  No. 2019/1587  of 
24 September  2019. 
2 Animals  to which  the import  prohibition  relates 
5This  Act applies  to an animal  of a species  listed  in Annex  A or B of the 
Principal  Wildlife  Trade  Regulation. 
3 Supplementary  provision  about  the import  prohibition 
(1) In this Act a reference  to bringing  a hunting  trophy  into Great  Britain  is a 
reference  to— 
(a) 
10importing  it into the United  Kingdom  as a result  of its entry  into Great 
Britain,  or 
(b) removing  it from  Northern  Ireland  to Great  Britain. 
(2) The Customs  and Excise  Management  Act 1979  applies  in relation  to the 
removal  of a hunting  trophy  from  Northern  Ireland  to Great  Britain  in 
15contravention  of   the prohibition  in section  1(1) as it applies  in relation  to 
importing  a hunting  trophy  as specified  in subsection  (1)(a)  in contravention 
of that prohibition. 
(3) The prohibition  in section  1(1) does  not apply  in relation  to the removal  of 
qualifying  Northern  Ireland  goods  from  Northern  Ireland  to Great  Britain. 
(4) 
20In subsection  (3) “qualifying  Northern  Ireland  goods”  has the same  meaning 
as it has in the European  Union  (Withdrawal)  Act 2018,  including  any meaning 
defined  for the purposes  of that Act from  time  to time  by regulations  made 
under  section  8C(6)  of that Act (and,  if those  regulations  provide  for different 
meanings  to be defined  for different  purposes  of that Act, regulations  under 
25section  8C(6)  may  make  provision  about  the meaning  or meanings  that are 
to apply  for the purposes  of this Act). 
4 Advisory  Board  on Hunting  Trophies 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  appoint  an Advisory  Board  on Hunting  Trophies 
(“the  Advisory  Board”). 
(2) 
30The Advisory  Board  appointed  under  subsection  (1) may  have  up to three 
members. 
(3) The role of the Advisory  Board  is to advise  the Secretary  of State— 
(a) on any question  relating  to this Act which  the Secretary  of State  may 
refer  to the Advisory  Board; 
(b) 
35on any matter  relating  to the import  to Great  Britain  of hunting 
trophies  derived  from  species  of animal  which  appear  to the Secretary 
of State  to be, or to be likely  to become,  endangered. 
(4) In appointing  members  of the Advisory  Board,  the Secretary  of State  must 
have  regard  to their  expertise  in matters  relating  to the import  of hunting 
trophies. Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Bill 2 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) Sections  1 and 2 come  into force  on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may 
by regulations  appoint. 
5 (3) The other  provisions  of this Act come  into force  on the day on which  this 
Act is passed. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
transitional  or saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into force  of 
sections  1 and 2. 
10 (5) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(6) This  Act may  be cited  as the Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Act 2025. 3 Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Bill 
Hunting  Trophies  (Import  Prohibition)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  prohibiting  the import  of hunting  trophies  into Great  Britain. 
Presented  by David  Reed 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 47



Illegal  Immigration  (Offences)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Offences 
2 Penalties 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 103 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  offences  in respect  of persons  who  have  entered  the UK illegally  or 
who  have  remained  in the UK without  legal  authority;  and for connected 
purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Offences 
(1) Any  person  who  is present  in the United  Kingdom  after  31 March  2025 
without  legal  authority  shall  be guilty  of an offence. 
(2) 
5Any  person  who  after  31 March  2025  enters  or attempts  to enter  the United 
Kingdom  without  legal  authority  shall  be guilty  of an offence. 
2 Penalties 
(1) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  section  1 is liable— 
(a) on summary  conviction  in England  and Wales,  to imprisonment  for 
a term  not exceeding  12 months  or a fine (or both); 
10 (b) on summary  conviction  in Scotland,  to imprisonment  for a term  not 
exceeding  12 months  or a fine not exceeding  the statutory  maximum 
(or both); 
(c) on summary  conviction  in Northern  Ireland,  to imprisonment  for a 
15term  not exceeding  6 months  or a fine not exceeding  the statutory 
maximum  (or both). 
(2) Any  person  who  is convicted  of an offence  under  section  1 shall  be subject 
to a deportation  order  unless  the Secretary  of State  deems  such  a deportation 
order  to be against  the public  interest. 
(3) 
20For the purposes  of subsection  (2) above,  a deportation  order  shall  be deemed 
to be in the public  interest  unless  a certificate  to the contrary  has been 
submitted  by the Secretary  of State  to the Court. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
59/1 Bill 103 1 Illegal  Immigration  (Offences)  Bill 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Illegal  Immigration  (Offences)  Act 2025. Illegal  Immigration  (Offences)  Bill 2 
Illegal  Immigration  (Offences)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  offences  in respect  of persons  who  have  entered  the UK illegally  or who  have 
remained  in the UK without  legal  authority;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 103



Imprisonment  for Public  Protection  (Re-sentencing)  Bill 
[HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
18 November  2024 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
LORD  WOODLEY 
★_ Clause  1, page  1, line 16, leave  out subsections  (5) and (6) and insert— 
“(5) A Crown  Court  designated  by the Lord  Chancellor  must  re-sentence  the person 
serving  the IPP sentence  in relation  to the original  offence  or offences,  and any 
associated  offences. 
(6) The re-sentencing  court  must  not impose  a sentence  more  severe  than  the notional 
determinate  sentence  upon  the basis  of which  the tariff  was specified  as needing 
to be served  before  an application  for early  release  might  be made. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  ensure  a person  serving  an IPP sentence  could  not be resentenced  to a 
sentence  more  severe  than the notional  determinate  sentence,  upon  the basis  of which  the tariff 
was specified  when  that person  was originally  sentenced,  unless  that person  falls into the category 
specified  in subsection  (6A),  added  by another  amendment  in the name  of Lord  Woodley. 
LORD  WOODLEY 
★_ Clause  1, page  1, line 20, after  subsection  (6) insert— 
“(6A) The re-sentencing  court  may  confirm  the sentence  of IPP only  if— 
(a) at the date  of the original  sentencing,  ignoring  the alternative  of an IPP 
sentence,  and at the date  of re-sentencing,  the person  serving  the IPP 
sentence  might  properly  have  been  and now  would  be sentenced  to life 
imprisonment,  and 
59/1 HL Bill 19—Running  List 18 November 
(b) that person,  at the date  of re-sentencing,  constitutes  a substantial  risk of 
causing  serious  harm  if released. 
(6B) Cases  falling  within  the potential  scope  of this subsection  (6A)  may  only  be 
re-sentenced  by a judge  authorised  to try cases  of murder. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  give the Court  the power  to confirm  a sentence  of IPP only where,  had 
not IPP have been an available  alternative,  the original  sentence  could  lawfully  have been a sentence 
of life imprisonment,  the person  would  under  current  sentencing  practice  be sentenced  to life 
imprisonment,  and where  the re-sentencing  judge  is authorised  to try cases  of murder. Imprisonment  for Public  Protection  (Re-sentencing)  Bill [HL] 2 
Imprisonment  for Public  Protection  (Re-sentencing)  Bill 
[HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
18 November  2024 
18 November  2024 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 19—Running  List 18 November



Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education 
(Transfer  of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
29 January  2025 
The amendments  are listed  in accordance  with the following  Instruction— 
Clause  3 Clause  1 
Schedule  3 Schedule  1 
Clauses  4 to 13 Clause  2 
Title Schedule  2 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  4 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
LORD  ABERDARE 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 6, at end insert— 
“(3B) A group  of persons  under  subsection  (3) must  include  a representative  from 
an organisation  that is the representative  body  for a sector. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
LORD  HAMPTON 
_ Clause  4, page  2, line 6, at end insert— 
“(3B) When  approving  a standard  under  subsection  (3), the Secretary  of State 
must  have  regard  to the reasonable  requirements  of— 
(a) industry,  commerce,  finance,  professions  and other  employers 
regarding  education  and training,  and 
(b) persons  who  may  wish  to undertake  education  and training. ” 
59/1 HL Bill 38—R—Running  List 29 January 
BARONESS  SMITH  OF MALVERN 
★_ Clause  4, page  2, line 14, at end insert— 
“(4A) In subsection  (7), after  paragraph  (a) insert— 
“(aa) information  about  matters  that the Secretary  of State  takes  into 
account  in deciding  whether  it would  be more  appropriate  for a 
standard  to be prepared  by the Secretary  of State  than  by a group 
of persons  for the purposes  of subsection  (3A) ;”.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to publish  information  about  the matters  that will 
be taken  into account  in deciding  whether  it would  be more  appropriate  for a standard  to be prepared 
by the Secretary  of State  than by a group  of persons. 
Clause  5 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
LORD  ABERDARE 
_ Clause  5, page  2, line 27, at end insert— 
“(6B) A group  of persons  under  subsection  (6) must  include  a representative  from 
an organisation  that is the representative  body  for a sector. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
LORD  HAMPTON 
_ Clause  5, page  2, line 27, at end insert— 
“(6B) When  approving  a standard  under  subsection  (6), the Secretary  of State 
must  have  regard  to the reasonable  requirements  of— 
(a) industry,  commerce,  finance,  professions  and other  employers 
regarding  education  and training,  and 
(b) persons  who  may  wish  to undertake  education  and training. ” 
BARONESS  SMITH  OF MALVERN 
★_ Clause  5, page  2, line 38, at end insert— 
“(5) In subsection  (10),  after  paragraph  (a) insert— 
“(aa) information  about  matters  that the Secretary  of State  takes  into 
account  in deciding  whether  it would  be more  appropriate  for an 
apprenticeship  assessment  plan  to be prepared  by the Secretary  of 
State  than  by a group  of persons  for the purposes  of subsection 
(6A) ;”.” Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education  (Transfer 
of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 2 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to publish  information  about  the matters  that will 
be taken  into account  in deciding  whether  it would  be more  appropriate  for an apprenticeship 
assessment  plan to be prepared  by the Secretary  of State  than by a group  of persons. 
After  Clause  8 
BARONESS  SMITH  OF MALVERN 
★_ After  Clause  8, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Report  on exercise  of the Secretary  of State’s  functions 
(1) Within  the period  of six months  beginning  with  the day on which  section  3 comes 
into force,  the Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  and publish  a report 
about  the exercise  of the relevant  functions. 
(2) The report  must  include  information  about— 
(a) which  of the relevant  functions  are being  exercised  through  an executive 
agency  known  as Skills  England,  and 
(b) the impact  of the exercise  of the relevant  functions  on apprenticeships  and 
technical  education  in England. 
(3) In this section  “the relevant  functions”  means  the functions  conferred  or imposed 
on the Secretary  of State  by sections  1 and 4 to 7 and Schedule  1.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the Secretary  of State  to lay before  Parliament  and publish  a report  about 
the exercise  of functions  conferred  or imposed  on the Secretary  of State  by this Bill.   The report 
must  be laid and published  within  six months  of the abolition  of the Institute  for Apprenticeships 
and Technical  Education. 
LORD  STOREY 
LORD  ABERDARE 
_ After  Clause  8, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Reporting  requirements  for the Secretary  of State 
Within  12 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  Parliament  a report  on the use of their  powers  under  this Act and 
their  effect  on— 
(a) the identification  of skills  gaps  and how  to address  them; 
(b) the provision  and funding  of training  to meet  the skills  needs  of employers; 
(c) the development  of occupational  standards; 
(d) work  with  regional  and local  bodies  to improve  the skills  of the workforce 
in England; 
(e) the uptake  of apprenticeships; 
(f) the provision  of employability  and new  technical  education  qualifications; 3 Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education  (Transfer 
of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 
(g) progress  made,  if any,  on the establishment  of new  arms-lengths  bodies 
responsible  for discharging  relevant  duties  relating  to skills. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
_ After  Clause  8, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Creation  of Skills  England 
(1) A body  corporate  known  as Skills  England  is established  to carry  out the functions 
transferred  to the Secretary  of State  under  this Act. 
(2) At the end of the period  of one year  beginning  with  the day on which  this Act is 
passed,  the Secretary  of State  must  transfer  to Skills  England  all the functions 
transferred  from  the Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education  under 
this Act. 
(3) Nothing  in this section  prevents  the Secretary  of State  from  transferring  more 
functions  to Skills  England  under  other  enactments. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  put Skills  England  on an independent  statutory  footing  rather  than as 
part of the DfE.  The role of IfATE  would  be included  in that planned  for Skills  England. 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
LORD  ABERDARE 
LORD  HAMPTON 
_ After  Clause  8, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Framework  for Skills  England 
The Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) ensure  that in performing  its functions,  Skills  England  has regard  to— 
(i) the need  to ensure  that education  and training  is of an appropriate 
quality; 
(ii) the need  to ensure  that education  and training  within  the remit  of 
Skills  England  represents  good  value  in relation  to financial 
resources  provided  out of public  funds; 
(b) ensure  that Skills  England  performs  its functions  efficiently  and effectively; 
(c) give  notice  in writing  to Skills  England  when  setting  out other  matters  to 
which  it must  have  regard  when  performing  its functions; 
(d) publish,  in such  a manner  as they  think  fit, any notice  under  paragraph 
(c), and lay a copy  of it before  Parliament; 
(e) require  Skills  England  to prepare,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after 
the end of each  financial  year,  an annual  report  which  includes— 
(i) a description  of what  Skills  England  has done  during  the year, 
including  a description  of what  Skills  England  has done  as a result 
of any notice  given  by the Secretary  of State  under  paragraph  (c); Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education  (Transfer 
of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 4 
(ii) such  other  provision  as the Secretary  of State  may  direct; 
(f) lay a copy  of the annual  report  under  paragraph  (e) before  Parliament. ” 
Clause  9 
LORD  ADDINGTON 
_ Clause  9, page  4, line 11, at beginning  insert  “Subject  to subsection  (6),” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  and another  in the name  of Lord  Addington  ensures  that all new statutory 
instruments  made  in the six months  following  the passing  of the Act must  follow  affirmative 
procedures. 
After  Clause  9 
LORD  ADDINGTON 
_ Clause  9, page  4, line 13, at end insert— 
“(6) For 6 months  after  the day on which  this Act is passed,  a statutory  instrument 
containing  (alone  or with  other  provisions)  regulations  under  this Act may  not 
be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before,  and approved  by 
a resolution  of, each  House  of Parliament. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  and another  in the name  of Lord  Addington  ensures  that all new statutory 
instruments  made  in the six months  following  the passing  of the Act must  follow  affirmative 
procedures. 
Clause  11 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  WOLF  OF DULWICH 
_ Clause  11, page  4, line 22, leave  out “on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may  by 
regulations  appoint”  and insert  “at the end of the period  of one year  beginning  on the 
day on which  Skills  England  is created” 5 Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education  (Transfer 
of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 
Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education 
(Transfer  of Functions  etc) Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
29 January  2025 
29 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 38—R—Running  List 29 January



Licensing  Hours  Extensions  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Home  Office,  are published  separately  as Bill 
21—EN. 
59/1 Bill 21 
Licensing  Hours  Extensions  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Procedure  for making  licensing  hours  orders 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 21 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Licensing  Act 2003  so that licensing  hours  orders  can be made  by 
negative  resolution  statutory  instrument. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Procedure  for making  licensing  hours  orders 
In section  197 of the Licensing  Act 2003  (regulations  and orders)— 
(a) in subsection  (3), omit  paragraph  (d); 
(b) in subsection  (4), omit  “(d),”; 
5 (c) omit  subsection  (5). 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Licensing  Hours  Extensions  Act 2025. 
59/1 Bill 21 1 Licensing  Hours  Extensions  Bill 
Licensing  Hours  Extensions  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Licensing  Act 2003  so that licensing  hours  orders  can be made  by negative 
resolution  statutory  instrument. 
Presented  by Andrew  Ranger 
supported  by Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck , 
Claire  Hughes , Gill German , Catherine  Fookes , 
David  Williams , Connor  Naismith , 
Mrs Sarah  Russell  and Dr Allison  Gardner . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 21



Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
CONTENTS 
1 Listed  closed-end  investment  companies 
2 Classification  of listed  closed-end  investment  companies  according  to their 
characteristics 
3 Amendments  to the Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2017/565 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 156 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  listed  investment  companies;  the classification  and 
characteristics  of those  companies;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Listed  closed-end  investment  companies 
This  Act relates  to collective  investment  undertakings  of the closed-end  type, 
the shares  of which  are admitted  to trading  on any market  or venue  operated 
5by a United  Kingdom  recognised  investment  exchange,  known  as Listed 
Closed-End  Investment  Companies  (“LCICs”)  and does  not relate  to collective 
investment  undertakings  other  than  the closed-end  type. 
2 Classification  of listed  closed-end  investment  companies  according  to their 
characteristics 
(1) 
10In the making  of rules,  guidance,  directions,  policy  or any other  regulatory 
material  and in the interpretation  of legislation,  including  retained  EU law, 
relating  to or relevant  to LCICs,  the Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA),  the 
Pensions  Regulator  (TPR)  and any other  relevant  regulator  must  be governed 
by the characteristics  and classification  of LCICs  in subsections  (2) to (9). 
(2) 
15LCICs  are collective  investment  undertakings  of the closed-end  type  and in 
particular  are distinct  from  those  known  as— 
(a) open  ended  investment  companies  or unit trusts, 
(b) long  term  asset  funds, 
(c) European  long-term  investment  funds,  and 
(d) exchange  traded  funds. 
20 (3) LCIC  shares  are a publicly  traded  capital  market  financial  instrument. 
(4) The value  of LCIC  shares  as a financial  instrument  is the price  at which  such 
LCIC  shares  are traded  on the relevant  market  or venue. 
(5) LCIC  shareholders  have  no individual  right  to a proportional  share  of the 
25net asset  value  of the relevant  LCIC  nor to have  their  shares  in that LCIC 1 
repurchased  or redeemed,  directly  or indirectly  out of the assets  of that LCIC 
59/1 Bill 156 1 Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) Bill [HL] 
at a time  of their  choosing  and realise  their  investment  value  by selling  their 
LCIC  shares  on the relevant  market  or venue. 
(6) Subsections  (4) and (5) apply  in the ordinary  course  of market  trading,  not 
5in unusual  circumstances  such  as, but not limited  to, winding-up,  shareholder 
votes  or court  action. 
(7) Management  expenses,  including  performance  fees,  and other  recurring  and 
non-recurring  operating  expenses  of the LCIC  are deductions  from  the net 
asset  value  of the LCIC  and not charges  paid  by the LCIC  shareholder  as a 
deduction  from  the value  of the shareholder's  LCIC  shares. 
10 (8) LCIC  management  expenses,  including  performance  fees,  and other  recurring 
and non-recurring  operating  expenses  are publicly  disclosed  to the market 
via published  audited  reports  and accounts. 
(9) There  are no direct  charges  levied  on the shareholder  by the LCIC  and 
therefore— 
15 (a) there  are no charges  in relation  to the LCIC  to enter  into any pre- or 
post-  trade  investor  facing  disclosures  made  by an alternative 
investment  fund  manager  of that LCIC  or any other  entity  acting  as 
a manufacturer  or distributor  of that LCIC’s  shares;  and 
(b) 
20where  shares  of a LCIC  (“A”)  are held  by another  collective  investment 
undertaking  (“B”),  there  are no charges  in relation  to the shares  of A 
to include  in B’s investor  facing  disclosures. 
3 Amendments  to the Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2017/565 
(1) The Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2017/565  is amended  as follows. 
(2) 
25In Article  50(2) (information  on costs  and associated  charges),  at end after 
paragraph  2 insert— 
“2A. For these  purposes,  investment  firms  are not required  to aggregate  or 
include  any costs  and charges  relating  to any closed-end  investment 
company  whose  shares  are admitted  to trading  on any market  or 
30venue  operated  by a United  Kingdom  recognised  investment 
exchange. ” 
(3) In Annex  II (costs  and charges),  in Table  2, in row “Ongoing  charges”,  column 
“Cost  items  to be disclosed”,  after  the second  “instrument”  insert— 
““Value”  for the purposes  of any closed-end  investment  company  whose 
35shares  are admitted  to trading  on any market  or venue  operated  by a 
United  Kingdom  recognised  investment  exchange  means  the share 
price. ” 
(4) In Annex  II (costs  and charges),  in Table  2, in row “Ongoing  charges”,  column 
“Examples”,  after  the third  “costs”  insert— 
40“Costs  and charges  of any closed-end  investment  company  whose  shares 
are admitted  to trading  on any market  or venue  operated  by a United 
Kingdom  recognised  investment  exchange  are not ongoing  charges. ” Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) Bill [HL] 2 
(5) In Annex  II (costs  and charges),  in Table  2, in row “Incidental  costs",  column 
“Examples”,  after  “Performance  fees”  insert— 
“Performance  fees and any other  incidental  costs  of any closed-end 
5investment  company  whose  shares  are admitted  to trading  on any 
market  or venue  operated  by a United  Kingdom  recognised  investment 
exchange  which  are not ongoing  charges  for the purposes  of this table 
are also not incidental  costs  as they  are not deducted  from  value  to 
the investor,  which  is the share  price. ” 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
10 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) 
Act 2024. 3 Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) Bill [HL] 
Listed  Investment  Companies  (Classification  etc) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  listed  investment  companies;  the classification  and characteristics 
of those  companies;  and for connected  purposes. 
Brought  from  the House  of Lords  on 
16th December  2024 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   18th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  and House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 156



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  1st Report of Session 2024–25
 Lithium-ion Battery Safety Bill [HL]
  Arbitration Bill [HL]
  Bank Resolution (Recapitalisation) Bill [HL]
  Budget Responsibility Bill
  Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
and International Committee of the Red Cross 
(Status) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate Bill [HL]
  Holocaust Memorial Bill
Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015 (Extension) 
Bill [HL]
Support for Infants and Parents etc 
(Information) Bill [HL]
Education (Values of British Citizenship) Bill 
[HL]
Statutory Instruments (Amendment) Bill [HL]
 Ordered to be printed 4 September 2024 and published 5 September 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 6
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 First Report
 PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.  This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to a private 
member’s Bill. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
 LITHIUM-ION BATTERY SAFETY BILL [HL]
2. This private member’s Bill is intended to make provision for the safe storage, 
use and disposal of lithium-ion batteries. It is due to have its second reading 
on 6 September. There is no delegated powers memorandum as the Bill has 
not been produced with the help of the Government.
3. The Bill contains five regulation making powers each of which would appear 
to allow for the creation of criminal offences:
• Two of the regulation making powers are explicit in conferring powers 
to create offences. In those cases, there is also a power to provide for 
the imposition of civil sanctions (clauses 3 and 4).
• In one case the power to create an offence appears to be a necessary 
consequence of the power being conferred (clause 2).
• In the other two cases, the nature of the regulation making power 
requires an enforcement mechanism, but without making it explicit 
what the nature of the enforcement mechanism is. Such a mechanism 
would have to be the creation of offences or the imposition of civil 
sanctions (clauses 5 and 6).
4. All of the powers in the Bill are subject to the negative resolution procedure. 
In our guidance to Departments1, we make it clear that the use of subordinate 
legislation to create criminal offences should be treated as exceptional and 
that it should only be done where there is a compelling justification. We 
also consider that, where subordinate legislation is used to create criminal 
offences (or where it is used to impose civil sanctions), it should be subject to 
the affirmative resolution procedure.
5. In the circumstances, we consider that the Bill should be amended 
so that the regulation making powers conferred by it are all made 
subject to the affirmative resolution procedure .
6. Clause 5 requires the Secretary of State to make regulations regarding the 
safety standards for conversion kits for use with micromobility vehicles that 
run on lithium-ion batteries, and relating to the use of charging systems for 
electric-powered micromobility vehicles. Clause 6 requires the Secretary of 
1 Paragraph 12 of the Guidance for Departments , December 2023.
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
State to make regulations with respect to the disposal of lithium-ion batteries. 
In both cases, although any requirements imposed by the regulations would 
need to be enforced in order to be effective, nothing is said on the face of the 
Bill as to what provision may be made in the regulations for the enforcement 
of their requirements. As noted above, it seems to us that the only possible 
enforcement mechanisms would be either the creation of criminal offences 
or the imposition of civil sanctions.
7. We consider that clauses 5 and 6 are defective in failing to specify 
the provision which is to be made in the regulations to enforce the 
requirements imposed by them. We consider that the failure to 
specify the enforcement mechanisms is particularly objectionable 
if the intention is that they should include the creation of criminal 
offences, given the constitutional significance of using subordinate 
legislation in this way.
 ARBITRATION BILL [HL]
8. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BANK RESOLUTION (RECAPITALISATION) BILL [HL]
9. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 BUDGET RESPONSIBILITY BILL
10. There is nothing in this Money Bill which we would wish to draw to the 
attention of the House.
 COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION AND 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (STATUS) 
BILL [HL]
11. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 CROWN ESTATE BILL [HL]
12. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL BILL
13. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LORDS SPIRITUAL (WOMEN) ACT 2015 (EXTENSION) BILL 
[HL]
14. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 SUPPORT FOR INFANTS AND PARENTS ETC (INFORMATION) 
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
BILL [HL]
15. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (VALUES OF BRITISH CITIZENSHIP) BILL [HL]
16. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL [HL]
17. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
For the business taken at the meeting on 4 September 2024, Members declared 
no interests.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by Lord Rooker, The Earl of Lindsay, Baroness 
Humphreys, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, Baroness Chakrabarti, Lord Carlile of 
Berriew, Baroness Bakewell of Hardington of Mandeville.



Committee  Stage:  Wednesday  18 December  2024 
Lords  Spiritual  (Women)  Act 2015  (Extension) 
Bill [HL] 
(Committee  Stage  Decisions) 
This document  sets out the fate of each  clause,  schedule,  amendment  and new clause  considered  at 
committee  stage. 
A glossary  with  key terms  can be found  at the end of this document. 
Clauses  1 and 2 agreed  to. 
Bill reported  without  amendment. 
Bill read  the third  time  and passed. 
Glossary 
Not called:  debated  in a group  of amendments, 
but not put to a decision. Added:  New  Clause  agreed  without  a vote and 
added  to the Bill. 
Not moved:  not debated  or put to a decision. Agreed  to: agreed  without  a vote. 
Not selected:  not chosen  for debate  by the 
Chair. Agreed  to on division:  agreed  following  a vote. 
Negatived:  rejected  without  a vote. 
Question  proposed:  debate  underway  but not 
concluded. Negatived  on division:  rejected  following  a 
vote. 
Withdrawn  after  debate:  moved  and debated 
but then  withdrawn,  so not put to a decision.



Stephanie Peacock MP  
Minister for Sport, Media, Civil Society and Youth  
Department for Culture, Media and Sport  
1st Floor  
100 Parliament Street  
London SW1A 2BQ  
 
E: enquiries@dcms.gov.uk   
 
www.gov.uk/dcms  
 
 
The Lord Gardiner of Kimble  
Senior Deputy Speaker  
House of Lord s 
London  
SW1A 0PW  
 
 
   
 22 January  2025 
  
 
INT2024/ 00737/Dc  
 
 
 
Dear Lord Gardiner,  
 
Malvern Hills Bill  
 
I write concerning the Malvern Hills Bill.  
 
Standing Order 98A (Reports concerning human rights) requires that, in the case of a  Private 
Bill originating in either House, a report from a Minister of the Crown on the  statement of 
opinion required by Standing Order 38(3) shall be presented to the House  (by being deposited 
in the Office of the Clerk of the Parliaments) not later than t he second sitting day after that on 
which the Bill was read a first time.  
 
I consider that the Bill’s promoters have undertaken a full assessment of the  compatibility of 
their proposals with the European Convention on Human Rights and I  see no need to dispu te 
their conclusions.  
 
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
Stephanie Peacock MP  
Minister for Sport, Media, Civil Society and Youth



Marine  Protected  Areas  (Bottom  Trawling)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Regulation  and limitation  of bottom  trawling  in marine  protected  areas 
2 Consultation  and technical  provisions 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 HL Bill 11 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Regulate  and limit  the practice  of bottom  trawling  in marine  protected  areas; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Regulation  and limitation  of bottom  trawling  in marine  protected  areas 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  make  provision  to regulate  and 
limit  the practice  of bottom  trawling  in marine  protected  areas. 
(2) The regulations— 
5 (a) must  prohibit  bottom  trawling  in those  marine  protected  areas  defined 
in subsection  (3); 
(b) may  make  associated  provision  about  licensing  and enforcement; 
(c) may  confer  responsibilities  and powers  on the Marine  Management 
Organisation  and Inshore  Fisheries  and Conservation  Authorities;  and 
10 (d) may  create  criminal  offences  punishable  with  a fine in respect  of 
failures  to comply  with  the regulations. 
(3) In this Act— 
“bottom  trawling”  is fishing  by dragging  heavy  weighted  nets across  the 
sea floor  using  bottom  towed  fishing  gear; 
15 “bottom  towed  fishing  gear”  means  any trawls,  seines,  dredges  or similar 
gear,  including  trawls  towed  on or very  close  to the sea bed,  which 
are actively  moved  in the water  by one or more  fishing  vessels  or by 
any other  mechanised  system  and in which  any part of the gear  is 
designed  and rigged  to operate  on, and be in contact  with,  the seabed; 
20 “marine  protected  area”  includes,  a Marine  Conservation  Zone,  a Nature 
Conservation  Marine  Protected  Area,  Highly  Protected  Marine  Area 
and;  a Special  Area  of Conservation,  a Special  Protection  Area,  a Site 
of Special  Scientific  Interest,  and an Area  of Special  Scientific  Interest 
in a marine  environment,  or a marine  Ramsar  Site. 
25 2 Consultation  and technical  provisions 
(1) Regulations  under  section  1— 
59/1 HL Bill 11 1 Marine  Protected  Areas  (Bottom  Trawling)  Bill [HL] 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
(b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
(c) may  make  transitional  and saving  provision; 
(d) 
5may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before 
and approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(2) Before  laying  draft  regulations  under  section  1 before  Parliament,  the Secretary 
of State  must  consult— 
(a) the Scottish  Ministers, 
(b) the Welsh  Ministers, 
10 (c) the Department  of Agriculture,  Environment  and Rural  Affairs  in 
Northern  Ireland, 
(d) Natural  England 
(e) the Joint  Nature  Conservation  Committee 
(f) the Marine  Management  Organisation;  and 
15 (g) the Inshore  Fisheries  and Conservation  Authorities. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a draft  statutory  instrument 
containing  regulations  under  section  1 before  the end of the period  of one 
year  beginning  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
20 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Marine  Protected  Areas  (Bottom  Trawling)  Act 
2024. Marine  Protected  Areas  (Bottom  Trawling)  Bill [HL] 2 
Marine  Protected  Areas  (Bottom  Trawling)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Regulate  and limit  the practice  of bottom  trawling  in marine  protected  areas;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
Baroness  Ritchie  of Downpatrick 
Ordered  to be Printed,   30th  July 2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 11



Marriage  (Prohibited  Degrees  of Relationship)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Prohibition  of marriage  of first cousins 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 146 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Prohibit  the marriage  of first cousins;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Prohibition  of marriage  of first cousins 
(1) The Marriage  Act 1949  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In Schedule  1, in the appropriate  place  in sub-paragraph  1 (1) insert— 
“first cousin ”. 
5 (3) In Schedule  1, after  paragraph  1(2) insert— 
“(3) In the list “first  cousin”  means  the child  of a parent’s  sibling. ” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) 
10This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Marriage  (Prohibited  Degrees  of Relationship) 
Act 2025. 
59/1 Bill 146 1 Marriage  (Prohibited  Degrees  of Relationship)  Bill 
Marriage  (Prohibited  Degrees  of Relationship)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Prohibit  the marriage  of first cousins;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Mr Richard  Holden 
supported  by Robert  Jenrick , Dan Carden , 
Claire  Coutinho , David  Smith , Neil O'Brien , 
Lee Anderson , Mr Andrew  Snowden , John Lamont , 
Nick  Timothy , Katie  Lam and Laura  Trott . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   10th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 146



Mental Health Bill 
How we want to change 
parts of Mental Health Law  
What is in this booklet 
Contents page to be set once content format is sorted. 
1 
      t format is sorted. 
1

2           
   
  
       
  
   What is in this booklet 
Page 1 Who we are and what we want   
to do 
Page 2 The law and how we want to  
change it 
Page 3    Why we want to change the law 
Page 5    Principles 
Page 8    Changes to the law that are better  
    for you 
Page 11 Getting the right treatment in  
  hospital 
Page 12 Getting the right treatment 
Page 14 Advance Choice Documents 
3           
    
  
   
   
    
  
    
  
 
   What is in this booklet 
Page 16 Care and treatment plans 
Page 18 More about care and treatment  
plans 
Page 20 Nominated person 
Page 21 Going to a tribunal 
Page 23 People who have been in trouble  
with the law 
Page 25 People with a learning disability  
and autistic people 
Page 28  Leaving hospital 
Page 29 Getting care after you leave hospital 
Who we are and what we 
want to do 
We are the Department for Health 
and Social Care and Ministry of Justice. We are part of the Government. 
The Government leads the country. We want to make mental health care 
better for people. 
We want to make changes so that 
people do not stay in hospital unless they need to. 
When people do have to stay in 
hospital, it is important that they get good care and treatment. 
1 
The law and how we want 
to change it 
The Mental Health Act tells people 
what to do if they need to stay in hospital because they are in crisis. 
Crisis is when you need help 
straightaway because of your  mental health. 
The law says you can be sent to 
hospital for your care and treatment when you need to for your safety, or to protect other people. 
This is called being detained. Some 
people know this as being sectioned. 
This law is only for England and 
Wales. 
2 
We want to change the law.   
When you want to change the law, you use a Bill. 
We write our ideas in a Bill and show 
it to Parliament. 
Parliament is where people called 
politicians meet to talk about the work of the Government.  
They also talk about and agree 
changes to the law. 
Why we want to change  
the law 
We decided to make changes to the 
law after there was a big review. 
Review means we looked to see if the 
Mental Health Act is still working. 
3 
We want to make changes so that you 
have more choice in: 
•What happens if you have a
mental health crisis.
•Who is involved in your care.
•What treatment you are given andwhy.
You will have more rights to say what you want to happen with your care and treatment. 
Your rights are things you are allowed 
to do and how you should be treated. 
4 
Principles 
A principle is an idea or rule that 
explains or tells you how something happens or works. 
We worked closely with people who 
use mental health services to do our review.  
Our review helped us come up with  
4 principles that we need to do to make things better. 
Our principles are: 
1. Respect people’s views and 
choices 
This means listening to what you 
want in your mental health care. 
In the Bill we call this Choice and 
Autonomy. 
5 
2. Limit peoples freedom as
little as possible
This means using the law in the
right w
ay so you are not taken to
hospital if you don’t need to be.
In the Bill we call this Least
Restriction.
3. Give people the help they
need to feel better
This means helping you get theright treatment and support youneed to feel well.
In the Bill we call this Therapeutic
Beneﬁt.
4.Respect people as individuals
This means treating you withrespect, understanding you andwhat you need.
In the Bill we call this The Person
as an Individual.
6 
We have thought about these 
principles in everything we have  done in the Bill. 
The Code of Practice is a set of rules that services must follow when they use the Mental Health Act.   
Services like hospitals and social care. 
Social care is care that you get in your 
own home or in the local community.  This might be in places like a day centre or care home. 
We will make sure that the principles 
are put in the Code of Practice. 
7 
Changes to the law that are 
better for you 
We want you to get more care and 
support in the community. 
Under the Bill, doctors or people who 
are in charge of your care will: 
1.List en to what you want in
your mental health care.
Your doctor or other health staff will listen and talk to you and your family and friends. 
The
y will ask you about what you 
want to happen and make sure this is written down.  
8 
2. People will only use the 
Mental Health Act when   it is needed. 
Going to hospital should only happen 
if nothing else is working for you. 
The Bill will: 
• Help people understand you as a 
person and give you more of a say over your treatment. 
and 
• Make sure you are listened to and 
your voice is heard.  It will help you 
to make choices about what care 
and treatment you want. 
9 
You will only have to go to hospital if 
there is a very big chance you might: 
• Seriously hurt yourself. 
• Not get better if you don’t go to 
hospital. 
• Seriously hurt other people. 
10 
Getting the right treatment 
in hospital 
Sometimes, people need to be made 
to stay in hospital to keep themselves and others safe. 
If you are made to go to hospital, the 
Bill says there has to be a very good reason for it.  
Before coming into hospital, staff have 
got to decide where is the best place for you to get treatment. 
Hospital must be the best place to give you the treatment and support you need. 
When you are ready, you might get 
treatment at home instead of in the hospital.  
11 
Getting the right treatment 
The Bill will say that you can tell 
doctors the treatment you want. 
But to do this, you have to be able to 
make decisions for yourself about what is best for you.  This is called having capacity. 
Under the Bill, you can talk to your 
doctor and tell them what you think works best for you. 
They will listen to what you say.  They will tell you why they want you to have some types of medicine or treatment. 
12 
There might be a treatment that you 
don’t want to have.  If this treatment helps to keep you safe, you will still have to have it. 
This might be because the medication 
is the only one that w
orks to keep you 
well. 
If you do not agree with the doctor, 
you can get a second opinion. 
A second opinion is when another 
doctor is asked to check what treatments might be best for you. 
13 
Advance Choice Documents 
An Advance Choice Document lets 
people say what care and treatment they want before they get ill.  
This means doctors can still know 
what help you would like if you are too poorly to make decisions. 
People can use an Advance Choice 
Document to say:  
• What treatment they do and do not want if they became ill.  
• Who they would want as their Nominated Person.   A nominated person is someone who can make decisions and speak for you. 
14 
The Bill says that services must tell 
people about Advance Choice Documents. 
Services should support people to 
write their own Advance Choice Document, if they want one. 
15 
Care and treatment plans 
The Bill says everyone should have  
a care and treatment plan. 
Your doctor will write your care and 
treatment plan with you. 
The plan should say: 
• What you want to happen with 
your treatment. 
• Who you want to be involved in decisions about your care. 
16 
Your doctor or the person who is 
looking after you will look at your care and treatment to see if it is still working.  
They will talk to you about your needs 
and if you want to change anything in your plan.  
Your doctor will do everything they 
can to make sure you are not taken  to hospital.   
They will only allow this if it the best 
thing for you in your care and treatment plan. 
17 
More about care and 
treatment plans 
You can ask your advocate or 
nominated person to help with the plan. 
Advocates help you to speak out for 
yourself and have your say. 
The plan should link in with your other 
care plans.  
This means that everyone involved in 
your care knows what is happening.  
18 
If something is not right or you are 
not happy with your care in hospital, 
you can tell us.  This is called making a 
complaint. 
The people who care for you must tell you how to do this and give you the right information. 
19 
Nominated person 
A nominated person can speak for 
you if you are unable to make decisions yourself. 
It is important that you choose 
someone who knows you well and who you can trust.  
The Bill says you can: 
• Choose the nominated person you 
want, so it doesn’t have to be chosen for you. 
• Say that your nominated person must be asked about your treatment and anything that happens to you in hospital.  
20 
Going to a tribunal 
You might not agree that you need to 
stay in hospital. 
You might need to use the law to get 
a judge to say you can leave hospital. This is called going to a tribunal. 
A tribunal is like a court of law. At a tribunal, people like lawyers, 
doctors and social workers look at what everyone says and decide what should happen. 
The tribunal will decide if you should 
be kept in hospital. 
21 
The Bill says there should be more 
tribunals for people. 
This will make sure you do not have to stay in hospital for longer than you need to be. 
22 
People who have been in 
trouble with the law 
Some people who need care and 
treatment for their mental health might be in trouble with the law.  They might be in prison. 
The Bill says that people should not 
have to wait a long time to be taken to hospital for treatment. 
The Bill also says that people cannot 
be taken to police cells or prisons  as a place of safety. 
A place of safety is a place people are 
made to stay for their own safety or for other people’s protection.  
You do not stay in a place of safety for 
long. A doctor comes to see you.  They will check to see if hospital is  the best place for you to go. 
23 
Some people are in hospital because  
a court said they must stay there until they get better. 
At the moment, some of these people 
might have to stay in hospital even if it is no longer helping them. 
This is because it helps to keep other 
people safe. 
The Bill says they should have the 
chance to live in the community under very safe rules.   
We call these rules conditions. 
It is better to do this than to keep a 
person in hospital if it is not helping them anymore.  
24 
People with a learning 
disability and autistic 
people 
The mental health law can help 
people to get the right support in hospital for a mental health condition. 
The Bill says that mental health law 
cannot be used to keep people with  a learning disability or autistic people in hospital for more than 28 days. 
If they also have a mental health 
condition that can be helped in hospital, they can be made to stay  for longer.  
If a person with a learning disability or 
autistic person is in trouble with the law, they can be sent to hospital instead of prison. 
25 
Some people people might be told to 
stay in hospital under the mental health law. 
If they do the Bill says they should have a care education and treatment review. 
A care education and treatment 
review is a meeting to see how an autistic person or a person with a learning disability is being cared for. 
The person should only have a review 
if they agree to it. 
This will help people to leave hospital as soon as they are ready. 
26 
Supporting people in the 
community 
People with a learning disability and 
autistic people don’t always need to be in hospital to get the right support. 
A Dynamic Support Register is a list 
of people who need support. Hospital, health and care staff should use the register to: 
• Understand the needs of people with a learning disability and autistic people in the area 
and 
• Make sure people are getting the 
right support. 
People must be asked ﬁrst if they want to be put on the register.  Staff must listen to what the person decides. 
27 
Leaving hospital 
You might be able to leave hospital 
when: 
• You feel better able to cope with your mental health 
and 
• You do not need to be in hospital 
anymore. 
When you leave hospital it is called being discharged. 
The Bill says that your doctor must 
look at your care before you leave.   
Your doctor must speak to another 
person involved in your care before they decide if you can be discharged. 
Together they must make sure you 
have the right treatment and support you need to leave hospital.  
28 
Getting care after you leave 
hospital 
You may have the right to get special 
care and treatment after you leave hospital. 
This is to make sure you can manage 
in the community and don’t have to go back to hospital.  This is called after care. 
You might also be given a Community 
Treatment Order by your doctor. 
The order says what care and 
treatment you need to stay safe and well at home. 
The Bill makes it harder to be put on  a community treatment order if it is not the right thing for you.  
29 
This Easy Read booklet was written by Easy Read UK.  
The pictures in this easy read are from Photosymbols and Ing Image. 30



Microplastic  Filters  (Washing  Machines)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  for washing  machine  manufacturers  to fit microplastic-catching 
filters 
2 Duty  to promote  filters  and raise  awareness  of microplastics 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/2 Bill 205 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  manufacturers  to fit microplastic-catching  filters  to new  domestic  and 
commercial  washing  machines;  to make  provision  about  the promotion  of the 
use of microplastic-catching  filters  in washing  machines  and raising  awareness 
about  the consequences  of microplastics  from  washing  machines  for pollution 
in rivers  and seas;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  for washing  machine  manufacturers  to fit microplastic-catching 
filters 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  make  provision  requiring  washing 
5machine  manufacturers  to fit qualifying  microplastic-catching  filters  to new 
domestic  and commercial  washing  machines  for use or sale in England. 
(2) In this section— 
“microplastics”  are any synthetic  fibre  particle  or polymeric  matrix,  with 
regular  or irregular  shape  and with  size between  1 μm and 5 mm,  of 
10either  primary  or secondary  manufacturing  origin,  which  are insoluble 
in water; 
a “qualifying  microplastic-catching  filter”  is a filter  which  typically  catches 
90 per cent of microplastics  measured  by mass  that are emitted  by the 
washing  machine  when  post  filtered  to 10 μm. 
(3) 
15The regulations  must  provide  for the requirement  to have  effect  no later  than 
1 January  2025. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  may  create  offences  in relation  to that 
requirement  punishable  by a fine. 
(5) Regulations  under  this section— 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
20 (b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
(c) may  make  transitional  and saving  provision; 
(d) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before 
and approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
58/2 Bill 205 1 Microplastic  Filters  (Washing  Machines)  Bill 
2 Duty  to promote  filters  and raise  awareness  of microplastics 
(1) It is a duty  of the Secretary  of State  to— 
(a) promote  the environmental  benefits  and use of microplastic-catching 
filters  in washing  machines,  and 
5 (b) raise  awareness  about  the consequences  of microplastic  fibres  shed 
from  clothing  as part of the laundry  cycle  through  washing  machines 
for pollution  in rivers  and seas. 
(2) The duty  extends  to promotion  and awareness-raising  in schools  and other 
educational  settings. 
10 (3) The Secretary  of State  may  publish  guidance  to public  bodies  in connection 
with  the duty. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
15 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Microplastic  Filters  (Washing  Machines)  Act 
2022. Microplastic  Filters  (Washing  Machines)  Bill 2 
Microplastic  Filters  (Washing  Machines)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  manufacturers  to fit microplastic-catching  filters  to new  domestic  and 
commercial  washing  machines;  to make  provision  about  the promotion  of the use of 
microplastic-catching  filters  in washing  machines  and raising  awareness  about  the 
consequences  of microplastics  from  washing  machines  for pollution  in rivers  and seas; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Alberto  Costa 
supported  by Philip  Dunne , Caroline  Lucas , 
Tim Loughton , Derek  Thomas , Mr Jonathan  Lord , 
Mrs Pauline  Latham , Alexander  Stafford , 
Andrew  Selous , Jim Shannon , Patrick  Grady  and 
Holly  Lynch . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  30th  November  2021 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2022 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/2 Bill 205



Military  Action  (Parliamentary  Approval)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Parliamentary  approval  for the deployment  of UK armed  forces  for armed 
conflict 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 146 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  parliamentary  approval  for the deployment  of UK armed  forces  for 
armed  conflict;  to provide  for exemptions  from  that requirement  in cases  of 
emergency  or in respect  of compliance  with  treaty  obligations;  to make 
provision  for retrospective  parliamentary  approval  in certain  circumstances; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Parliamentary  approval  for the deployment  of UK armed  forces  for armed 
conflict 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  only  authorise  the deployment  of armed  forces 
5on behalf  of the Crown  outside  the United  Kingdom  where  that deployment 
has been  approved  by a resolution  of the House  of Commons  consisting  of 
the words  “that  this House  approves  the deployment  of armed  forces  of the 
Crown  as proposed  by His Majesty’s  Government”  (and  of no other  words), 
on a motion  tabled  by a Minister  of the Crown. 
(2) Subsection  (1) does  not apply  where— 
10 (a) it appears  to the Prime  Minister  that there  is an emergency  which 
requires  the urgent  deployment  of armed  forces,  or 
(b) the deployment  of armed  forces  is required  for the United  Kingdom 
to comply  with  its obligations  under  a treaty. 
(3) 
15No more  than  three  sitting  days  after  the deployment  of armed  forces  under 
subsection  (2), a Minister  of the Crown  must  move  a motion  in the House  of 
Commons  consisting  of the words  “that  this House  approves  the deployment 
of armed  forces  of the Crown  as authorised  by His Majesty’s  Government” 
(and  of no other  words). 
(4) 
20In this section,  "sitting  day"  means  a day on which  the House  of Commons 
is sitting  (and  a day is only  a day on which  the House  of Commons  is sitting 
if the House  begins  to sit on that day). 
58/4 Bill 146 1 Military  Action  (Parliamentary  Approval)  Bill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of three  months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(2) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
5 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Military  Action  (Parliamentary  Approval)  Act 
2024. Military  Action  (Parliamentary  Approval)  Bill 2 
Military  Action  (Parliamentary  Approval)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  parliamentary  approval  for the deployment  of UK armed  forces  for armed 
conflict;  to provide  for exemptions  from  that requirement  in cases  of emergency  or in 
respect  of compliance  with  treaty  obligations;  to make  provision  for retrospective 
parliamentary  approval  in certain  circumstances;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Richard  Foord 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  January  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 146



Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duty  on the Prime  Minister  to establish  the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention 
2 Abolishing  or merging  the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention 
3 Poverty  reduction  targets 
4 Reporting  requirements  on poverty  reduction  targets 
5 Reporting  system  for all government  spending  in relation  to poverty 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 HL Bill 65 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for establishing  a new  government  Ministry,  the Ministry  for 
Poverty  Prevention;  to make  provision  for the objectives  and powers  of that 
Ministry;  to make  provision  that the Ministry  can only  be abolished  or 
combined  with  another  department  by an Act of Parliament;  to make  provision 
for reporting  requirements  on the Ministry’s  work;  to make  provision  for a 
power  to create  binding  poverty  reduction  targets;  to make  provision  for a 
reporting  system  for all government  spending  in relation  to poverty;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  on the Prime  Minister  to establish  the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention 
(1) The Prime  Minister  must  establish  a new department,  the Ministry  for Poverty 
Prevention,  by an Order  in Council  within  six months  of the passing  of this 
Act. 
5 (2) The Order  under  subsection  (1) must  set out the— 
(a) objectives,  and 
(b) reporting  requirements 
of the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention. 
2 Abolishing  or merging  the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention 
10 The Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  may  only  be abolished  or merged  with 
another  government  department  by an Act of Parliament. 
3 Poverty  reduction  targets 
(1) The Secretary  of State  for the Ministry  of Poverty  Prevention  must  set poverty 
reduction  targets  which  the Government  must  meet. 
15 (2) The targets  under  subsection  (1) must  be set by regulations  within  one year 
of the passing  of this Act, and every  one year  thereafter. 
(3) Regulations  under  subsection  (1), which  must  be made  by statutory  instrument 
and must  include— 
59/1 HL Bill 65 1 Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  Bill [HL] 
(a) a timeframe  for meeting  the target,  and 
(b) the metrics  to be used  to assess  delivery  of the target. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not be 
5made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
4 Reporting  requirements  on poverty  reduction  targets 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a report  setting  out the 
Government’s  compliance  with  the poverty  reduction  targets  established  in 
regulations  under  section  3. 
10 (2) Reports  under  subsection  (1) must  be laid before  Parliament  within  two years 
of the day on which  this Act is passed,  and every  one year  thereafter. 
5 Reporting  system  for all government  spending  in relation  to poverty 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of 
15State  for the Ministry  of Poverty  Prevention  must  by regulations  establish  the 
Preventative,  Emergency,  Coping  and Cure  (PECC)  reporting  system  against 
which  the Government  must  report  all spending  related  to poverty. 
(2) The PECC  reporting  system  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) require  the Government  to classify  the purpose  of all spending  related 
to poverty  into one of the following  categories— 
20 (i) poverty  prevention  measures, 
(ii) emergency  support  for those  in poverty, 
(iii) support  for those  coping  with  long-term  poverty,  or 
(iv) poverty  elimination  or cure  measures; 
(b) 
25seek  to increase  transparency  surrounding  spending  on poverty 
alleviation  through  whatever  means  the Secretary  of State  deems 
appropriate. 
(3) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
30 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  Act 2025. Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  Bill [HL] 2 
Ministry  for Poverty  Prevention  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for establishing  a new  government  Ministry,  the Ministry  for Poverty 
Prevention;  to make  provision  for the objectives  and powers  of that Ministry;  to make 
provision  that the Ministry  can only  be abolished  or combined  with  another  department 
by an Act of Parliament;  to make  provision  for reporting  requirements  on the Ministry’s 
work;  to make  provision  for a power  to create  binding  poverty  reduction  targets;  to 
make  provision  for a reporting  system  for all government  spending  in relation  to 
poverty;  and for connected  purposes. 
Lord  Bird 
Ordered  to be Printed,   29th  January  2025 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 65



Bill 36 58/1Mobile Homes Act 1983 (Amendment) Bill
CONTENTS
1 Amendments to the Mobile Homes Act 1983
2 Extent, commencement and short title
Bill 36 58/1Mobile Homes Act 1983 (Amendment) Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Amend the Mobile Homes Act 1983; and for connected purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Amendments to the Mobile Homes Act 1983
(1) The Mobile Homes Act 1983 is amended as follows.
(2) In Schedule 1, Part 1, Chapter 2 (agreements relating to pitches)—
(a) after paragraph 18(1A ) (determination of new pitch fee), insert—
“(1B) And, in the case of a pitch in England, no regard shall be had,
when determining the amount of the new pitch fee, to any sums
expended or costs incurred by  the owner on maintenance and
repairs since the last review date.”
(b) in paragraph 20(A1) (indexation of pitch fee, England), for “retail prices
index” substitute “consumer prices index”.
2 Extent, commencement and short title
(1) This Act comes into force on the day on which it is passed.(2) This Act extends to England and Wales only.
(3) This Act may be cited as the Mobile Homes Act 1983 (Amendment) Act 2020.B
5
10
Bill 36 58/1Mobile Homes Act 1983 (Amendment) Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2020
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONSA
BILL
To amend the Mobile Homes Act 1983; and for connected purposes.
Presented by Sir Christopher Chope
supported by
Mr Peter Bone and Philip Davies.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 10th February  2020.



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



Bill 37 57/1National Health Service (Co-Funding and Co-
Payment) Bill
CONTENTS
1 Amendment of section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006
2 Other amendments of the Nati onal Health Service Act 2006
3 Extent, commencement and short title
Bill 37 57/1National Health Service (Co- Funding and Co-Payment) Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Make provision for co-funding and for the extension of co-payment for NHS
services in England; an d for connected purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Amendment of section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006
(1) The National Health Service Act 2006 is amended as follows.
(2) In section 1 (Secretary of State’s duty to promote comprehensive health
service), in subsection (4)—
(a) the words “the making and recovery of charges is expressly provided
for by or under any enactment, wh enever passed” become paragraph
(a), and
(b) after paragraph (a), insert “or
(b) the charges form part of an  agreement in England for co-
funding or co-payment.”
2 Other amendments of the National Health Service Act 2006
(1) The National Health Service Act 2006 is amended as follows.
(2) After section 12E (Secretary of State’s duty as respects variation in provision of
health services), insert—
“Co-Funding and Co-Payment
12F Co-Funding and Co-Payment: England
(1) For the purposes of this Act,  co-funding of NHS care shall be
permissible in England when NHS-co mmissioned care is proposed to
be partly funded—
(a) by a patient, or
(b) on behalf of a patient.B
5
10
15
20
National Health Service (Co- Funding and Co-Payment) Bill 2
(2) Co-payments permitted by virtue of this Act shall, in  England, include
payments made through co-funding as provided for in subsection (1).”
3 Extent, commencement and short title
(1) This Act extends to England and Wales.
(2) This Act shall come into force at the end of the period of two months after the
day on which it receives Royal Assent.
(3) This Act may be cited as the Nation al Health Service (Co-Funding and Co-
Payment) 2018.5
Bill 37 57/1National Health Service (Co-Funding and Co-
Payment) Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2018
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONSA
BILL
To make provision for co-funding and fo r the extension of co-payment for NHS
services in England; an d for connected purposes.
Presented by Mr Christopher Chope,
supported by Mr Peter Bone,
and Sir Edward Leigh.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 5 September  2017.



National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
THIRD  MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  2 Amendment 
No. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF ASPLEY  GUISE 
18_ Clause  2, page  1, line 12, leave  out “£96”  and insert  “£130  for the tax year  2025/26  and 
£96 from  the tax year  2026/27” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This forms  part of a package  of amendments  in the name  of Baroness  Noakes  to allow  for a phased 
introduction  of the reductions  to the secondary  threshold. 
LORD  SCRIVEN 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
LORD  RANDALL  OF UXBRIDGE 
19_ Clause  2, page  1, line 14, leave  out paragraphs  (a) and (b) and insert— 
“(a) in sub-paragraph  (a), for “£758”  substitute— 
“(i) for a specified  employer  under  section  9(1B)  of the 
Social  Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992, 
£758,  and 
(ii) in all other  cases,  £417 ”, and 
(b) in sub-paragraph  (b), for “£9,100”  substitute— 
“(i) for a specified  employer  under  section  9(1B)  of the 
Social  Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992 
59/1 HL Bill 56—III 
or section  9(1B)  of the Social  Security  Contributions 
and Benefits  (Northern  Ireland)  Act 1992,  £9,100, 
and 
(ii) in all other  cases  £5,000. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to Lord  Scriven’s  amendments  to Clause  1, page 1, line 2 and Clause 
2, page 1, line 12. 
BARONESS  SMITH  OF NEWNHAM 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
LORD  RANDALL  OF UXBRIDGE 
20_ Clause  2, page  1, line 14, leave  out paragraphs  (a) and (b) and insert— 
“(a) in sub-paragraph  (a), for “£758”  substitute— 
“(i) where  the earner  is a veteran  within  the meaning 
of section  9AA(3)  of the Social  Security 
Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992,  £758,  and 
(ii) in all other  cases,  £417 ”, and 
(b) in sub-paragraph  (b), for “£9,100”  substitute— 
“(i) where  the earner  is a veteran  within  the meaning 
of section  9AA(3)  of the Social  Security 
Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992,  £9,100,  and 
(ii) in all other  cases  £5,000. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is connected  to Baroness  Smith  of Newnham’s  amendment  to Clause  1, page 1, 
line 2 and Clause  2, page 1, line 12. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF ASPLEY  GUISE 
21_ Clause  2, page  1, line 14, leave  out “£417”  and insert  “£563  for the tax year  2025/26  and 
£417  from  the tax year  2026/27” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This forms  part of a package  of amendments  in the name  of Baroness  Noakes  to allow  for a phased 
introduction  of the reductions  to the secondary  threshold. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 2 
LORD  LONDESBOROUGH 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
22_ Clause  2, page  1, line 15, leave  out paragraph  (b) and insert— 
“(b) in sub-paragraph  (b), for “£9,100”  substitute— 
(i) for businesses  and organisations  with  fewer  than  25 full-time 
employees,  £9,100, 
(ii) for businesses  and organisation  with  full-time  employees  of 25 or 
more  but fewer  than  50, £7,500,  and 
(iii) in all other  cases  £5,000. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  increase  the per-employee  threshold  at which  employers  become  liable  to 
pay national  insurance  contributions  on employees’  earnings  from  £5,000  to £9,100  for businesses 
employing  fewer  than 25 staff;  and to £7,500  for businesses  employing  less than 50 but more  than 
25 staff. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
23_ Clause  2, page  1, line 15, leave  out “5,000”  and insert  “7,500” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  change  the per-employee  threshold  at which  employers  become  liable  to 
pay national  insurance  contributions  on employees’  earnings  from  £5000  to £7500. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF ASPLEY  GUISE 
24_ Clause  2, page  1, line 15, leave  out “£5,000”  and insert  “£6,760  for the tax year  2025/26 
and £5,000  from  the tax year  2026/27” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This forms  part of a package  of amendments  in the name  of Baroness  Noakes  to allow  for a phased 
introduction  of the reductions  to the secondary  threshold. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  WOLFSON  OF ASPLEY  GUISE 
25_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out subsection  (4) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This forms  part of a package  of amendments  in the name  of Baroness  Noakes  to allow  for a phased 
introduction  of the reductions  to the secondary  threshold. 3 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
26_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on jobs,  wages,  inflation  and growth.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published,  noting  the impact  note of this policy  that was published  on 13 November. 
BARONESS  MONCKTON  OF DALLINGTON  FOREST 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
27_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on persons  who  provide  transport  for children  with  special  educational  needs 
and disabilities” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and two other  amendments  in the name  of Baroness  Monckton  of Dallington 
Forest,  would  prevent  commencement  of this Act until  an assessment  of the impact  of the policy 
on persons  who provide  transport  for children  with special  educational  needs  and disabilities  is 
published. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
28_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on early  years  provision.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for early  years  provision. 
BARONESS  MONCKTON  OF DALLINGTON  FOREST 
29_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on hospices.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for hospices. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 4 
BARONESS  MONCKTON  OF DALLINGTON  FOREST 
30_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on the retail  sector.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for retail. 
BARONESS  MONCKTON  OF DALLINGTON  FOREST 
31_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on the hospitality  sector.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for hospitality. 
BARONESS  SATER 
32_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on charities.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for charities. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
LORD  AHMAD  OF WIMBLEDON 
LORD  HOWARD  OF RISING 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
33_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on employers  which  are businesses  with  an annual  turnover  of less than— 
(a) £1 million, 
(b) £5 million,  and 
(c) £10 million. 
(5) In this section  “turnover”  means  the amounts  derived  from  the provision  of goods 
and services  after  deduction  of trade  discounts,  value  added  tax and any other 
taxes  on the amounts  so derived. ” 5 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for small  businesses  of various  sizes. 
LORD  JACKSON  OF PETERBOROUGH 
BARONESS  LAWLOR 
34_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on community  pharmacies.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for community  pharmacies. 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
35_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on schools  and universities” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for schools  and universities. 
LORD  HOWARD  OF RISING 
36_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, leave  out “2025-26”  and insert  “beginning  after  the tax year  in 
which  an impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
section  on farms.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  prevent  commencement  of this section  until  a full impact  assessment  is 
published  for farms. 
BARONESS  LAWLOR 
37_ Clause  2, page  1, line 16, at end insert  “subject  to subsection  (5). 
(5) The amounts  substituted  by this section  must  not come  into force  until  the Secretary 
of State  has laid before  both  Houses  of Parliament  a full impact  statement  which 
must  include— 
(a) the number  of employers  affected  by this change  by— 
(i) category,  and 
(ii) number  of employees; 
(b) the estimated  cost to those  employers; 
(c) the predicted  effects  on levels  of employment  and wages. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 6 
(6) Once  the amendments  made  by this section  come  into force,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  both  Houses  of Parliament  an impact  statement  every  six months 
which  includes— 
(a) actual  costs  to employers,  and 
(b) actual  effects  on employment  levels  and wages. ” 
Clause  3 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
38_ Clause  3, page  1, line 18, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  1(2),  for “The”  substitute  “Unless  the person  is an employer  in a 
qualifying  sector  under  subsection  (2A),  the”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and others  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for certain  sectors  from  £10,500  to £20,000. 
LORD  LONDESBOROUGH 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
39_ Clause  3, page  1, line 18, at end insert— 
“(1A) In section  1(2),  for “The”  substitute  “Unless  the person  is employed  in a business 
or organisation  with  fewer  than  25 full-time  employees  under  subsection  (2A), 
the”” 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
40_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the early  years  sector,  the employment  allowance  for 
the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the early  years  sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  early  years  providers  and 
the cost of that to the Exchequer. 7 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
41_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the hospice  sector,  the employment  allowance  for the 
tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the hospice  sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  smaller  hospices  and the cost 
of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
42_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the primary  care sector,  the employment  allowance 
for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the primary  care sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  primary  care settings  and 
the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
43_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a university,  the employment  allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 8 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for a university  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks  to 
probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  universities  and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
44_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a general  practice,  the employment  allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for GPs from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks  to probe  the 
Government’s  openness  to supporting  GPs and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
45_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a dental  practice,  the employment  allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for dental  practices  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks 
to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  dentists  and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
46_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a pharmacy,  the employment  allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 9 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for pharmacies  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks  to 
probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  pharmacies  and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
LORD  LEIGH  OF HURLEY 
47_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the social  care sector,  the employment  allowance  for 
the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the social  care sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  those  providing  social  care 
and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
48_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a business  with  a turnover  of less than  £1 million,  the employment 
allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe,  would  change  the employment 
allowance  for small  businesses  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks  to probe  the 
Government’s  openness  to supporting  small  businesses  and the cost of that to the Exchequer. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 10 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
49_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the hospitality  sector,  the employment  allowance  for 
the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the hospitality  sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  the hospitality  sector  and 
the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
50_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For a farm,  the employment  allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for farms  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This amendment  seeks  to probe  the 
Government’s  openness  to supporting  farms  and the cost of that to the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
51_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the retail  sector,  the employment  allowance  for the tax 
year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 11 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the retail  sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  retail  and the cost of that to 
the Exchequer. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
52_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  in the charity  sector,  the employment  allowance  for the 
tax year  is— 
(a) £20,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and another  in the name  of Baroness  Neville-Rolfe  to this Clause,  would  increase 
the employment  allowance  for employers  in the charity  sector  from  £10,500  to £20,000.  This 
amendment  seeks  to probe  the Government’s  openness  to supporting  charities  and the cost of that 
to the Exchequer. 
LORD  LONDESBOROUGH 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
53_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) For an employer  with  fewer  than  25 full-time  employees,  the employment 
allowance  for the tax year  is— 
(a) £15,000,  or 
(b) if less, an amount  equal  to the total  amount  of the liabilities 
mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b)  which  are not excluded  liabilities. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  increase  the employment  allowance  from  £10,500  to £15,000  for small 
businesses  and organisations  employing  fewer  than 25 staff. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 12 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
54_ Clause  3, page  1, line 20, at end insert— 
“(2A) After  section  1(2),  insert— 
“(2A) If the person  is a public  authority,  the amount  of the employment  allowance 
in subsection  (1)(2)(a)  is £20,000. 
(2B) A public  authority  means  any person  whose  activities  involve,  wholly  or 
mainly,  the performance  of functions  (whether  or not in the United 
Kingdom)  which  are of a public  nature. ”” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  give a higher  employment  allowance  to persons  carrying  out functions  of 
a public  nature. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
55_ Clause  3, page  1, line 21, at end insert— 
“(za) subsections  (1) and (2),” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  removes  the disqualification  of public  authorities  from  claiming  the employment 
allowance. 
BARONESS  NOAKES 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
56_ Clause  3, page  1, line 21, at end insert— 
“(za) subsection  (3),” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  removes  the exclusion  of employment  of persons  to provide  personal,  family  or 
household  affairs  from  the employment  allowance. 
BARONESS  LAWLOR 
57_ Clause  3, page  2, line 4, at and insert  “subject  to subsection  (5). 
(5) The amendments  made  by this section  must  not come  into force  until  the Secretary 
of State  has laid before  both  Houses  of Parliament  a full impact  statement  which 
must  include— 
(a) the number  of employers  affected  by this change  by— 
(i) category,  and 
(ii) number  of employees; 13 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
(b) the estimated  cost to those  employers; 
(c) the predicted  effects  on levels  of employment  and wages. 
(6) Once  the amendments  made  by this section  come  into force,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  both  Houses  of Parliament  an impact  statement  every  six months 
which  includes— 
(a) actual  costs  to employers,  and 
(b) actual  effects  on employment  levels  and wages. ” 
After  Clause  3 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
LORD  BRUCE  OF BENNACHIE 
58_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  of employer  NIC  threshold  on part-time  workers 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this 
Act, lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures  contained  in 
this Act on part-time  workers. 
(2) The review  must  consider  in particular  the effect  of the threshold  set by section 
2 of this Act on part-time  workers— 
(a) earning  £5,000  to £9,000  per annum,  or 
(b) working  under  16 hours  per week. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  would  require  the Government  to produce  a report  into the impact  of the employer 
NIC threshold  on part-time  staff,  especially  those  who are lower  paid or working  less than 16 hours 
a week. 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
LORD  BRUCE  OF BENNACHIE 
LORD  LONDESBOROUGH 
59_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on SMEs,  hospitality,  tourism  and seasonal  workers 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act. 
(2) The review  must  consider  in particular— 
(a) the impact  of those  measures  on the finances  and staffing  of small  and 
medium  sized  businesses; 
(b) the impact  of those  measures  on the finances  and staffing  of small  and 
medium  sized  businesses  in the hospitality  and tourism  sector; 
(c) the impact  of those  measures  on sectors  who  rely on seasonal  workers. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 14 
(3) In this section,  “small  and medium  sized  businesses”  means  any business  which 
has an average  headcount  of staff  of less than  250 in the tax year  2023-24. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Government  to produce  an impact  assessment  of the effect  of 
the Act on SMEs,  hospitality,  tourism  and on the sectors  relying  on seasonal  workers. 
LORD  BRUCE  OF BENNACHIE 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
60_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  in Scotland 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the passing  of this 
Act, lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  in Scotland  of the measures 
contained  in this Act. 
(2) The review  must  consider  in particular— 
(a) the impact  of those  measures  on the finances  and staffing  of small  and 
medium  sized  businesses  in Scotland; 
(b) the impact  of those  measures  on the finances  and staffing  of small  and 
medium  sized  businesses  in the hospitality  and tourism  sector  in Scotland; 
(c) the impact  of those  measures  on sectors  in Scotland  who  rely on seasonal 
workers; 
(d) the effect  of the threshold  set out by section  2 of this Act on part-time 
workers  in Scotland— 
(i) earning  £5,000  to £9,000  per annum,  or 
(ii) working  under  16 hours  per week. 
(3) In this section,  “small  and medium  sized  businesses”  means  any business  which 
has an average  headcount  of staff  of less than  250 in the tax year  2023-24. ” 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
61_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on certain  sectors 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on the persons  and sectors  in subsection  (2). 
(2) The review  must  consider  the impact  on— 
(a) general  practitioners; 
(b) dentists; 
(c) social  care providers; 
(d) hospices; 15 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
(e) small  businesses  (businesses  with  an annual  turnover  of less than  £1 
million); 
(f) early  years  providers; 
(g) universities; 
(h) charities; 
(i) farms; 
(j) retail; 
(k) hospitality. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on certain  sectors 
within  six months  of the day on which  it is passed. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
LORD  LONDESBOROUGH 
62_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on employment 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on the rate of employment  in the United  Kingdom. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on employment 
within  six months  of the day on which  it is passed. 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
63_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on jobs,  wages  and inflation 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on jobs,  wages  and inflation  in the United  Kingdom. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on jobs, wages 
and inflation  within  six months  of the day on which  it is passed. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 16 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
LORD  ALTRINCHAM 
64_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on economic  growth 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on the rate of economic  growth  in the United  Kingdom. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on economic 
growth  within  six months  of the day on which  it is passed. 
LORD  LEIGH  OF HURLEY 
65_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Annual  impact  assessment:  impact  on social  care providers 
(1) Within  12 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  and annually  thereafter, 
the Secretary  of State  must  publish  an impact  assessment  to assess  the impact  of 
the provision  in section  2 on social  care providers. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a copy  of these  reports  before  Parliament. ” 
BARONESS  BAKEWELL  OF HARDINGTON  MANDEVILLE 
BARONESS  KRAMER 
66_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on farming 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on farms. 
(2) The review  must  consider— 
(a) the direct  impact  of those  measures  on the finances  and staffing  of farms, 
(b) the indirect  impact  of those  measures,  taking  into account  employment  in 
the supply  chain,  and 
(c) the impact  of those  measures  on seasonal  workers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Government  to produce  an impact  assessment  of the effect  of 
the Act on farms,  including  any indirect  costs  incurred  through  the supply  chain. 17 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
THE  LORD  BISHOP  OF SOUTHWARK 
LORD  FORSYTH  OF DRUMLEAN 
LORD  ALTON  OF LIVERPOOL 
67_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on school  transport  services  for children  with  special 
educational  needs  and disabilities 
(1) The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  one month  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of this Act on the 
ability  of local  authorities  to meet  their  statutory  duties  in respect  of supplying 
school  transport  services  either  directly  or through  private  providers  for children 
with  special  educational  needs  and disabilities. 
(2) The review  must  supply  estimates  of any funding  shortfall  for the provision  of 
transport  services  for children  with  special  educational  needs  and disabilities  in 
local  authorities  in— 
(a) tax year  2025-26; 
(b) tax year  2026-27; 
(c) tax year  2027-28. 
(3) The review  must  set out what  intervention  or interventions  would  be necessary 
to ensure  local  authorities  can continue  to meet  their  statutory  duties  in respect 
of providing  school  transport  for children  with  special  educational  needs  and 
disabilities  for tax years  from  2025  to 2028. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  would  require  the Government  to analyse  the impact  of this Act on the ability  of 
local authorities  to meet  their  statutory  duties  around  the supply  of school  transport  services  for 
children  with special  educational  needs  and disabilities  in the period  to April  2028. 
BARONESS  BENNETT  OF MANOR  CASTLE 
68_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on people  with  protected  characteristics 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on people  with  protected  characteristics  under  the Equality 
Act 2010. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on people  with 
protected  characteristics. National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 18 
BARONESS  BENNETT  OF MANOR  CASTLE 
69_ After  Clause  3, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of effect  on climate,  nature  and green  jobs 
The Chancellor  of the Exchequer  must,  within  six months  of the day on which 
this Act is passed,  lay before  Parliament  a review  of the impact  of the measures 
contained  in this Act on matters  covered  by the Climate  Change  Act 2008  and 
Environment  Act 2021,  and on green  jobs. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  a review  of the impact  of the measures  in this Act on climate,  other 
aspects  of the environment,  and on green  jobs. 19 National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
National  Insurance  Contributions  (Secondary  Class  1 
Contributions)  Bill 
THIRD  MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
31 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 56—III



New  Homes  (Solar  Generation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to install  solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment  on new homes 
2 Exemptions  from  requirements  under  section  1 
3 Regulations 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 13 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the installation  of solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment  on new 
homes;  to set minimum  standards  for compliance  with  that requirement;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to install  solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment  on new 
homes 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  require  the installation  of solar 
photovoltaic  generation  equipment  on new  homes  built  from  1 October  2026. 
5 (2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) must— 
(a) require  the installation  of solar  photovoltaic  systems  covering  at least 
40% of the new  home’s  ground  floor  area, 
(b) set minimum  standards  for compliance, 
(c) 
10make  provision  for penalties  for failure  to comply  with  requirements 
under  those  regulations. 
2 Exemptions  from  requirements  under  section  1 
(1) Regulations  under  section  1 must  provide  for partial  or complete  exemptions 
for— 
(a) 
15buildings  which  cannot  physically  accommodate  solar  photovoltaic 
systems  covering  at least  40% of the building’s  ground  floor  area, 
(b) flats in buildings  exceeding  15 stories, 
(c) buildings  on which  it is not cost-effective  to install  solar  photovoltaic 
generation  equipment, 
(d) 
20buildings  on which  other  forms  of renewable  energy  generation  are 
installed. 
(2) Where  an exemption  applies  under  subsection  (1)(a)  above,  the regulations 
must  require  the installation  of solar  photovoltaic  systems  to the maximum 
possible  extent  that the building  can physically  accommodate. 
59/1 Bill 13 1 New  Homes  (Solar  Generation)  Bill 
(3) Regulations  under  section  1 may  provide  for any other  exemption  which  the 
Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(4) Regulations  under  section  1 must  make  provision  for a process  by which— 
(a) 
5a person  may  apply  to a local  planning  authority  for an exemption 
from  the requirement  to install  solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment 
on a new  home,  and 
(b) the local  planning  authority  must  determine  such  applications. 
3 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  under  this Act are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
10 (2) Before  making  regulations  under  this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(3) Regulations  under  this Act may— 
(a) provide  for the definition  of the following— 
(i) solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment, 
15 (ii) solar  photovoltaic  system, 
(iii) cost-effective,  and 
(iv) any other  term  the Secretary  of State  considers  it necessary  to 
define, 
(b) make  different  provision  for different  purposes, 
20 (c) make  transitional  or saving  provision. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
25 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the New  Homes  (Solar  Generation)  Act 2025. New  Homes  (Solar  Generation)  Bill 2 
New  Homes  (Solar  Generation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the installation  of solar  photovoltaic  generation  equipment  on new  homes;  to 
set minimum  standards  for compliance  with  that requirement;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Max  Wilkinson 
supported  by Gideon  Amos , Alex  Sobel , 
Pippa  Heylings , Dr Simon  Opher , 
Dr Danny  Chambers , Ellie Chowns , Layla  Moran , 
Carla  Denyer , Edward  Morello , Calum  Miller  and 
Anna  Sabine . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 13



NHS  England  (Alternative  Treatment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Access  for NHS  patients  to hospital  treatment 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 97 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  arranging  alternative  non-NHS  England  treatment  for 
patients  who  have  waited  for more  than  one year  for hospital  treatment;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Access  for NHS  patients  to hospital  treatment 
(1) The Secretary  of State  shall  by regulations  make  provision  for a scheme  to 
give  access  to hospital  treatment  for patients  registered  with  the NHS  in 
England  who  have  been  waiting  for more  than  one year  for NHS  treatment. 
5 (2) The scheme  under  this section  shall  include  arrangements  for access  to and 
payment  for treatment  which  is not provided  by the NHS. 
(3) The regulations  shall  make  provision  for calculating  the length  of period  for 
which  a patient  has been  awaiting  NHS  hospital  treatment. 
(4) 
10The regulations  shall  make  provision  for the cost of delayed  treatment  under  this 
section  to be funded  by NHS  England . 
(5) Regulations  under  this section— 
(a) are to be made  no later  than  six months  after  this Act comes  into force; 
(b) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
(c) 
15may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory  instrument  containing 
them  has been  laid before  and approved  by resolution  of each  House 
of Parliament. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  three  months  after  Royal  Assent. 
20 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the NHS  England  (Alternative  Treatment)  Act 2024. 
59/1 Bill 97 1 NHS  England  (Alternative  Treatment)  Bill 
NHS  England  (Alternative  Treatment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  arranging  alternative  non-NHS  England  treatment  for patients 
who  have  waited  for more  than  one year  for hospital  treatment;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 97



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Interpretation 
2 Use of non-disclosure  agreements 
3 Content  of non-disclosure  agreements 
4 Short  title,  commencement  and extent 
58/3 Bill 131 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the content  and use of non-disclosure  agreements;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
“responsible  party”  means  a person  who  has an obligation  in law to take 
5reasonable  steps  to prevent  bullying,  harassment  or discrimination  in 
the place  where  the bullying,  harassment  or discrimination  occurred 
or is alleged  to have  occurred; 
“relevant  person”  means  a person  who  has experienced  or made 
allegations  about  harassment  or discrimination; 
10“discrimination”  has the meaning  given  by sections  13 to 25 of the 
Equality  Act 2010; 
“bullying”  means  any action,  conduct  or comment  that could  reasonably 
be considered  to be an abuse  or misuse  of power  that undermines, 
humiliates,  or causes  physical  or psychological  injury  or illness  to a 
person; 
15 “harassment”  means  any action,  conduct  or comment  that could 
reasonably  be expected  to cause  offence,  humiliation  or other  physical 
or psychological  injury  or illness  to a person  and includes  actions, 
conduct  or comments  of a sexual  nature,  including  but not limited 
to— 
20 (a) sexual  solicitations  or advances, 
(b) sexually  suggestive  remarks,  jokes  or gestures, 
(c) sharing  inappropriate  images, 
(d) unwanted  physical  contact, 
(e) 
25any action,  conduct  or comment  that might  reasonably  be 
perceived  as placing  a condition  of a sexual  nature  on 
employment,  an opportunity  for training,  a promotion,  or any 
other  employment-related  opportunity,  or 
58/3 Bill 131 1 Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Bill 
(f) a reprisal  or threat  of reprisal  for rejecting  a sexual  solicitation 
or advance; 
“non-disclosure  agreement”  means  a provision  in writing  in a settlement 
agreement,  however  described,  between  a relevant  person  and— 
5 (a) a responsible  party,  or 
(b) a person  who  has committed  or is alleged  to have  committed 
bullying,  harassment  or discrimination, 
whereby  the relevant  person  agrees  not to disclose  any material 
10information  about  the circumstances  of a dispute  between  them 
concerning  allegations  of bullying,  harassment  or discrimination; 
“settlement  agreement”  means  an agreement  between  two or more  parties 
that disposes  of one or more  issues  in dispute  between  the parties  in 
relation  to allegations  of bullying,  harassment  or discrimination. 
2 Use of non-disclosure  agreements 
15 (1) Other  than  in accordance  with  subsection  (2), no responsible  party  or person 
who  has committed  or who  is alleged  to have  committed  bullying,  harassment 
or discrimination  shall  enter  into a non-disclosure  agreement  with  a relevant 
person  where— 
(a) 
20the relevant  person  has experienced,  or made  allegations  that they 
have  experienced,  bullying,  harassment  or discrimination;  and 
(b) the non-disclosure  agreement  has the purpose  or effect  of concealing 
information  about  a complaint  of bullying,  harassment  or 
discrimination. 
(2) 
25A responsible  party  or a person  who  has committed,  or who  is alleged  to 
have  committed,  bullying,  harassment  or discrimination  may  only  enter  into 
a non-disclosure  agreement  with  a relevant  person  in accordance  with  this 
section  if such  an agreement  is the expressed  wish  and preference  of the 
relevant  person  concerned. 
(3) 
30Where  a non-disclosure  agreement  is made  under  subsection  (2), the agreement 
is only  enforceable  if— 
(a) the relevant  person  has had a reasonable  opportunity  to receive 
independent  legal  advice, 
(b) there  have  been  no unreasonable  attempts  to influence  the relevant 
35person  in respect  of the decision  to enter  into a non-disclosure 
agreement, 
(c) the agreement  does  not adversely  affect— 
(i) the health  or safety  of a third  party,  or 
(ii) the public  interest, 
(d) 
40the agreement  includes  an opportunity  for the relevant  person  to 
decide  to waive  their  own  confidentiality  in the future  and sets out a 
process  for doing  so, and 
(e) the agreement  is of a set and limited  duration. Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Bill 2 
3 Content  of non-disclosure  agreements 
A non-disclosure  agreement  entered  into under  section  2(2) must,  as far as 
is possible,  be written  in plain  language. 
4 Short  title,  commencement  and extent 
5 (1) This  Act may  be cited  as the Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Act 2023. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of six months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 3 Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Bill 
Non-Disclosure  Agreements  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the content  and use of non-disclosure  agreements;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Layla  Moran 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   29th  June  2022 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2022 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/3 Bill 131



Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  1, page  2, line 5, at end insert— 
“(1A) Regulations  under  subsection  (1)(a)  must  provide  discretion  for billing 
authorities  with  regard  to the application  of the higher  multiplier. ” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Baroness  Scott  of Bybrook  gives  notice  of her intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  1 stand 
part of the Bill. 
Clause  3 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 27, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a retail  premises  which  is open 
to customers  for more  than  18 hours  a day,” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 27, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a premises  which  is shared  with 
a Post  Office,” 
59/1 HL Bill 61—Running  List 31 January 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 27, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a premises  which  is shared  with 
a Banking  Hub,” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 31, after  “hospitality”  insert  “, manufacturing” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 35, after  “hospitality”  insert  “, manufacturing” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  3, line 36, leave  out “has  such  meaning”  and insert  “and  “Banking  Hub” 
have  such  meanings” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 7, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a retail  premises  which  is open  to 
customers  for more  than  18 hours  a day,” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 7, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a premises  which  is shared  with 
a Post  Office,” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 7, after  “more,”  insert  “and  is not a premises  which  is shared  with 
a Banking  Hub,” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 11, after  “hospitality”  insert  “, manufacturing” 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 15, after  “hospitality”  insert  “, manufacturing” Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 2 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  3, page  4, line 16, leave  out “has  such  meaning”  and insert  “and  “Banking  Hubs” 
have  such  meanings” 
After  Clause  4 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ After  Clause  4, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of impact  on businesses,  high  streets  and economic  growth 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  review  the impact  of sections  1 to 4 of this Act on— 
(a) businesses, 
(b) high  streets,  and 
(c) economic  growth. 
(2) The review  must  consider— 
(a) the impact  on different  types  of business,  including  small  businesses; 
(b) the impact  on businesses  operating  mainly  or solely  on high  streets; 
(c) whether  the provisions  have  had a measurable  impact  on economic  growth, 
and if so what  that impact  has been. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must  lay a report  of the review  before  Parliament  within 
six months  of the day on which  those  sections  take effect. ” 
Clause  5 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 16, at end insert  “, subject  to sub-paragraph  (5A).” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 23, leave  out “or other  consideration” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, leave  out lines  26 to 37 3 Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 27, leave  out “wholly  or mainly” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 34, leave  out “or other  consideration” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 38, leave  out “wholly  or mainly” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 39, leave  out “for whom  an EHC  plan  is maintained”  and insert 
“with  special  educational  needs  and disabilities  as defined  in the Children  and Families 
Act 2014” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 40, at end insert— 
“(5A) An institution  is not to be considered  a private  school  for the purposes  of 
sub-paragraph  (3) if it is wholly  or mainly  concerned  with  providing  full-time 
education  for less than  an annual  fee of £27,642  per pupil. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 40, at end insert— 
“(5A) An institution  is not to be considered  a private  school  for the purposes  of 
sub-paragraph  (3) if it is wholly  or mainly  concerned  with  providing  full-time 
education  where  at least  7% of gross  income  is spent  on means-tested  fee 
assistance. ” Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 4 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 40, at end insert— 
“(5A) An institution  is not to be considered  a private  school  for the purposes  of 
sub-paragraph  (3) if it is wholly  or mainly  concerned  with  providing  full-time 
education  for gifted  arts students. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  5, page  5, line 40, at end insert— 
“(5A) An institution  is not to be considered  a private  school  for the purposes  of 
sub-paragraph  (3) if it has a religious  character  or other  special  character 
and there  is no maintained  school  or academy  of the same  character  within 
the specified  distance  from  the school. 
(5B) In this paragraph— 
“religious  character”  has the meaning  given  under  section  69 (duty  to 
secure  provision  of religious  education)  of the School  Standards  and 
Framework  Act 1998; 
“other  special  character”  has the meaning  as defined  by the Secretary 
of State  by regulation; 
“specified  distance”  is the distance  specified  under  section  444(5) 
(offence:  failure  to secure  regular  attendance  at school  of registered 
pupil)  of the Education  Act 1996. 
(5C) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(5D) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  may  not 
be made  unless  a draft  instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by a 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. ” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
★_ Clause  5, page  5, line 40, at end insert— 
“(5A) An institution  is not to be considered  a private  school  for the purposes  of 
sub-paragraph  (3) if it is wholly  or mainly  concerned  with  providing  full-time 
education  where  at least  10% of students  have  at least  one parent  or guardian 
serving  in the military. ” 5 Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ The above  named  Lords  give notice  of their  intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  5 stand 
part of the Bill. 
Clause  6 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  6, page  6, line 23, leave  out from  “effect”  to end of line 24 and insert  “after  an 
impact  assessment  is published  assessing  the impact  of the provisions  in section  5 on 
children  in private  schools  who  receive  means-tested  fee assistance  and their  access  to 
university” 
BARONESS  BARRAN 
BARONESS  SCOTT  OF BYBROOK 
_ Clause  6, page  6, line 24, leave  out “2025”  and insert  “2026” Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 6 
Non-Domestic  Rating  (Multipliers  and Private  Schools)  Bill 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN GRAND  COMMITTEE 
Tabled  up to and including 
31 January  2025 
31 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 61—Running  List 31 January



Baroness Hayman of Ullock  
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State  
Seacole Building  
2 Marsham Street  
London  
SW1P 4DF  
 
T:  +44 (0) 3459 335577  
E:  correspondence.section@defra.gov.uk  
W: gov.uk/defra  
 
 
  
 
The Lord Gardiner of Kimble  
Senior Deputy Speaker  
House of Lords  
London  
SW1A 0PW  
  
      
 
 
 
   
27 January 2025  
 
Dear  Lord Gardiner   
 Norwich Market Bill  
 I write concerning the Norwich Market Bill.  
 Standing Order 98A (Reports concerning human rights) requires that, in the case of a 
Private Bill originating in either House, a report from a Minister of the Crown on the 
statement of opinion required by Standing Order 38(3) shall be presented to the Hous e (by 
being deposited in the Office of the Clerk of the Parliaments) not later than the second sitting day after that on which the Bill was read a first time.  
 I consider that the Bill’s promoters have undertaken a full assessment of the compatibility 
of their proposals with the European Convention on Human Rights and I see no need to 
dispute their conclusions.                 
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
 
 
BARONESS HAYMAN OF ULLOCK



HL Bill 66 58/1Office of the Whistleblower Bill [HL] 1
A
BILL
TO
Make provision for an Office of the Whistleblower.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Establishment of the Office of the Whistleblower
(1) The Secretary of State must by regulations made by statutory instrument
within one year after the passing of this Act establish an Office of the
Whistleblower.
(2) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Act may not be made
u n l e s s  a  d r a f t  o f  t h e  i n s t r u m e n t  h a s  b e e n  l a i d  b e f o r e  a n d  a p p r o v e d  b y  aresolution of each House of Parliament.
2 Duties of the Office of the Whistleblower 
   The duties of the Office of the Whistleblower are the administration of
arrangements to facilitate whistleblowing.
3 Powers of the Office of the Whistleblower 
   The Office of the Wh istleblower has powers to—
(a) give direction to and monitor activiti es of relevant bo dies prescribed by
the regulations under section 1, including but not limited toconfidentiality and the use of disclosed information;
(b) act as a point of contact for indi viduals who wish to make a disclosure
they believe to be protected under the Public Interest Disclosure Act
1998 or the Public Interest Disclo sure (Northern Ireland) Order 1998
(S.I. 1998/1763 (N.I. 17));
(c) form and maintain a panel of ac credited legal firms and advisory
bodies to advise and support whistleblowers;
(d) maintain a fund to support whistleblowers;
(e) provide financial redress to indivi duals whose disclosure is deemed by
the Office to have harmed their employment, reputation or career;B
5
10
15
20
Office of the Whis tleblower Bill [HL] 2
(f) publish a report regarding its activiti es and lay it before both Houses of
Parliament each year.
4 Interpretation, extent, commencement and short title
(1) In this Act, “whistleblower” means a person who makes a protected disclosure
under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 or the Public Interest Disclosure
(Northern Ireland) Order 1998 (S.I. 1998/1763 (N.I. 17)) and “whistleblowing”is construed accordingly. 
(2) This Act extends to England and Wa les, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
(3) This Act comes into force on the day on which it is passed.(4) This Act may be cited as the Office of the Whistleblower Act 2020. 5
10
HL Bill 66 58/1Office of the Whistleblower Bill [HL]
© Parliamentary copyright House of Lords 2020
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF LORDSA
BILL
To make provision for an O ffice of the Whistleblower.
Baroness Kramer
Ordered to be Prin ted, 28th January 2020



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



Palestine  Statehood  (Recognition)  (No.  2) Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Recognition  of the State  of Palestine 
2 Status  of the Palestinian  Mission  to the UK 
3 Duty  to report  to Parliament 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 34 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  in connection  with  the recognition  of the State  of Palestine. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Recognition  of the State  of Palestine 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  one month  of the passing  of this Act, take 
such  steps  as are necessary  to ensure  that the Government  of the United 
Kingdom  formally  recognises— 
5 (a) Palestine  as a sovereign  and independent  state  on the basis  of the 
pre-1967  borders,  and 
(b) the inalienable  right  of the Palestinian  people  to self-determination. 
(2) In complying  with  subsection  (1)(b),  the Secretary  of State  must  have  regard 
10to any resolution  of the UN General  Assembly  which  appears  to them  to 
relate  to the right  of the Palestinian  people  to self-determination. 
(3) In this section,  “pre-1967  borders”  has the same  meaning  as in resolution 
76/10  (2021)  of the UN General  Assembly. 
2 Status  of the Palestinian  Mission  to the UK 
(1) 
15The Secretary  of State  must,  within  one month  of the passing  of this Act, take 
such  steps  as are necessary  to— 
(a) afford  the Mission  of Palestine  in London  status  as a full diplomatic 
mission,  and 
(b) afford  the members  of the diplomatic  staff  all applicable  privileges 
20and immunities  thereby  accorded  under  the Diplomatic  Privileges  Act 
1964. 
(2) For the purposes  of this section,  “diplomatic  mission”  is to be read  in 
accordance  with  the Vienna  Convention  on Diplomatic  Relations  done  at 
Vienna  on 18 April  1961. 
59/1 Bill 34 1 Palestine  Statehood  (Recognition)  (No. 2) Bill 
3 Duty  to report  to Parliament 
The Secretary  of State  must,  within  two months  of the passing  of this Act, 
lay before  Parliament  a report  outlining  the steps  taken  in pursuance  of the 
requirements  under  this Act. 
5 4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Palestine  Statehood  (Recognition)  Act 2024. Palestine  Statehood  (Recognition)  (No. 2) Bill 2 
Palestine  Statehood  (Recognition)  (No.  2) Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  in connection  with  the recognition  of the State  of Palestine. 
Presented  by Shockat  Adam 
supported  by Jeremy  Corbyn , Kim Johnson , 
Ayoub  Khan , Iqbal  Mohamed , Mr Adnan  Hussain , 
Brendan  O'Hara , Siân Berry , Liz Saville  Roberts , 
Ian Byrne  and Stephen  Gethins . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 34



Passenger Railway  Services (Public Ownership) Bill 
MARSHALLED LIST OF MOTIONS 
TO BE MOVED ON CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS REASONS 
[The page and line references are to HL Bill 21, the Bill as first printed for the Lords ] 
MOTION A 
LORDS AMENDMENT 1 
Before Clause 1 
1_ Before Clause 1, insert the following new Clause— 
“Purpose: improvement of passenger railway  services 
(1) The purpose of this Act is to improve the  performance of passenger railway
services in the United Kingdom.
(2) The Secretary of State must, in  taking  any actions under the  provisions of this Act,
have regard to this purpose. ”
COMMONS REASON 
The Commons disagree to Lords Amendment 1 for the following Reason— 
1A Because the proposed purpose clause is unnecessary. 
A★_ Lord Hendy of Richmond Hill to move, That this House do not insist on its Amendment 
1, to which the Commons have disagreed for their Reason 1A. 
A1★_ Lord Gascoigne to  move,    as an amendment to  Motion A, leave  out from  “House” to
end and insert “do insist on its Amendment 1” 
59/1 HL Bill 50—I 
MOTION B 
LORDS AMENDMENT 2 
Clause 1 
2_ Clause 1, page  1, line 12, at end insert— 
“25B Termination of existing franchise agreements 
(1) The Secretary of State must terminate franchise agreements for default in
accordance with the  terms of the  agreement as soon as it  is possible to do
so.
(2) The Secretary of State must assess and rank  existing franchise agreements
according to performance criteria established after consultation with relevant
stakeholders.
(3) Subject to subsection (1),  the Secretary of State must only terminate a
franchise agreement pursuant to a break  clause if—
(a) there are no other franchise agreements which are performing worse
under the criteria in the list referenced in subsection (2), and
(b) the Secretary of State is satisfied that  provision of the  services by  a
public sector company will improve existing service provision.
(4) In this section, “break clause” means a  contractual provision in  a franchise
agreement which entitles the  Secretary of State to terminate the  franchise
agreement before the end of the franchise term by notice without reason. ”
COMMONS REASON 
The Commons disagree to Lords Amendment 2 for the following Reason— 
2A Because it would alter the financial arrangements made by the Commons, and the Commons do 
not offer any further Reason, trusting that this Reason may be deemed sufficient. 
B★_ Lord Hendy of Richmond Hill to move, That this House do not insist on its Amendment 
2, to which the Commons have disagreed for their Reason 2A. Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill 2 
Passenger Railway  Services (Public Ownership) Bill 
MARSHALLED LIST OF MOTIONS 
TO BE MOVED ON CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS REASONS 
20 November 2024 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 50—I



Bill 32 55/4Pavement Parking Bill
CONTENTS
1 Prohibition of parking on verges , central reservations and footways
2 Consequential amendments3R e g u l a t i o n s4G u i d a n c e5 Short title, commencement and extent
Bill 32 55/4Pavement Parking Bill 1
A
BILL
TO
Make provision for the safety, conven ience and free movement on pavements
of disabled people, older people, peop le accompanying young children, and
other pavement users; to clarify, stre ngthen and simplify the law relating to
parking on pavements in England an d Wales; and for connected purposes.
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
1 Prohibition of parking on verges, central reservations and footways
(1) The Road Traffic Act 1988 is amended as follows.
(2) After section 19 insert—
“19A Parking on verges, centra l reservations and footways
(1) A person who parks a motor vehicl e (as defined in section 185 of this
Act) wholly or partly—
(a) on the verge of an urban road, or
(b) on a footway comprised of an urban road,
is guilty of a civil offence, subject to the provisions of regulations made
under section 3 of the Pavement Parking Act 2014.
(2) An offence under this section shall be treated as a traffic contravention
for the purposes of Part 6 of the Traffic Management Act 2004 andregulations made under it.
(3) A highway authority may by resoluti on, or in the case of the Secretary
of State by such notice as appears to him to be appropriate, authorise,from a date specified in the resoluti on or notice, the parking of vehicles
on or over a footway or any part  of a footway as referred to in
subsection (1).
(4) In this section—
“carriageway” and “footway” have the same meanings as in the
Highways Act 1980,B
5
10
15
20
Pavement Parking Bill 2
“urban road” means a road which—
(a) is a restricted road for the purposes of section 81 of the
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1980, or
(b) is subject to an order under section 84 of that Act
imposing a speed limit not ex ceeding 40 miles per hour,
or
(c) is subject to a speed limit not exceeding 40 miles per
hour which is imposed by or under any local Act,
“vehicle” means a mechanically propelled vehicle or a vehicle
designed or adapted for towing by, or to be attached to, a
mechanically propelled vehicle but does not include a heavy
commercial vehicle within the me aning of section 19 of the
Road Traffic Act 1988.”
2 Consequential amendments
(1) Schedule 7, Part 1 of the Traffic Mana gement Act 2004 is amended as follows.
(2) After paragraph 3(2)(h) insert—
“(i) an offence under section 19A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c.
52) (parking on verges, centra l reservations or footways).”
(3) After paragrap h 4(2)(i) insert—
“(j) an offence under section 19A of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (c.
52) (parking on verges, centra l reservations or footways).”
3 Regulations
(1) The Secretary of State shall make regulations as to statutory exemptions from
the provisions in section 1 of this Act and requirements as to adequateadvertisement, markings and signage. 
(2) The Secretary of State shall, following such public consultation as the Secretary
of State considers sufficient, make regulations amending the maximum fine
levels in the Civil Enforcement of Parking Contraventions (Guidelines on
Levels of Charges) (England) Order 2007 (SI 2007/3487) so as to allow thoseauthorities who take up the additional  enforcement powers available to them
under this Act to make a fair increase in the level of such  fines. In making
regulations under this section the Secretar y of State shall give  directions about
how “fair” is to be defined fo r the purposes of this section.
4 Guidance
(1) The Secretary of State shall consult on and issue statutory gu idance to all civil
enforcement authorities before this Act comes into force.
(2) Guidance issued under this section shall include a requirement that civil
enforcement authorities shall prioritise enforcement in areas already subject to
an existing Traffic Regulation Order, made under the Road Traffic Regulation
Act 1984, or where the relevant authority has formally been notified thatpavement parking is taking place.
(3) In this section, “relev ant authority” means a loca l authority in England or
Wales that has assumed civil parking en forcement powers under Part 6 of the
Traffic Management Act 2004.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Pavement Parking Bill 3
5 Short title, commencement and extent
(1) This Act may be cited as the Pavement Parking Act 2014.
(2) ThisAct shall come into force 12 months following the date of Royal Assent.
(3) This Act extends to England and Wales.
Bill 32 (xxxxxx) 55/4Pavement Parking Bill
© Parliamentary copyright House of Commons 2014
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at 
www.parliament.uk/site-i nformation/copyright.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
LONDON — THE STATIONERY OFFICE LIMITED
Printed in the United Kingdom by
The Stationery Office Limited
£x.xx
xxxbarxxxA
BILL
To make provision for the safety, convenience and free movement on
pavements of disabled people, older people, people accompanying young
children, and other pavement users; to clarify, strengthen an d simplify the law
relating to parking on pavements in  England and Wales; and for connected
purposes.
Presented by Martin Horwood, 
supported by 
Mr Jim Cunningham, Tracey Crouch, 
Kate Green, Mr Elfyn Llwyd, 
Caroline Lucas, Roger Williams, 
Lisa Nandy, Richard Fuller, 
Mr Michael Thornton, Henry Smith 
and Greg Mulholland.
Ordered, by  The House of Commons,
 to be Printed , 2 July  2014.



Pension  (Special  Rules  for End of Life)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Changes  to periods  of life expectancy 
2 Extent  and commencement 
3 Short  title 
59/1 Bill 40 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Change  the period  of life expectancy  relevant  to certain  pension  rules. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Changes  to periods  of life expectancy 
(1) In Schedule  7 to the Pensions  Act 2004,  in paragraph  25B(3)  (meaning  of 
“terminally  ill”),  for “6 months”  substitute  “12 months”. 
(2) 
5In Schedule  5 to the Pensions  Act 2008,  in paragraph  12(3)  (meaning  of 
“terminally  ill”),  for “6 months”  substitute  “12 months”. 
(3) In Schedule  6 to the Pensions  (Northern  Ireland)  Order  2005  (S.I. 2005/255 
(N.I.  1)), in paragraph  25B(3)  (meaning  of “terminally  ill”),  for “six months” 
substitute  “12 months”. 
(4) 
10In Schedule  4 to the Pensions  (No.  2) Act (Northern  Ireland)  2008  (c. 13 (N.I.)), 
in paragraph  12(3)  (meaning  of “terminally  ill”),  for “six months”  substitute 
“12 months”. 
(5) In the Financial  Assistance  Scheme  Regulations  2005  (S.I. 2005/1986)— 
(a) in regulation  2(9) (meaning  of “terminally  ill”),  for “six months”  substitute 
“12 months”; 
15 (b) in regulation  17(3D)(b)(i)  (period  of life expectancy  in relation  to progressive 
disease),  for “six months”  substitute  “12 months”. 
2 Extent  and commencement 
(1) Subsections  (1) and (2) of section  1 extend  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
(2) Subsections  (3) and (4) of section  1 extend  to Northern  Ireland. 
20 (3) Section  1(5), this section  and section  3 extend  to England  and Wales,  Scotland 
and Northern  Ireland. 
(4) Subsections  (1), (2) and (5) of section  1 come  into force  on such  day or days 
as the Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  appoint. 
59/1 Bill 40 1 Pension  (Special  Rules  for End of Life) Bill 
(5) Subsections  (3) and (4) of section  1 come  into force  on such  day or days  as 
the Department  for Communities  in Northern  Ireland  may  by order  appoint. 
(6) This  section  and section  3 come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is 
passed. 
5 (7) Regulations  under  subsection  (4) may  contain  such  transitional  or saving 
provision  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(8) An order  under  subsection  (5) may  contain  such  transitional  or saving 
provision  as the Department  for Communities  in Northern  Ireland  considers 
appropriate. 
10 (9) Regulations  made  by the Secretary  of State  under  subsection  (4) are to be 
made  by statutory  instrument. 
(10) The power  of the Department  for Communities  in Northern  Ireland  to make 
an order  under  subsection  (5) is exercisable  by statutory  rule for the purposes 
15of the Statutory  Rules  (Northern  Ireland)  Order  1979  (S.I. 1979/1573  (N.I. 
12)). 
3 Short  title 
This  Act may  be cited  as the Pension  (Special  Rules  for End of Life)  Act 2025. Pension  (Special  Rules  for End of Life) Bill 2 
Pension  (Special  Rules  for End of Life)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Change  the period  of life expectancy  relevant  to certain  pension  rules. 
Presented  by Greg  Smith 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 40



Ordered to be printed 22 January 2025 and published 23 January 2025
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 74  13th Report of Session 2024–25
  Bus Services (No. 2) Bill [HL]
Permitted Development 
Rights (Extension) Bill [HL]
Non-Domestic Rating 
(Multipliers and Private 
Schools) Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,  
(b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or 
(c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,  
(b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,  
(c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,  
(d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or 
(e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Thirteenth Report        
 BUS SERVICES (NO. 2) BILL [HL]
1.  This Bill, which was introduced in the House of Lords on 17 December 
2024 and had its Second Reading on 8 January 2025, is expected to begin 
Committee Stage on 28 January.
2. The Bill makes provision to facilitate the operation of franchise bus services 
by local transport authorities, to safeguard “socially necessary” services 
where local transport authorities operate “enhanced partnership” models 
and to make it easier for local authorities to create their own municipal bus 
companies. It also makes provision in a number of areas relating to safety 
and accessibility of buses and restricts the use of new non-zero emission 
buses on registered local bus services.
3. The Department for Transport is responsible for the Bill and has published 
a Delegated Powers Memorandum (“the Memorandum”).1
4. The Bill includes thirty delegated powers. We draw the attention of the 
House to one matter.
 Clause 27—use of zero-emission vehicles for registered local services 
in England
5. Clause 27 inserts a new section 151A in the Transport Act 2000. The new 
section 151A(1) prohibits the use of new non-zero emissions vehicles for 
local bus services in England which are registered under section 6 of the 
Transport Act 1985. Whether or not a vehicle is new will be determined by a 
date to be set in regulations.
6. Non-zero emissions vehicles are those which emit any of the following from 
the tailpipe: carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide 
and particulates. The restriction of scope to services which are registered 
under section 6 of the 1985 Act means that franchised services, including 
services in Greater London, are not affected by the prohibition.2
7. The prohibition applies to vehicles which have more than 22 passenger seats 
and will affect vehicles that are first registered under the Vehicle Excise and 
Registration Act 1994 on or after the date set in regulations. That date may 
not be before 1 January 2030.
8. The delegated power is in clause 27(3) and is subject to the negative 
procedure.3
1 Memorandum on the Bus Services (No. 2) Bill [HL] from the Department for Transport to the 
Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (21 January 2024): https://bills.parliament.uk/
publications/57869/documents/5668 
2 The Explanatory Notes explain at paragraph 108 that where franchising is in place the decision on 
whether to phase out non-zero emissions vehicles and its timing would be a local one, with the local 
transport authority setting the emissions expectations taking into account local needs and franchising 
costs.
3 In addition to the power to set the date, the regulations may contain provision specifying the 
documents that can evidence the absence of tailpipe emissions and provision exempting services from 
the prohibition. These additional matters are not relevant to the issue raised in this report.
2
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
9. The Memorandum explains that this restriction on the use of new non-zero 
emissions buses would deliver significant environmental and air quality 
benefits and contribute to the UK meeting its interim carbon budget and 
net-zero emissions targets under the Climate Change Act 2008.
10. The Explanatory Notes further explain that bus operators have begun to 
invest in new technology and that local transport authorities have begun 
to move to, or plan for, zero-emission fleets. The prohibition is intended to 
help accelerate bus decarbonisation by giving greater certainty of demand 
for zero-emission buses to manufacturers.
11. The Memorandum justifies the use of negative resolution procedure on the 
basis that the content of the regulations will be very limited and that the 
Bill setting the earliest possible date means that those affected will have 
sufficient notice.
12. It is not necessarily the case that regulations with limited content (such as 
a date) have a limited effect. Setting a date in this case will likely require 
judgments to be made about issues including the state of technology, readiness 
of the supply chain, the cost and availability of compliant vehicles, and the 
balance of environmental impacts such as the extent to which old vehicles 
will be scrapped as well as positive air quality and greenhouse gas emissions 
outcomes. The impacts of the decision on timing are of direct interest to bus 
manufacturers and others in the supply chain, bus operators, local transport 
authorities and passengers, and indirect interest to many more. Furthermore, 
the decision is part of the government’s broader decarbonisation policy and 
move to phasing out non-zero emissions road vehicles of other types, such as 
cars and vans.
13. We recommend that in light of the complex judgments to be made 
in setting a date for the phase out of non-zero emissions buses from 
registered local bus services, the effect on a wide range of people and 
organisations, and the broader interest in decarbonisation policy, the 
power in clause 27(3) is made subject to the affirmative procedure.
3
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
14. T
his report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to one private
member’s Bill. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those membersof the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do nothave the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel inthe preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills areframed in the light of that understanding.
 PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (EXTENSION) BILL
[HL]
15.
 
This private member’s Bill, which is expected to have its Second Reading on
7 February 2025, makes provision for new permitted development rights inrelation to the development of residential property in England and Wales.A permitted development right is a right to develop land that falls within itsscope without the need for planning permission. The Bill uses numerousterms and expressions used in the existing system of planning legislation andtherefore seems intended to form a discrete part of that system. It includesseven delegated powers.
16.
W
e draw the attention of the House to two matters.
 Clauses 2(2), 2(3), 2(4)(b), 2(5) and 4—potentially ineffective delegated
powers
17. E
ach of the delegated powers in clauses 2(2), 2(3), 2(4)(b), 2(5) and 4 permit
the Secretary of State to set additional technical requirements or standards
which may be required when a new permitted development right is reliedon. They relate, respectively, to slowing rainwater run-off, structural safety,insulation or energy efficiency, offsetting urban heat island effect, and floodresilience.
18.
U
nder existing planning legislation compliance with a permitted development
right is deemed to be compliance with planning permission, so if a permitteddevelopment right under existing legislation was purportedly relied on fordevelopment outside its scope, or conditions attached to it were not met, thedeveloper would be subject to enforcement action.
4
19. H owever, the Bill does not link its central term “new permitted development
right” in any way to the existing legislation, for example by providing thatthose complying with a new permitted development right are deemed to haveplanning permission for the development.
20.
I
t follows that development that complies with a new permitted development
right under the Bill would still require planning permission and that any
4 In England and Wales planning permission is required by section 57(1) of the Town and Country 
Planning Act 1990 and in England, article 3 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted 
Development) (England) Order (SI 2015/596) provides that planning permission is granted for the classes of development set out as permitted development rights in Schedule 2 to the Order. Equivalent provision for Wales is made in the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995. Enforcement related powers, procedures and sanctions for breach are set out in Part 7 of the 1990 Act. 
4
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
exercise of the delegated powers to set requirements and standards in relation 
to those rights would be without full legal effect.
21. We recommend that the Bill is amended so that the delegated powers 
in clauses 2(2), 2(3), 2(4)(b), 2(5) and 4 are capable of having full effect 
if they are exercised.
 Clause 4—permitted development rights: flood zones
22. Clause 4 confers a power on the Secretary of State to make regulations 
specifying standards of flood resilience to be required where a new permitted 
development right is relied on in an area within the clause’s scope. The scope 
of the clause is expressed to be residential buildings within flood zones 2 
and 3 which are “well serviced by public transport”. The meaning of “well 
serviced by public transport” is left to be defined in regulations made by the 
Secretary of State.
23. It is not possible to understand the true scope of the power without knowing 
the meaning of “well serviced by public transport”. In particular it is not 
possible to know whether exercise of the power would affect a significant 
amount of flood-vulnerable property or not. A term that significantly affects 
the scope of a delegated power should be set out fully on the face of the Bill.
24. We consider that clause 4 inappropriately delegates an essential 
element of its scope to be defined in secondary legislation and that 
the meaning of the term “well serviced by public transport” should 
be set out on the face of the Bill.
5
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 NON-DOMESTIC RATING (MULTIPLIERS AND PRIVATE 
SCHOOLS) BILL
25. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
6
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
For the business taken at the meeting on 22 January 2025, Members declared no 
interests.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Finlay of Llandaff, 
Lord McLoughlin, Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville, The Earl of 
Lindsay, Lord Rooker and Baroness Chakrabarti.



Pets  (Microchips)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  for vets to scan  for microchips  before  euthanising  pets 
2 Regulations 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 66 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  regarding  pets with  microchips;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  for vets to scan  for microchips  before  euthanising  pets 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulations,  make  provision  requiring 
veterinary  surgeons  in England  to take the steps  in subsection  (2) before 
5euthanising  a healthy  or treatable  pet which  has no history  or evidence  of 
negative  behavioural  problems. 
(2) Those  steps  are— 
(a) to scan  the pet for a microchip  on first presentation  and before  any 
final  decision  is made  on its euthanasia; 
(b) 
10if the veterinary  surgeon  considers  it safe to do so, to contact  the 
registered  owner  and any back-up  rescuer  of the pet in accordance 
with  information  held  on the database  associated  with  any such 
microchip. 
(3) The steps  in subsection  (2) must  be carried  out in accordance  with  any relevant 
15Code  of Conduct  or guidance  issued  by the Royal  College  of Veterinary 
Surgeons,  including  guidance  on client  confidentiality  and on microchipped 
animals. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  may  make  provision— 
(a) requiring  veterinary  surgeons  in England  to take further  steps  prior 
to euthanising  a pet fitted  with  a microchip; 
20 (b) requiring  Government-endorsed  pet microchip  databases  regarding 
pets in England  to indicate  when  a pet has both  a registered  owner 
and a back-up  rescuer; 
(c) for safeguards  limiting  requests  to change  information  about  a pet 
held  on such  databases  to the registered  owner  of that pet; 
25 (d) about  other  information  to be held  on such  databases. 
59/1 Bill 66 1 Pets (Microchips)  Bill 
2 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  under  this Act— 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
(b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
5 (c) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory  instrument  containing 
them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution  of, each 
House  of Parliament. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  not lay a draft  of a statutory  instrument  containing 
10regulations  under  section  1 before  Parliament  unless,  in the opinion  of the 
Secretary  of State,  there  is in operation  a central  digital  database  of information 
about  microchipped  pets. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
15 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Pets (Microchips)  Act 2025. Pets (Microchips)  Bill 2 
Pets  (Microchips)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  regarding  pets with  microchips;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Rebecca  Harris 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 66



Poly  and Perfluorinated  Alkyl  Substances 
(Guidance)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to issue  guidance  on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances 
in drinking  water 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 120 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Chief  Inspector  of Drinking  Water  to issue  guidance  to water 
companies  on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances  in drinking  water; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to issue  guidance  on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances 
in drinking  water 
(1) The Water  Industry  Act 1991  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  86ZA  (charging  of fees),  insert— 
5 “86ZB Guidance  on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances  in drinking 
water 
(1) The Chief  Inspector  of Drinking  Water  must  issue  guidance  for— 
(a) water  undertakers,  and 
(b) water  supply  licensees 
10 on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances  (“PFAS”)  in drinking 
water. 
(2) Guidance  issued  under  this section  must  include  guidance— 
(a) about  monitoring  and reporting  of PFAS,  including  monitoring 
of PFAS  in sewage  overflows, 
15 (b) about  limits  on the amount  of PFAS  that may  be present  in 
drinking  water, 
(c) about  carrying  out risk assessments  in respect  of PFAS, 
(d) about  the development  of strategies  in relation  to PFAS, 
(e) 
20for companies  receiving  bulk  supplies  of water  for onward 
distribution, 
(f) about  such  other  matters  as the Chief  Inspector  of Drinking 
Water  considers  appropriate. 
(3) The Chief  Inspector  of Drinking  Water  may  revise  guidance  issued 
under  this section. 
59/1 Bill 120 1 Poly and Perfluorinated  Alkyl  Substances  (Guidance)  Bill 
(4) The Chief  Inspector  of Drinking  Water  must  arrange  for guidance 
issued  under  this section  to be published. ” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
5 (2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Poly  and Perfluorinated  Alkyl  Substances 
(Guidance)  Act 2025. Poly and Perfluorinated  Alkyl  Substances  (Guidance)  Bill 2 
Poly  and Perfluorinated  Alkyl  Substances 
(Guidance)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Chief  Inspector  of Drinking  Water  to issue  guidance  to water  companies 
on poly  and perfluorinated  alkyl  substances  in drinking  water;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Presented  by Munira  Wilson 
supported  by Tim Farron , Alex  Sobel , 
James  MacCleary , Alberto  Costa , Edward  Morello , 
Ellie Chowns , Sarah  Olney , Ruth  Cadbury , 
David  Chadwick , Cameron  Thomas  and 
Mr Joshua  Reynolds . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   5th November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 120



Powers  of Attorney  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duties  of banks  in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney 
2 Powers  of the Public  Guardian  in relation  to investigations 
3 Review:  effectiveness  of the powers  of the Office  of the Public  Guardian 
4 Duties  of care homes  in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney 
5 Requirement  for the Public  Guardian  to notify  a donor’s  General  Practitioner 
6 Requirement  for Attorneys  to notify  a death  of a donor 
7 Requirement  for Public  Guardian  to take steps  to promote  search  facility 
8 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 126 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to place  duties  on banks 
in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to make  provision  about  the powers 
of the Office  of the Public  Guardian  to investigate  the actions  of an attorney; 
to require  the Secretary  of State  to review  the effectiveness  of the powers  of 
the Office  of the Public  Guardian  to investigate  the actions  of an attorney  and 
of its use of those  powers;  to make  provision  about  the duties  of care homes 
in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to require  an attorney  to notify  the 
Office  of the Public  Guardian  of the death  of a donor;  to require  the Office  of 
the Public  Guardian  to take steps  to promote  the facility  to request  a search 
of its registers  of powers  of attorney;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duties  of banks  in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney 
(1) If a relevant  financial  institution  to which  this section  applies  has reasonable 
grounds  to believe  that an attorney  (or attorneys  if there  is more  than  one) 
5registered  as a donee  under  section  10 (appointment  of a donees)  of the Mental 
Capacity  Act 2005— 
(a) has behaved  or is suspected  of planning  to behave  in a way  that goes 
against  their  fiducial  duties  or is not in the donor’s  best interests,  or 
(b) is suspected  of potential  misuse,  negligence  or fraud  in respect  of 
money  held  in a donor’s  account, 
10 it must  notify  the Public  Guardian  as soon  as practicable  after  detecting 
concerns  that an attorney  may  be abusing  their  position. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  about  the 
information  to be included  in a notification  and timescale  for reporting  to the 
Public  Guardian. 
15 (3) Regulations  under  subsection  (2)— 
(a) may  provide  that the institution  which  includes  information  in a 
notification  in accordance  with  the regulations  does  not breach  any 
obligation  of confidence  owed  by the institution  in relation  to the 
20provision  of that information  where  there  is a public  interest  for said 
disclosure; 
59/1 Bill 126 1 Powers  of Attorney  Bill 
(b) may  not require  or authorise  the inclusion  of information  which 
contravenes  any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information 
(however  imposed). 
(4) A relevant  financial  institution  means— 
5 (a) a bank,  which  means  an authorised  deposit-taker,  other  than  a building 
society,  that has its head  office  or a branch  in the United  Kingdom. 
(b) a building  society,  which  has the same  meaning  as in the Building 
Societies  Act 1986. 
(c) an electronic  money  institution,  or 
10 (d) a payment  institution. 
2 Powers  of the Public  Guardian  in relation  to investigations 
(1) This  section  applies  if the Public  Guardian— 
(a) has reasonable  grounds  for suspecting  that money  held  in an account 
15maintained  with  a relevant  financial  institution  in the donor’s  name 
is not being  used  by an attorney  (or attorneys  if there  is more  than 
one)  in the best interests  of the donor,  and 
(b) is investigating  the actions  of that attorney  or attorneys. 
(2) Under  this section  the Public  Guardian  may  apply  to the relevant  court  for 
20an account  freezing  order  in relation  to the account  in which  the money  is 
held. 
(3) A judge  may,  on an application  made  to him by the Public  Guardian,  make 
an account  freezing  order  if he is satisfied  that— 
(a) the application  is sought  for the purposes  of an investigation;  and 
(b) 
25a person  or persons  specified  in the application,  who  are registered 
donees,  are behaving  or planning  to behave,  in a way that goes  against 
their  fiduciary  duties  or is not in the donor’s  best interests. 
(4) For the purposes  of this section— 
(a) an account  freezing  order  is an order  that prohibits  each  person  by 
30or for whom  the account  to which  the order  applies  is operated  from 
making  withdrawals  or payments  from  the account; 
(b) an account  is operated  by or for a person  if the person  is an account 
holder  or a signatory  or identified  as a beneficiary  in relation  to the 
account. 
(5) 
35An application  for an account  freezing  order  may  be made  without  notice  if 
the circumstances  of the case are such  that notice  of the application  would 
prejudice  the taking  of any steps  under  this section  to prevent  money  intended 
by any person  for use in unlawful  conduct  from  being  so used. 
(6) The power  to vary  an account  freezing  order  includes  (amongst  other  things) 
40power  to make  exclusions  from  the prohibition  on making  withdrawals  or 
payments  from  the account  to which  the order  applies. 
(7) Exclusions  from  the prohibition  may  also be made  when  the order  is made. Powers  of Attorney  Bill 2 
(8) An exclusion  may  (amongst  other  things)  make  provision  for the purpose  of 
enabling  a person  by or for whom  the account  is operated  to meet  the donor’s 
reasonable  living  expenses. 
(9) 
5An exclusion  order  must  not be made  for the purpose  of enabling  a person 
to meet  legal  expenses  that the person  has incurred,  or may  incur,  in respect 
of proceedings  relating  to an investigation. 
(10) An exclusion  may  be made  subject  to conditions. 
(11) The application  for an account  freezing  order  may  relate  to— 
(a) 
10all accounts  held  by the person  specified  in the application  for the 
order  at the financial  institution  so specified, 
(b) a particular  description,  or particular  descriptions,  of accounts  so held, 
or 
(c) a particular  account,  or particular  accounts,  so held. 
(12) A relevant  financial  institution  means— 
15 (a) a bank,  which  means  an authorised  deposit-taker,  other  than  a building 
society,  that has its head  office  or a branch  in the United  Kingdom. 
(b) a building  society,  which  has the same  meaning  as in the Building 
Societies  Act 1986. 
(c) an electronic  money  institution,  or 
20 (d) a payment  institution. 
3 Review:  effectiveness  of the powers  of the Office  of the Public  Guardian 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  three  months  of the passing  of this Act, 
appoint  an independent  person  (“the  independent  person”)  to carry  out a 
25review  of the regulation  of the effectiveness  of the powers  of the Office  of 
the Public  Guardian  to investigate  the actions  of attorneys  (“the  review”). 
(3) The review  must  consider— 
(a) whether  the existing  powers  of the Office  of the Public  Guardian  are 
sufficient  to enable  it to carry  out its duties, 
(b) 
30whether  the Office  of the Public  Guardian  is using  its powers 
effectively  to safeguard  donors, 
(c) whether  there  is a need  for any change  to the powers  of the Office  of 
the Public  Guardian. 
(4) The independent  person  must  prepare  a report  of the review  and provide  a 
copy  of that report  to the Secretary  of State. 
35 (5) The report  under  subsection  (3) may  contain  recommendations  for such 
changes  to the law or to government  policy  as the independent  reviewer 
considers  appropriate. 
(6) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a copy  of the report  before 
Parliament  as soon  as is reasonably  practicable  after  receipt. 3 Powers  of Attorney  Bill 
4 Duties  of care homes  in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney 
(1) The Public  Guardian  must  establish  and maintain  a register  containing  such 
information  as appears  to the Public  Guardian  to be necessary  to protect  persons 
whose  primary  residence  is a care home  who have— 
5 (a) made,  and 
(b) registered 
a lasting  power  of attorney. 
(2) Under  this section  a registered  person  or manager  in a care home  establishment  must 
10give notice  in writing  to the Public  Guardian,  as soon as it is reasonably  practicable 
to do so, if, to their  knowledge,  any of the following  events  takes  place  relating  to 
persons  whose  primary  residence  is that home— 
(a) a resident  makes  or registers  a lasting  power  of attorney; 
(b) a new resident  arrives  with a registered  lasting  power  of attorney; 
(c) 
15a proposed  change  in the name  or address  of a person  in a care home  with a 
registered  lasting  power  of attorney; 
(d) the death  of a person  in a care home  with a registered  lasting  power  of 
attorney. 
(3) Following  a notification  under  subsection  (2) the Public  Guardian  must  carry  out a 
20review  to confirm  there  is no reason  to suspect  a person  has been put under  undue 
influence,  manipulated  or forced  into granting  a power  of attorney  against  their  will. 
(4) For the purposes  of this Act, a care home  establishment  in England  and Wales  is a 
care home  if it provides  accommodation,  together  with nursing  or personal  care,  for 
any of the following  persons— 
(a) persons  who are or have been ill; 
25 (b) persons  who have or have had a mental  disorder; 
(c) persons  who are disabled  or infirm;  or 
(d) persons  who are or have been dependent  on alcohol  or drugs. 
(5) For the purpose  of this section— 
30“registered  manager”  in relation  to a care home,  means  a person  who is 
registered  as the manager  of the care home; 
“registered  person”  in relation  to a care home,  means  any person  who is the 
registered  provider  or registered  manager  in respect  of the care home. 
5 Requirement  for the Public  Guardian  to notify  a donor’s  General  Practitioner 
(1) Schedule  1 to the Mental  Capacity  Act 2005  is amended  as follows— 
35 (2) In paragraph  15, after  sub-paragraph  (b) insert— 
“(c) the donor’s  general  practitioner. 
(2) The notification  to a general  practitioner  in sub-paragraph  (c) must 
set out the grounds  and process  for registering  an objection  to the 
registration  of a lasting  power  of attorney. ” Powers  of Attorney  Bill 4 
6 Requirement  for Attorneys  to notify  a death  of a donor 
(1) Schedule  1 to the Mental  Capacity  Act 2005  is amended  as follows— 
(2) At the end of paragraph  23, insert— 
“Death  of a donor 
5 23A In the event  of the death  of a donor,  it is the duty  of a registered 
donee  (or donees  if there  is more  than  one)  to notify  the Public 
Guardian,  as soon  as is practicable,  of the death  and the date  of 
death  of a donor. ” 
7 Requirement  for Public  Guardian  to take  steps  to promote  search  facility 
10 (1) The Mental  Capacity  Act 2005  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  58(1)  (functions  of the Public  Guardian),  after  paragraph  (i) insert— 
“(j) promoting  and publishing  public  information  to ensure 
public  awareness  of how  individuals  may  apply  to the 
15Public  Guardian  to establish  whether  a person  has 
applied  for or registered  a lasting  power  of attorney. ” 
8 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  section  comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(3) 
20The remaining  provisions  of this Act come  into force  on such  day or days  as 
the Lord  Chancellor  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
(4) The regulations— 
(a) may  make  transitional,  transitory  or saving  provision,  and 
(b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes. 
(5) This  Act may  be cited  as the Powers  of Attorney  Act 2025. 5 Powers  of Attorney  Bill 
Powers  of Attorney  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to place  duties  on banks  in respect 
of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to make  provision  about  the powers  of the Office  of the 
Public  Guardian  to investigate  the actions  of an attorney;  to require  the Secretary  of 
State  to review  the effectiveness  of the powers  of the Office  of the Public  Guardian  to 
investigate  the actions  of an attorney  and of its use of those  powers;  to make  provision 
about  the duties  of care homes  in respect  of Lasting  Powers  of Attorney;  to require  an 
attorney  to notify  the Office  of the Public  Guardian  of the death  of a donor;  to require 
the Office  of the Public  Guardian  to take steps  to promote  the facility  to request  a search 
of its registers  of powers  of attorney;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Fabian  Hamilton 
supported  by Bambos  Charalambous , Mark  Sewards , 
Paula  Barker , Layla  Moran , Tim Roca , Chris  Law, 
Alex  Sobel , Yuan  Yang  and Andrew  George . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   12th  November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 126



Product  Regulation  and Metrology  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
21 January  2025 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
LORD  LANSLEY 
★_ Clause  1, page  1, line 4, at end insert— 
“(za) securing  that products  to which  this section  applies  are safe; ” 
LORD  LANSLEY 
_ Clause  1, page  1, line 8, at end insert— 
“(1A) In considering  whether  regulations  should  be made  under  subsection  (1), the 
Secretary  of State  must  have  regard  to the likelihood  of the United  Kingdom  being 
seen  as a favourable  place  in which  to develop,  manufacture  or supply  products. ” 
LORD  LANSLEY 
★_ Clause  1, page  2, line 13, at end insert— 
““safe” , in relation  to any products,  means  such  that there  is no risk,  or no risk 
apart  from  one reduced  to a minimum,  that any of the following  will 
(whether  immediately  or after  a definite  or indefinite  period)  cause  the death 
of, or any personal  injury  to, any person  whatsoever,  that is to say— 
(a) the products, 
(b) the keeping,  use or consumption  of the products, 
(c) the assembly  of any of the products  which  are, or are to be, supplied 
unassembled, 
(d) any emission  or leakage  from  the products  or, as a result  of the 
keeping,  use or consumption  of the products,  from  anything  else,  or 
59/1 HL Bill 18—R—Running  List 21 January 
(e) reliance  on the accuracy  of any measurement,  calculation  or other 
reading  made  by or by means  of the products; ” 
Clause  2 
LORD  LANSLEY 
_ Clause  2, page  3, line 26, at end insert— 
“(d) the identification  of and availability,  including  licensing,  of standard 
essential  patents  that relate  to technology  essential  for implementing  a 
technical  standard. ” 
LORD  LANSLEY 
_ Clause  2, page  3, line 37, at end insert— 
“(7A) Provision  made  in reliance  on subsection  (1) may  (among  other  things)  identify 
product  requirements  by reference  to international  agreements  or standards 
relating  to the marketing  or use of products,  including  agreements  or standards 
as they  have  effect  from  time  to time. ” 
After  Clause  4 
LORD  HOPE  OF CRAIGHEAD 
★_ After  Clause  4, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Product  regulations:  devolved  administrations 
(1) Product  regulations  under  section  1 may  not be made  unless  and until  the Secretary 
of State  has consulted  the devolved  administrations  as to their  impact  and effect 
on the marketing  and use of products  in the areas  within  the United  Kingdom 
over  which  they  have  legislative  competence. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  exclude  the application  of this Act to 
products  to be marketed  or used  in areas  within  the United  Kingdom  over  which 
the devolved  administrations  have  legislative  competence  to enable  effect  to be 
given  to an agreement  that forms  part of a common  framework  agreement. 
(3) A “common  framework  agreement”  is a consensus  between  a Minister  of the 
Crown  and one or more  devolved  administrations  as to how  devolved  or 
transferred  matters  previously  governed  by EU law are to be regulated. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  ensures  that devolved  administrations  are consulted  before  regulations  are made 
under  this Part of the Act, and that common  framework  agreements  receive  the same  protection 
to enable  them  to receive  effect  as they have under  section  10 of the United  Kingdom  Internal 
Market  Act 2020. Product  Regulation  and Metrology  Bill [HL] 2 
Clause  9 
LORD  LANSLEY 
_ Clause  9, page  9, line 26, at end insert— 
“(c) sections  48, 48B, 49, 50, 52, 53 and 54 of the Patents  Act 1977  (licences  of 
right  and compulsory  licences). ” 3 Product  Regulation  and Metrology  Bill [HL] 
Product  Regulation  and Metrology  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  ON REPORT 
Tabled  up to and including 
21 January  2025 
21 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 18—R—Running  List 21 January



Property  (Digital  Assets  etc) Bill [HL] 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN SPECIAL  PUBLIC  BILL  COMMITTEE 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 Amendment 
No. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
1_ Clause  1, page  1, line 2, leave  out from  first “thing”  to second  “is” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  seeks  to remove  the parenthetical  reference  to “digital  or electronic” 
things. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
2_ Clause  1, page  1, line 2, at end insert  “and  has never  been” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  seeks  to give the Bill retrospective  effect. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
3_ Clause  1, page  1, line 5, leave  out “a thing  in” and insert  “capable  of” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment,  connected  to another  in the name  of Lord  Anderson  of Ipswich,  seeks 
to provide  a statutory  basis  for recognising  digital  assets  as property,  while  removing  any 
presumption  that these  assets  cannot  be accommodated  by the existing  two categories  of personal 
property  rights. 
59/1 HL Bill 31—I 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
4_ Clause  1, page  1, line 6, leave  out paragraph  (b) and insert— 
“(b) a right  that may  only  be claimed  or enforced  by legal  action  or proceedings 
against  another  person  or persons. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment,  connected  to another  in the name  of Lord  Anderson  of Ipswich,  seeks 
to provide  a statutory  basis  for recognising  digital  assets  as property,  while  removing  any 
presumption  that these  assets  cannot  be accommodated  by the existing  two categories  of personal 
property  rights. 
After  Clause  1 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
5_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Attributes  of digital  assets  conferring  property  rights 
In determining  whether  a digital  thing  can be the object  of personal  property 
rights,  regard  may  be had to whether  the thing— 
(a) is composed  of data  represented  in an electronic  medium,  including  in the 
form  of computer  code,  electronic,  digital  or analogue  signals, 
(b) exists  independently  of persons  and exists  independently  of the legal 
system,  and 
(c) is rivalrous. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  seeks  to specify  indicia  that may be considered  by the courts  when 
determining  whether  digital  things  can be the object  of personal  property  rights. 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
6_ After  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review:  impact  of any digital  assets  being  treated  as property  by virtue  of this 
Act 
(1) Within  six months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  both  Houses  of Parliament  a review  analysing  the impacts  of this 
Act. 
(2) The review  made  under  subsection  (1) must  include  analysis  of the impact  of any 
digital  assets  being  treated  as property  by virtue  of this Act on— 
(a) data  centre  power  usage  in relation  to digital  assets, 
(b) the need  for data  centre  construction  and expansion, Property  (Digital  Assets  etc) Bill [HL] 2 
(c) the viability  of creating  a government  digital  sovereign  gilt, 
(d) the desirability  of establishing  an objective  for the National  Wealth  Fund 
relating  to tokenisation  opportunities, 
(e) the need  for further  regulation  of stablecoins  and tokenised  deposits, 
(f) the need  for international  interoperability  standards  for digital  bonds,  and 
(g) the need  for a review  of the tax regime  to assess  how  it interacts  with 
digital  assets. ” 
Clause  2 
LORD  PONSONBY  OF SHULBREDE 
7_ Clause  2, page  1, line 8, leave  out “only”  and insert  “and  Northern  Ireland” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  extends  the territorial  extent  of the Bill so that it will form  part of the law of 
Northern  Ireland  as well as that of England  and Wales. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
8_ Clause  2, page  1, line 10, leave  out “(Digital  Assets  etc)”  and insert  “(Objects  of Personal 
Property  Rights)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  to the short  title, connected  to another  in the name  of Lord  Anderson  of 
Ipswich,  seeks  to restate  the title of the Bill by removing  reference  to specific  types  of thing  which 
the Bill applies  to. 
Title 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
9_ Title,  line 1, after  “provision”  insert  “(with  retrospective  effect)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment,  connected  to another  in the name  of Lord  Anderson  of Ipswich,  seeks 
to draw  attention  to the Bill’s  retrospective  effect,  if amended. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  HOLMES  OF RICHMOND 
10_ Title,  line 1, leave  out “capable  of” and insert  “not  prevented  from” 3 Property  (Digital  Assets  etc) Bill [HL] 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  seeks  to restate  the long title more  clearly,  so that it is consistent  with 
the operative  clause  of the Bill. Property  (Digital  Assets  etc) Bill [HL] 4 
Property  (Digital  Assets  etc) Bill [HL] 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN SPECIAL  PUBLIC  BILL  COMMITTEE 
30 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 31—I



Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Department  for Work and Pensions,  are published 
separately  as Bill 167—EN. 
EUROPEAN  CONVENTION  ON HUMAN  RIGHTS 
Secretary  Liz Kendall  has made  the following  statement  under  section  19(1)(a)  of the Human 
Rights  Act 1998: 
In my view  the provisions  of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill are 
compatible  with the Convention  rights. 
59/1 Bill 167 
Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
PART 1 
FUNCTIONS EXERCISABLE ON BEHALF OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
CHAPTER 1 
KEY CONCEPTS 
1 Core  functions  of the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office 
2 Interaction  with  other  public  authorities  etc 
CHAPTER 2 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS 
Information 
3 Information  notices 
4 Reviews 
5 Information  sharing 
6 Amendment  of the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016 
Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
7 Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  etc powers 
8 Disposal  of property 
9 Incidents  etc 
CHAPTER 3 
RIGHTS TO RECOVER 
Recovery  of recoverable  amounts 
10 Acting  for another  public  authority 
11 Recovery  notices 
12 Restriction  on availability  of powers 
59/1 Bill 167 
Recovery  of other  amounts 
13 Penalties  etc 
14 Restriction  on availability  of powers 
CHAPTER 4 
METHODS OF RECOVERY 
Introduction 
15 Payable  amounts 
Recovery  as if payable  under  a court  order 
16 Recovery  orders 
Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
17 Direct  deduction  orders 
18 Accounts  which  may  be subject  to a direct  deduction  order 
19 Requirement  for banks  to provide  information 
20 Joint  accounts 
21 Further  requirements  before  making  a direct  deduction  order 
22 Amount  of deductions 
23 Content  and effect  of direct  deduction  orders 
24 Bank’s  administrative  costs 
25 Insufficient  funds 
26 Restrictions  on accounts:  banks 
27 Restrictions  on accounts:  account  holders 
28 Applications  to vary 
29 Variation 
30 Revocation 
31 Further  information  notices 
32 Suspension  of direct  deduction  orders 
33 Cessation  on death  of liable  person 
34 Reviews 
35 Appeals 
36 Meaning  of “bank”  etc 
37 Regulations 
Deduction  from  earnings 
38 Deduction  from  earnings  orders 
39 Content  and effect  of deduction  from  earnings  orders 
40 Requirements  before  making  a deduction  from  earnings  order 
41 Amount  of deductions 
42 The employer’s  administrative  costs 
43 Suspension  of deduction  from  earnings  orders 
44 Duty  to notify  the Minister  of change  of circumstances 
45 Applications  to vary 
46 Variation 
47 Revocation Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill ii 
48 Reviews 
49 Appeals 
CHAPTER 5 
CIVIL PENALTIES 
50 Penalty  relating  to fraud 
51 Application  to members  etc of bodies 
52 Amount  of penalty  relating  to fraud 
53 Penalty  for failing  to comply  with  requirements 
54 Application  to members  etc of bodies 
55 Amount  of penalty  for failing  to comply  with  requirements 
56 Procedural  rights 
57 Penalty  decision  notices 
58 Reviews  and decisions 
59 Penalty  notices 
60 Appeals 
61 Interest 
62 Code  of practice 
63 Penalties  and criminal  proceedings  or convictions 
CHAPTER 6 
GENERAL 
64 Independent  review 
65 Independent  review:  further  provision 
66 Authorised  officers 
67 Disclosure  of information  etc: interaction  with  external  constraints 
68 Crown  etc application 
69 The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
70 Interpretation 
71 Regulations 
PART 2 
SOCIAL SECURITY ETC 
CHAPTER 1 
POWERS TO REQUIRE INFORMATION 
72 Information  notices 
73 Code  of practice 
74 Eligibility  verification 
75 Eligibility  verification:  independent  review iii Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
CHAPTER 2 
POWERS OF ENTRY, SEARCH AND SEIZURE ETC 
76 Entry,  search  and seizure  in England  and Wales 
77 Entry,  search  and seizure  in Scotland 
78 Entry,  search  and seizure:  Crown  application 
79 Offence  of delay,  obstruction  etc 
80 Disposal  of property 
81 Amendments  to the Criminal  Justice  and Police  Act 2001 
82 Incidents  etc in England  and Wales 
83 Incidents  etc in Scotland 
CHAPTER 3 
FURTHER PROVISION RELEVANT TO INVESTIGATORY POWERS 
84 DWP  offence 
85 Disclosure  of information  etc: interaction  with  external  constraints 
86 Giving  notices  etc 
87 Independent  review 
CHAPTER 4 
OVERPAYMENTS: RECOVERY AND ENFORCEMENT 
88 Enforcement  of non-benefit  payments 
89 Recovery  and enforcement  mechanisms 
90 Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
91 Disqualification  from  driving 
92 Code  of practice 
93 Rights  of audience 
94 Recovery  of costs 
95 Recovery:  further  provision 
CHAPTER 5 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES ETC 
96 Offences:  non-benefit  payments 
97 Penalty  as alternative  to prosecution:  extension  to non-benefit  payments 
98 Amendments  to the Social  Security  Fraud  Act 2001:  loss of benefits  following 
penalty 
PART 3 
GENERAL 
99 Application  and limitation 
100 Power  to make  consequential  provision 
101 Financial  provision 
102 Extent Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill iv 
103 Commencement 
104 Short  title 
Fraud  against  public  authorities:  Police  and Criminal  Evidence 
Act 1984  powers Schedule  1 —  
The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority Schedule  2 —  
Establishment Part 1 —  
Constitution  etc Part 2 —  
Transfer  of functions  etc Part 3 —  
Eligibility  verification  etc Schedule  3 —  
Eligibility  verification Part 1 —  
Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002 Part 2 —  
Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc Schedule  4 —  
Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc Schedule  5 —  
Disqualification  from  driving Schedule  6 —  v Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the prevention  of fraud  against  public  authorities  and 
the making  of erroneous  payments  by public  authorities;  about  the recovery 
of money  paid  by public  authorities  as a result  of fraud  or error;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
PART 1 
FUNCTIONS EXERCISABLE ON BEHALF OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
CHAPTER 1 
KEY CONCEPTS 
5 1 Core  functions  of the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office 
(1) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  (“the  Minister”)  has the following  functions 
(“the  core functions”)— 
(a) investigating  suspected  fraud  against  public  authorities, 
(b) recovering  amounts  mentioned  in subsection  (2), 
10 (c) taking  enforcement  action  in connection  with  fraud  against  public 
authorities,  and 
(d) providing  support  to public  authorities  in relation  to preventing  and 
tackling  fraud  against  them. 
(2) The amounts  are— 
15 (a) payments  made  as a result  of fraud  or error  that— 
(i) the Minister  has identified  or confirmed  during  the course  of 
an investigation  in respect  of suspected  fraud  against  a public 
authority,  and 
(ii) the public  authority  is entitled  to recover, 
20 (b) any other  amount  that a public  authority  is entitled  to recover  in 
respect  of fraud,  and 
59/1 Bill 167 1 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  1—Key  concepts 
(c) any interest  that a public  authority  is entitled  to recover  in respect  of 
an amount  within    paragraph  (a) or (b). 
(3) In this Part,  amounts  within  subsection  (2) are referred  to as “recoverable 
amounts”. 
5 2 Interaction  with  other  public  authorities  etc 
(1) The Minister  is to— 
(a) investigate  or take enforcement  action  in respect  of suspected  fraud 
against  another  public  authority,  or 
(b) recover  money  on behalf  of another  public  authority, 
10 only  at the request  of that public  authority. 
(2) The Minister  may  not act as mentioned  in subsection  (1) at the request  of— 
(a) the Secretary  of State  with  responsibility  for social  security,  or 
(b) His Majesty’s  Revenue  and Customs. 
(3) 
15The Minister  may  charge  another  public  authority  a fee in relation  to the 
exercise  of functions  under  this Part on behalf  of, or in relation  to, the public 
authority. 
(4) References  in this Part to any public  authority  include  the Minister  in any 
case relating  to— 
(a) fraud  or suspected  fraud  against  the Minister,  or 
20 (b) the recovery  of money  for the Minister. 
(5) Nothing  in this Part affects— 
(a) whether  a public  authority  is entitled  to recover  an amount,  or 
(b) functions  that a public  authority  has in respect  of fraud  and the 
recovery  of money, 
25 otherwise  than  by virtue  of this Part. 
CHAPTER 2 
INVESTIGATORY POWERS 
Information 
3 Information  notices 
30 (1) The Minister  may  require  a person  (“P”)  to give  specified  information  to the 
Minister  where  the Minister  considers  that— 
(a) it is necessary  and proportionate  to do so for the purpose  of exercising 
the Minister’s  functions  under  section  1(1)(a) to (c), and 
(b) 
35the information  relates  to a person  (whether  or not P) whom  the 
Minister  has reasonable  grounds  to suspect  has committed  fraud 
against  a public  authority. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 2 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
(2) The power  conferred  by subsection  (1) is to be exercised  by giving  P a notice 
(an “information  notice”). 
(3) An information  notice  must  identify  (by name  or description)  the person 
suspected  of having  committed  fraud  as mentioned  in subsection  (1)(b). 
5 (4) An information  notice  must  set out— 
(a) how,  where  and the period  within  which  the information  must  be 
given  to the Minister  in order  for the recipient  of the notice  to avoid 
being  liable  to a penalty  under  section  53; 
(b) information  about  the consequences  of not complying  with  the notice. 
10 (5) The period  mentioned  in subsection  (4)(a) must  not be less than  10 working 
days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the information  notice 
is given. 
(6) The power  under  this section  to require  P to give  information  to the Minister 
includes  the power  to— 
15 (a) take copies  of or extracts  from  information; 
(b) require  P to provide  information  in a specified  form; 
(c) require  P to retain  information  that P would  not otherwise  retain; 
(d) if any specified  information  is not given  to the Minister,  require  P to 
20state,  to the best of P’s knowledge  and belief,  both  where  that 
information  is and why  it has not been  given  to the Minister. 
(7) An information  notice  under  this section  may  not require  the giving  of— 
(a) excluded  material,  or 
(b) special  procedure  material, 
25within  the meaning  of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  (see sections 
11 to 14 of that Act; see section  7(2)(b) of this Act for provision  about 
production  orders). 
(8) In this section,  “specified”  means— 
(a) specified,  or described,  in an information  notice,  or 
(b) 
30falling  within  a category  that is specified,  or described,  in an 
information  notice. 
4 Reviews 
(1) A person  to whom  an information  notice  is given  under  section  3 may  apply 
to the Minister  for a review  of the decision  to give  the notice. 
(2) 
35An application  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  within  the period  of 7 
days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(3) Where  an application  is made  under  subsection  (1), the Minister  must  review 
the decision  to give  the notice. 
(4) On the review,  the Minister  may— 
(a) revoke  the notice, 3 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
(b) uphold  the notice,  or 
(c) vary  the notice. 
(5) After  a review  has been  carried  out, the Minister  must— 
(a) 
5notify  the person  who  applied  for the review  of the outcome  of the 
review,  and 
(b) if the outcome  was to vary  the notice,  give the person  the varied  notice. 
(6) Where  an information  notice  is upheld  or varied  on a review,  the period 
mentioned  in section  3(4)(a) is to be treated  as beginning  on the day after  the 
10day on which  the outcome  of the review  is notified  to the person  to whom 
the information  notice  was given. 
5 Information  sharing 
(1) A public  authority  may  disclose  information  to the Minister  for the purpose 
of facilitating  the Minister’s  exercise  of the core functions. 
(2) 
15The Minister  may  use information  disclosed  under  subsection  (1) only  for the 
purpose  of exercising  the core functions. 
(3) The Minister  may  disclose  information  to another  person  for the purpose  of 
exercising  the core functions. 
(4) Where  the Minister  discloses  information  to a person  under  subsection  (3), 
the person  may  not— 
20 (a) use it for any purpose  other  than  the purpose  for which  it was 
disclosed,  and 
(b) may  not disclose  it to any other  person, 
without  the consent  of the Minister. 
6 Amendment  of the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016 
25 In the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016,  in Schedule  4 (relevant  public  authorities 
and designated  senior  officers  etc), in the table  in Part 1, before  the entry  for 
the Common  Services  Agency  for the Scottish  Health  Service  insert— 
 ”. 28 60A(7)(b) 28 “Cabinet  Office 
Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
30 7 Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  etc powers 
(1) The provisions  of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  listed  in 
subsection  (2) apply  in relation  to investigations  of offences  of fraud  against 
a public  authority  that are conducted  by authorised  investigators  in the 
35exercise  of the Minister’s  function  under  section  1(1)(a) as they  apply  in 
relation  to investigations  of offences  conducted  by police  officers,  subject  to 
the modifications  in Schedule  1. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 4 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
(2) The provisions  are— 
(a) section  8(1) to (5) (power  of justice  of the peace  to authorise  entry  and 
search  of premises); 
(b) section  9(1) and Schedule  1 (special  provisions  as to access); 
5 (c) section  15 (search  warrants:  safeguards); 
(d) section  16 (execution  of warrants); 
(e) section  19 (general  power  of seizure  etc); 
(f) section  20 (extension  of powers  of seizure  to computerised  information); 
(g) section  21 (access  and copying); 
10 (h) section  22 (retention); 
(i) sections  10 to 14, 23 and 118 (interpretation  provisions),  so far as 
necessary  for the application  of the provisions  mentioned  in paragraphs 
(a) to (h). 
(3) 
15An authorised  investigator  is an individual  who  is authorised  by the Minister 
to exercise  the powers  conferred  by this section. 
(4) An individual  may  not be an authorised  investigator  unless  the individual— 
(a) is employed  in the civil  service  of the state  in the Minister’s 
department,  and 
(b) 
20is a higher  executive  officer  or has a grade  that is equivalent  to, or 
higher  than,  that of a higher  executive  officer. 
8 Disposal  of property 
(1) A magistrates’  court  may,  on an application  by the Minister  or a person  with 
an interest  in relevant  property— 
(a) 
25order  the delivery  of the relevant  property  to the person  appearing 
to the court  to be its owner,  or 
(b) if its owner  cannot  be ascertained,  make  any other  order  about  the 
relevant  property. 
(2) An order  under  subsection  (1)(a) may  include  provision  for the Minister  to 
30make  any changes  to the relevant  property  that the court  considers  necessary 
for the purpose  of avoiding  or reducing  any risk of the relevant  property 
being  used  in the commission  of an offence. 
(3) An order  under  subsection  (1)(b) may  not provide  for the destruction  or 
disposal  of the relevant  property  before  the end of the period  of 6 months 
beginning  with  the day on which  the order  is made. 
35 (4) An order  under  subsection  (1)(b) (“the  first order”)  does  not prevent  further 
applications  being  made  for an order  under  subsection  (1) in respect  of the 
relevant  property  to which  the first order  applies. 
(5) Where  an order  is made  following  a further  application— 
(a) 
40the order  may  not provide  for the destruction  or disposal  of the 
relevant  property  before  the end of the period  of 6 months  beginning 
with  the day on which  the first order  was made,  but 5 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
(b) the order  may  otherwise  contain  such  provision  as to the timing  of 
the destruction  or disposal  of the relevant  property  as the court  thinks 
fit. 
(6) 
5In this section,  “relevant  property”  means  tangible  property  which  has come 
into the possession  of the Minister  in the course  of, or in connection  with, 
the exercise  of a function  under  this Part. 
9 Incidents  etc 
(1) Part 2 of the Police  Reform  Act 2002  (complaints  and misconduct)  is amended 
as follows. 
10 (2) In section  10 (general  functions  of the Director  General)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), at the end of paragraph  (gb) insert  “, and 
(gc) to carry  out such  corresponding  functions  in relation 
to public  sector  fraud  investigators  acting  in the exercise 
15of functions  conferred  on them  by section  7 of the Public 
Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Act 2025  (Police 
and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  powers  for public  sector 
fraud  investigators). ”, 
(b) in subsection  (3), after  paragraph  (be) insert— 
“(bf) 
20any regulations  under  section  26G of this Act (public 
sector  fraud  investigators); ”, and 
(c) after  subsection  (7) insert— 
“(7A) In this section,  “public  sector  fraud  investigators”  means 
authorised  investigators  within  the meaning  given  by section 
257 of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Act 
2025. ” 
(3) After  section  26F insert— 
“26G Public  sector  fraud  investigators 
(1) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  (“the  Minister”)  may  make 
30regulations  conferring  functions  on the Director  General  in relation  to 
public  sector  fraud  investigators  acting  in the exercise  of functions 
conferred  on them  by section  7 of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error 
and Recovery)  Act 2025  (Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  powers 
for public  sector  fraud  investigators). 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  may,  in particular— 
35 (a) apply  (with  or without  modifications),  or make  provision 
similar  to, any provision  of or made  under  this Part; 
(b) make  provision  for payment  by the Minister  to, or in respect 
of, the Office  or in respect  of the Director  General. 
(3) 
40The Director  General  and the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for 
Administration  may  jointly  investigate  a matter  in relation  to which— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 6 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
(a) the Director  General  has functions  by virtue  of this section, 
and 
(b) the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for Administration  has 
5functions  by virtue  of the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 
1967. 
(4) The Minister  may  disclose  information  to the Director  General  or to 
a person  acting  on the Director  General’s  behalf,  for the purposes  of 
the exercise  by the Director  General  or by any person  acting  on the 
Director  General’s  behalf,  of a public  sector  fraud  complaints  function. 
10 (5) The Director  General  and the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for 
Administration  may  disclose  information  to each  other  for the purposes 
of the exercise  of a function— 
(a) by virtue  of this section,  or 
(b) under  the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967. 
15 (6) Regulations  under  this section  may,  in particular,  make— 
(a) further  provision  about  the disclosure  of information  under 
subsection  (4) or (5); 
(b) provision  about  the further  disclosure  of information  that has 
been  so disclosed. 
20 (7) A disclosure  of information  authorised  by or under  this section  does 
not breach— 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the 
disclosure,  or 
(b) 
25any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(8) No provision  made  by or under  this section  authorises  a disclosure 
of information  that— 
(a) would  contravene  the data  protection  legislation  (but in 
30determining  whether  a disclosure  would  do so, the power 
conferred  by this section  is to be taken  into account),  or 
(b) is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 of 
the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. 
(9) In this section— 
35“data  protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the Data 
Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3 of that Act); 
“public  sector  fraud  complaints  function”  means  a function  in 
relation  to the exercise  of functions  conferred  by section  7 of 
the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Act 2025; 
40“public  sector  fraud  investigator”  means  an authorised  investigator 
within  the meaning  given  by section  7 that Act.” 7 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  2—Investigatory  powers 
CHAPTER 3 
RIGHTS TO RECOVER 
Recovery  of recoverable  amounts 
10 Acting  for another  public  authority 
5 (1) The Minister  may  act under  this Part on behalf  of another  public  authority 
in relation  to the recovery  of a recoverable  amount,  including  by— 
(a) bringing  or continuing  proceedings  in a court  or tribunal  for an amount 
(a “claimed  amount”)  which  the Minister  reasonably  believes  to be a 
recoverable  amount,  and 
10 (b) exercising  the powers  in Chapter  4 to recover  a recoverable  amount. 
(2) Where  the Minister  recovers  an amount  under  this Part on behalf  of another 
public  authority,  the Minister  must  transfer  that amount  to the public  authority 
unless  the public  authority  agrees  that the Minister  may  retain  some  or all 
of the amount. 
15 11 Recovery  notices 
(1) Before  bringing  proceedings  in a court  or tribunal  for a claimed  amount  on 
behalf  of another  public  authority,  the Minister  must  give  the person  from 
whom  the Minister  reasonably  believes  the amount  is recoverable  (the “liable 
person”)  a notice  (a “recovery  notice”). 
20 (2) A recovery  notice  must— 
(a) state  that the Minister  intends  to bring  proceedings  for the claimed 
amount, 
(b) state  the amount  of the claimed  amount, 
(c) 
25provide  the Minister’s  reasons  for believing  that amount  to be a 
recoverable  amount, 
(d) invite  the liable  person  to discharge  the person’s  liability  in respect 
of the claimed  amount  by agreement  with  the Minister,  and set out 
how  this can be done, 
(e) 
30set out the further  action  that may  be taken  by the Minister  under  this 
Part in respect  of the claimed  amount,  including  if the liable  person’s 
liability  for the amount  is not settled  by agreement,  and 
(f) state  a period  during  which  the Minister  will not bring  proceedings 
for the claimed  amount  in order  to give  the liable  person  an 
35opportunity  to settle  their  liability  in respect  of the claimed  amount 
by agreement. 
(3) The period  mentioned  in subsection  (2)(f) must  not be less than  28 days 
beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the recovery  notice  is given. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 8 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  3—Rights  to recover 
(4) The giving  of a recovery  notice  has effect  as the bringing  of an action  for the 
recovery  of a claimed  amount  for the purposes  of any time  limit  that would 
apply  in relation  to that amount. 
12 Restriction  on availability  of powers 
5 The Minister  may  use the methods  of recovery  in Chapter  4 to recover  a 
claimed  amount  from  a liable  person  only  so far as— 
(a) the liable  person  agrees,  or 
(b) there  has been  a final  determination  by a court  or tribunal, 
that the amount  is a recoverable  amount. 
10 Recovery  of other  amounts 
13 Penalties  etc 
(1) The Minister  may  exercise  the powers  in Chapter  4 to recover  amounts  due 
in respect  of— 
(a) a penalty  under  Chapter  5, and 
15 (b) relevant  costs. 
(2) For the purposes  of this Part,  references  to— 
(a) an “amount  due in respect  of a penalty  under  Chapter  5” include  late 
payment  interest  due in respect  of a penalty  (see section  61), and 
(b) “relevant  costs”  are to— 
20 (i) costs  that are awarded  by a court  or tribunal  on or in relation 
to a claim  for a recoverable  amount,  and 
(ii) costs  that are reasonably  incurred  by the Minister  in exercising 
the powers  in Chapter  4. 
14 Restriction  on availability  of powers 
25 The Minister  may  exercise  the powers  in Chapter  4 to recover  an amount  due 
in respect  of a penalty  only  when— 
(a) the time  for appealing  against  the penalty  has passed  without  an 
appeal  being  brought  (see section  60), or 
(b) 
30any appeal  against  the penalty  has been  finally  determined  (see section 
70(3)). 9 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  3—Rights  to recover 
CHAPTER 4 
METHODS OF RECOVERY 
Introduction 
15 Payable  amounts 
5 In this Part,  references  to a “payable  amount”  are to— 
(a) a recoverable  amount  (see section  1(3)), or 
(b) an amount  within  section  13(1). 
Recovery  as if payable  under  a court  order 
16 Recovery  orders 
10 (1) The Minister  may  apply  to the county  court  for a recovery  order  in respect 
of a payable  amount. 
(2) A recovery  order  is an order  providing  that the payable  amount  is 
recoverable— 
(a) under  section  85 of the County  Courts  Act 1984,  or 
15 (b) otherwise  as if it were  payable  under  an order  of the court. 
Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
17 Direct  deduction  orders 
(1) Where  a payable  amount  is recoverable  from  a liable  person  who  holds  an 
20account  with  a bank,  the Minister  may  make  an order  (a “direct  deduction 
order”)  in respect  of that account. 
(2) A direct  deduction  order  must  be given  to the bank  with  which  the account 
is held. 
(3) A direct  deduction  order  may  be— 
(a) a regular  direct  deduction  order,  or 
25 (b) a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order. 
(4) A regular  direct  deduction  order  is an order  requiring  the bank— 
(a) to make  regular  deductions  from  the liable  person’s  account,  and 
(b) to pay the amounts  deducted  to the Minister. 
(5) A lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  is an order  requiring  the bank— 
30 (a) to deduct  from  the liable  person’s  account  an amount  specified  in the 
order,  and 
(b) to pay that amount  to the Minister. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 10 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(6) The Minister  may  give  a regular  direct  deduction  order  and a lump  sum 
direct  deduction  order  in respect  of the same  account. 
(7) The Minister  must  give  a copy  of a direct  deduction  order  to— 
(a) the liable  person,  and 
5 (b) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders. 
(8) Sections  19 to 21 set out steps  that the Minister  must  take before  making  a 
direct  deduction  order. 
18 Accounts  which  may  be subject  to a direct  deduction  order 
(1) 
10The Minister  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of any account 
which— 
(a) is held  by a liable  person,  and 
(b) contains  an amount  in which  the Minister  considers  the liable  person 
has a beneficial  interest. 
(2) 
15The Minister  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of a joint  account 
only  if the liable  person  does  not hold  a sole account  in respect  of which  a 
deduction  order  may  be made  which  would  be likely  to result  in the recovery 
of the payable  amount  within  a reasonable  period  of time. 
(3) But sub-paragraph  (2) does  not apply  if all the joint  account  holders  are liable 
persons  in relation  to the same  payable  amount. 
20 19 Requirement  for banks  to provide  information 
(1) Before  the Minister  makes  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of a liable 
person’s  account,  the Minister  must  obtain  and consider  bank  statements  for 
the account  covering  a period  of at least  three  months. 
(2) 
25To obtain  the statements,  the Minister  must  give  the bank  with  which  the 
Minister  believes  the liable  person  holds  the account  a notice  (an “account 
information  notice”)  requiring  the bank  to give  the Minister  statements  for 
the account  covering— 
(a) the three  months  immediately  before  the notice  is given,  or 
(b) 
30such  longer  period,  ending  immediately  before  the notice  is given,  as 
may  be specified  in the notice. 
(3) An account  information  notice  must— 
(a) contain  the name  of the liable  person,  and 
(b) identify  the account  (for example,  by number  and sort code). 
(4) 
35The Minister  may  give  an account  information  notice  relating  to an account 
only  for the purpose  of determining  whether  to make  a direct  deduction  order 
in respect  of the account. 
(5) At any time,  for the purposes  of determining  whether  to make  a direct 
deduction  order  in relation  to a liable  person,  the Minister  may  give  a notice 
(a “general  information  notice”)  to a bank  requiring  the bank  to— 11 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(a) identify  every  account  that the liable  person  holds  with  the bank, 
(b) for each  identified  account,  give  the Minister  the following 
information— 
(i) a description  of the type  of account, 
5 (ii) identifiers  for the account, 
(iii) if the account  is a sole account,  the balance  of the account  at 
the time  that it is identified,  and 
(iv) if the account  is a joint  account,  the name  of each  other  account 
holder,  and 
10 (c) give  the Minister— 
(i) the correspondence  address  that the bank  holds  for the liable 
person,  and 
(ii) in the case of a joint  account,  the correspondence  address  that 
the bank  holds  for each  other  account  holder. 
15 (6) The Minister  may  give— 
(a) more  than  one account  information  notice,  or general  information 
notice,  in relation  to the same  payable  amount; 
(b) more  than  one account  information  notice  in respect  of the same 
account. 
20 (7) A notice  under  this section  must— 
(a) set out how  and when  the bank  is to comply  with  the notice,  and 
(b) explain  that the bank  may  be liable  to a penalty  under  section  53 if it 
fails to do so without  reasonable  excuse. 
(8) The bank  must  comply  with  a notice  given  under  this section. 
25 (9) A bank  that is given  an account  information  notice,  or a general  information 
notice,  must  not notify  any of the following  people  that the notice  has been 
given— 
(a) the liable  person, 
(b) 
30any other  holder  of the account  in respect  of which  an account 
information  notice  is given; 
(c) any other  holder  of an account  identified  in accordance  with  a general 
information  notice. 
(10) Information  given  to the Minister  in response  to a notice  under  this section 
35may  be used  by the Minister  for the purpose  of exercising  the core functions 
but not for any other  purpose. 
20 Joint  accounts 
(1) Before  making  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of a joint  account,  the 
Minister  must  make  an assessment  of the liable  person’s  beneficial  interest 
in the amounts  which  are or may  be in the account  from  time  to time. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 12 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(2) The Minister  must  presume  that the liable  person’s  beneficial  interest  entitles 
them  to the following  share  in the amounts  which  are or may  be in the account 
from  time  to time— 
1
N
5 where  “N” is the number  of account  holders. 
(3) But the presumption  does  not apply  where  the Minister  has reason  to believe 
that the liable  person’s  beneficial  interest  is different  from  the presumed  share. 
(4) In making  an assessment  under  subsection  (1), the Minister  must  have  regard 
to— 
10 (a) the bank  statements  obtained  for the account  under  section  19, and 
(b) any responses  to a notice  under  section  21. 
21 Further  requirements  before  making  a direct  deduction  order 
(1) Before  making  a direct  deduction  order,  the Minister  must  give  the bank 
15where  the account  in question  is held,  the liable  person,  and,  in the case of 
a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders,  a notice— 
(a) identifying  the account  that would  be subject  to the proposed  order, 
(b) stating  the amount  that would  be recoverable  under  the proposed 
order, 
(c) setting  out the terms  of the proposed  order,  and 
20 (d) if the account  is a joint  account,  setting  out the Minister’s  duty  to 
make  an assessment  as to the liable  person’s  beneficial  interest  and 
the presumption  that applies  (see section  20). 
(2) The notice  must  invite  the liable  person  and,  in the case of a joint  account, 
each  other  account  holder— 
25 (a) to make  representations  about  the terms  of the proposed  order,  and 
(b) in the case of a joint  account,  to make  representations  about  the liable 
person’s  beneficial  interest  in amounts  in the account. 
(3) The notice  must  set out the means  by which,  and the period  within  which, 
representations  may  be made. 
30 (4) The period  must  be at least  28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on 
which  the notice  is given. 
(5) The Minister  must— 
(a) consider  representations  made  in accordance  with  the notice,  and 
(b) in light  of any representations— 
35 (i) in the case of a joint  account,  make  the assessment  required 
under  section  20(1), and 
(ii) in any case,  decide  whether,  and in what  terms,  to make  a 
direct  deduction  order  in respect  of the account. 13 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(6) A notice  under  subsection  (1) may  be given  to the bank  before  it is given  to 
the other  persons  to whom  it is required  to be given  under  that subsection 
(and  for the effect  of giving  the notice  to the bank  see section  26 (restrictions 
on accounts)). 
5 (7) Where  a notice  is given  to the bank  in reliance  on subsection  (6), the notice 
must  be given  to the other  persons  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after 
being  given  to the bank. 
(8) If, following  the giving  of a notice  under  this section,  the Minister  decides 
10not to make  a direct  deduction  order,  the Minister  must,  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable,  notify  the bank,  the liable  person  and,  in the case of a joint 
account,  each  of the other  account  holders,  of the decision. 
22 Amount  of deductions 
(1) The Minister  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  only  if satisfied  on the basis 
15of information  received  by virtue  of sections  19 and 21 that the terms  of the 
order— 
(a) will not cause  the liable  person,  any other  account  holder  or a person 
within  subsection  (2) to suffer  hardship  in meeting  essential  living 
expenses,  and 
(b) are otherwise  fair in all the circumstances. 
20 (2) A person  is within  this subsection  if— 
(a) they  live with  the liable  person,  or any other  account  holder,  for some 
or all of the time,  or 
(b) they  are financially  dependent  on the liable  person  or any other  account 
holder. 
25 (3) The total  amount  of deductions  to be made  under  a regular  direct  deduction 
order  in relation  to any period  of 28 days  must  not exceed— 
(a) in a case to which  subsection  (4) applies,  40% of the amounts  credited 
to the account  in the relevant  period,  and 
(b) 
30in any other  case,  20% of the amounts  credited  to the account  in the 
relevant  period. 
(4) This  subsection  applies  in a case where  the Minister  is satisfied,  on the balance 
of probabilities,  that the payable  amount  to which  the regular  direct  deduction 
order  relates  is recoverable  from  the liable  person  because  the liable  person 
committed  fraud. 
35 (5) The “relevant  period”  is the period  of three  months  mentioned  in section 
19(2)(a) (and  if more  than  one notice  is given  under  section  19 in relation  to 
the same  direct  deduction  order,  the reference  in section  19(2)(a) to “the notice” 
is to be read  as a reference  to the most  recent  of those  notices). 
(6) 
40The Minister  must  ensure  that the total  amount  to be deducted  and paid  to 
the Minister  under  a direct  deduction  order  does  not exceed  the payable 
amount  to which  the order  relates. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 14 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
23 Content  and effect  of direct  deduction  orders 
(1) A regular  direct  deduction  order  must  specify— 
(a) the amounts,  or a method  for calculating  the amounts,  to be deducted 
(see section  22), 
5 (b) when  amounts  are to be deducted  and paid  to the Minister,  and 
(c) the penalties  that may  be imposed  for a failure  to comply  (see section 
53). 
(2) A regular  direct  deduction  order  may  specify  different  amounts,  or different 
methods  for calculating  the amounts,  to be deducted  at different  times. 
10 (3) A lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  must  specify— 
(a) the amount,  or method  for calculating  the amount,  to be deducted, 
and 
(b) when  the amount  is to be deducted  and paid  to the Minister,  and 
(c) 
15the penalties  that may  be imposed  for a failure  to comply  (see section 
53). 
(4) A direct  deduction  order  may  not require  an amount  to be deducted  from  a 
person’s  bank  account  before  the end of the period  of 28 days  beginning  with 
the day after  the day on which  the Minister  complies  with  section  17(7). 
(5) A bank  must  comply  with  a direct  deduction  order. 
20 (6) If (apart  from  this subsection)  a bank  would  be required  to make  a deduction 
and payment  under  a direct  deduction  order  on a day that is not a working 
day,  the obligation  to make  the deduction  and payment  applies  in relation 
to the next  working  day after  that day. 
24 Bank’s  administrative  costs 
25 (1) A direct  deduction  order  may  include  provision  for the bank  to deduct  from 
the liable  person’s  account  an amount  specified  in, or calculated  in accordance 
with,  the order,  for the purposes  of meeting  costs  reasonably  incurred  by the 
bank  in complying  with  the order. 
(2) 
30A bank  may  deduct  the costs  to which  they  are entitled  under  a direct 
deduction  order  immediately  prior  to making  the deduction  which  is to be 
paid  to the Minister  under  the order. 
(3) In complying  with  section  22(1) and (3) in relation  to a direct  deduction  order 
the Minister  must  take account  of any deductions  to be made  under  the order 
by virtue  of provision  under  subsection  (1). 
35 25 Insufficient  funds 
(1) Where  the amount  in an account  is lower  than  the amount  to be deducted 
in accordance  with  a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  at the time  that the 
bank  is (apart  from  this subsection)  required  to make  the deduction— 
(a) no deduction  is to be made,  and 15 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(b) the bank  must  notify  the Minister  as soon  as possible. 
(2) Where  the amount  in an account  is lower  than  the amount  to be deducted 
in accordance  with  a regular  direct  deduction  order  at the time  that the bank 
is (apart  from  this subsection)  required  to make  the deduction— 
5 (a) the order  is to be read  as requiring  the deduction  and payment  to the 
Minister  to take place  on the same  day the following  week,  and 
(b) if, on that day,  the amount  in the account  is lower  than  the amount 
to be deducted  in accordance  with  the order— 
(i) no deduction  is to be made,  and 
10 (ii) the bank  must  notify  the Minister  as soon  as possible. 
(3) References  in this section  to the amount  to be deducted  in accordance  with 
a direct  deduction  order  include  any amounts  to be deducted  in respect  of a 
bank’s  costs  by virtue  of provision  under  section  24(1). 
26 Restrictions  on accounts:  banks 
15 (1) Where  a notice  under  section  21(1) (a “first  notice”),  or a direct  deduction 
order  under  section  17, is given  to a bank  in relation  to a liable  person’s 
account,  the bank  must— 
(a) ensure  that the account  is not closed  at the request  of an account 
holder,  and 
20 (b) if the notice  relates  to a proposed  lump  sum  direct  deduction  order, 
or the order  is a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order— 
(i) secure  that no transaction  takes  place  (except  for any deduction 
under  the order)  which  would  result  in the amount  in the 
25account  falling  below  the specified  amount  or, if the amount 
in the account  is already  below  that amount,  falling  any further, 
or 
(ii) take the action  set out in subsection  (2). 
(2) The action  is to— 
(a) 
30transfer  the specified  amount,  or the amount  in the account  if that is 
less than  the specified  amount,  from  the account  into a different 
account  (a “hold  account”)  created  by the bank  for the sole purpose 
of holding  that transferred  amount,  and 
(b) secure  that no transaction  takes  place  (except  for any deduction  under 
35the order)  which  would  result  in the amount  in the hold  account 
falling  below  the amount  transferred. 
(3) Where  a bank  takes  the action  set out in subsection  (2) in relation  to a lump 
sum  direct  deduction  order,  the order  is to be read  as if it required  all 
deductions  to be made  from  the hold  account. 
(4) 
40A bank  must  ensure  that taking  the action  set out in subsection  (2) does  not 
cause  any disadvantage  to the liable  person,  and in the case of a joint  account, 1 
any other  account  holder,  that the liable  person,  and any other  account  holder, Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 16 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
would  not have  experienced  if the bank  had instead  acted  in accordance  with 
to subsection  (1)(b)(i). 
(5) The requirements  in subsection  (1) cease  to apply  when— 
(a) 
5in relation  to a first notice,  a notice  is given  to the bank  under  section 
21(8)) (notice  of decision  not to make  a direct  deduction  order),  or a 
direct  deduction  order  is given  to the bank  under  section  17; 
(b) in relation  to a direct  deduction  order— 
(i) all the deductions  under  the order  have  been  made,  or 
(ii) the order  is revoked. 
10 (6) In subsection  (1)(b) and (2)(a), “specified”  means  specified  in, or calculated 
in accordance  with,  a first notice  or direct  deduction  order. 
27 Restrictions  on accounts:  account  holders 
(1) Where  a notice  under  section  21(1) (a “first  notice”),  or a copy  of direct 
15deduction  order  under  section  17, is given  to a person  in relation  to an account 
that they  hold,  they  must  not do anything  to frustrate  the effect  of the first 
notice  or the direct  deduction  order. 
(2) The requirement  in subsection  (1) ceases  to apply  when— 
(a) in relation  to a first notice,  a notice  under  section  21(8)) (notice  of 
20decision  not to make  a direct  deduction  order),  or a copy  of a direct 
deduction  order  under  section  17, is given  to the person; 
(b) in relation  to a direct  deduction  order— 
(i) all the deductions  under  the order  have  been  made,  or 
(ii) the order  is revoked. 
(3) 
25In subsection  (1), the reference  to frustrating  the effect  of a first notice  is a 
reference  to frustrating  the effect  of the proposed  direct  deduction  order  the 
terms  of which  are set out in the notice. 
28 Applications  to vary 
(1) Any  holder  of an account  to which  a direct  deduction  order  applies  may 
apply  to the Minister  to vary  the order. 
30 (2) The Minister  must  give  any other  holders  of the account  an opportunity  to 
make  representations  in relation  to the application. 
(3) The Minister  must  notify  the applicant  and any other  account  holders  of the 
Minister’s  decision  on the application. 
29 Variation 
35 (1) The Minister  may  vary  a direct  deduction  order  (whether  on an application 
by an account  holder  or otherwise). 17 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(2) The provisions  in this section  apply  in relation  to any variation  of a direct 
deduction  order,  including  one that results  from  a review  under  section  34. 
(3) Where  the Minister  proposes  to vary  a direct  deduction  order,  the Minister 
must  give— 
5 (a) the liable  person,  and 
(b) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders, 
an opportunity  to make  representations  about  the proposed  variation. 
(4) The Minister  may  comply  with  subsection  (3) at the same  time  as complying 
with  section  28(2). 
10 (5) A variation  to a direct  deduction  order  takes  effect  when  the Minister  gives 
the varied  order  to the bank  or, if later,  in accordance  with  the terms  of the 
order  as varied. 
(6) The Minister  must  give  a copy  of the varied  order  to the liable  person  and, 
in the case of a joint  account,  each  other  account  holder. 
15 (7) The Minister  may  vary  a direct  deduction  order  so that the order  applies  to 
another  account  held  by the liable  person  (including  an account  provided  by 
a different  bank)  only  if— 
(a) the variation  is requested  by the liable  person,  and 
(b) 
20if the other  account  is a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders 
consents. 
(8) Where  a direct  deduction  order  is varied  under  subsection  (7)— 
(a) if the order  is varied  so that it applies  to an account  provided  by 
another  bank— 
(i) 
25the reference  in subsection  (5) to “the bank”  is to the bank 
which  provides  that account, 
(ii) section  23(5) applies  to the order  as varied  as it applied  to the 
original  order,  and 
(iii) the Minister  must  notify  the bank  given  the original  order  of 
the effect  of the variation,  and 
30 (b) if the order  is varied  so that it applies  to a joint  account— 
(i) the requirement  in subsection  (6) is to give  a copy  of the order 
to each  other  holder  of that joint  account,  and 
(ii) if the original  order  applied  to a joint  account,  the Minister 
35must  notify  each  other  holder  of that joint  account  of the effect 
of the variation. 
(9) The steps  set out in sections  19 to 21 do not apply  to a decision  to vary  a 
direct  deduction  order. 
30 Revocation 
(1) The Minister  may  revoke  a direct  deduction  order. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 18 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(2) The Minister  must  revoke  a direct  deduction  order  as soon  as reasonably 
practicable  after  becoming  aware  that— 
(a) the payable  amount  has been  recovered  (whether  by the Minister  or 
the public  authority  on behalf  of which  the Minister  is acting),  or 
5 (b) the liable  person  to whom  the order  relates  has died. 
(3) Where  the Minister  revokes  a direct  deduction  order,  the Minister  must  give 
a notice  of the revocation  to— 
(a) the bank  to which  the order  was given, 
(b) the liable  person  (apart  from  in a case within  subsection  (2)(b)), and 
10 (c) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders. 
31 Further  information  notices 
(1) For the purposes  of determining  whether  to revoke  or vary  a direct  deduction 
order,  the Minister  may  give  a bank  a notice  (a “further  information  notice”) 
requiring  the bank— 
15 (a) to give the Minister  statements  for an account  held  by the liable  person 
covering— 
(i) the three  months  immediately  before  the notice  was given,  or 
(ii) such  longer  period,  ending  immediately  before  the notice  was 
given,  as may  be specified  in the notice; 
20 (b) to take the steps  set out in paragraphs  (a) to (c) of section  19(5). 
(2) Subsections  (6) to (8) and (10) of section  19 apply  in relation  to a further 
information  notice  as they  apply  in relation  to a notice  under  that section. 
(3) Before  giving  a further  information  notice  to a bank  requiring  statements  to 
25be given  in respect  of a joint  account,  the Minister  must  notify  each  account 
holder  other  than  the liable  person— 
(a) that the notice  will be given,  and 
(b) of the effect  of the notice. 
(4) A further  information  notice  may  be given  to the bank  before,  at the same 
time  as or after  the Minister  complies  with  section  29(3). 
30 32 Suspension  of direct  deduction  orders 
(1) The Minister  may  suspend  and re-start  the requirement  to make  deductions 
and payments  under  a regular  direct  deduction  order  at any time  by notifying 
the bank  to which  the order  was given. 
(2) 
35The Minister  must  notify  the liable  person  and,  in the case of a joint  account, 
each  other  account  holder  if the requirement  is suspended  or re-started  under 
this section. 19 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
33 Cessation  on death  of liable  person 
A bank  ceases  to be subject  to a direct  deduction  order  on becoming  aware 
of the liable  person’s  death. 
34 Reviews 
5 (1) This  section  applies  where  the Minister— 
(a) makes  a direct  deduction  order, 
(b) varies  a direct  deduction  order,  or 
(c) decides  not to vary  a direct  deduction  order  in response  to an 
application  under  section  28. 
10 (2) Any  of the following  persons  (“relevant  persons”)  may  apply  to the Minister 
for a review  of the decision  to make,  to vary  or not to vary  the order— 
(a) the liable  person  to whom  the order  relates,  and 
(b) in the case of a joint  account,  any other  account  holder. 
(3) 
15An application  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  before  the end of the 
period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the applicant 
was— 
(a) given  a copy  of the order  or the order  as varied,  or 
(b) notified  of the decision  not to vary  the order. 
(4) 
20An application  for a review  under  this section  may  not be made  on, or include, 
any ground  relating  to the existence  or amount  of a payable  amount  (unless 
the amount  is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(5) Where  an application  for a review  is made  under  this section,  the Minister 
must  review  the decision  in question. 
(6) On the review,  the Minister  may— 
25 (a) uphold  the decision, 
(b) vary  the order,  or 
(c) revoke  the order. 
(7) After  a review  has been  carried  out, the Minister  must— 
(a) 
30notify  the applicant  and other  relevant  persons  of the outcome  of the 
review,  and 
(b) if the outcome  was to vary  the order,  give— 
(i) the order  as varied  to the bank  which  was given  the original 
order,  and 
(ii) 
35a copy  of the varied  order  to the liable  person  and,  in the case 
of a joint  account,  each  other  account  holder. 
(8) See section  29 for provisions  about  varying  a direct  deduction  order. 
35 Appeals 
(1) A relevant  person  may  appeal  to the First-tier  Tribunal  against— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 20 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(a) the making  of a direct  deduction  order, 
(b) the variation  of a direct  deduction  order,  or 
(c) a refusal  to vary  a direct  deduction  order  after  an application  under 
section  28. 
5 (2) A relevant  person  may  not appeal  under  subsection  (1) in relation  to a direct 
deduction  order  unless  they  have— 
(a) applied  for a review  of the decision  to make,  to vary  or not to vary 
the order  under  section  34, and 
(b) been  notified  of the outcome  of the review. 
10 (3) Subsection  (2) does  not apply  where  a direct  deduction  order  is varied  on a 
review  under  section  34. 
(4) A relevant  person  must  bring  an appeal  under  subsection  (1) within  the period 
of 28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the person  was 
notified  of the outcome  of the review. 
15 (5) An appeal  under  subsection  (1) may  not be brought  on, or include,  any ground 
relating  to the existence  or amount  of a payable  amount  (unless  the amount 
is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(6) On an appeal  under  this section,  the First-tier  Tribunal  may  suspend  the 
20requirement  on a bank  to comply  with  a direct  deduction  order  for some  or 
all of the time  until  the appeal  is finally  determined. 
(7) On an appeal  under  subsection  (1), the First-tier  Tribunal  may— 
(a) amend  the direct  deduction  order; 
(b) revoke  the direct  deduction  order; 
(c) dismiss  the appeal. 
25 (8) In this section,  “relevant  person”  has the meaning  that it has in section  34. 
36 Meaning  of “bank”  etc 
(1) For the purposes  of direct  deduction  orders,  “bank”  means  a person  who  is 
authorised— 
(a) to accept  deposits,  or 
30 (b) to issue  electronic  money. 
(2) For the purposes  of subsection  (1)(a)— 
(a) the reference  to accepting  deposits  is to carrying  on the regulated 
activity  of accepting  deposits  for the purposes  of the Financial  Services 
35and Markets  Act 2000  (see section  22 of that Act and article  5 of the 
Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 2000  (Regulated  Activities)  Order 
2001  (S.I. 2001/544)),  and 
(b) a person  is authorised  to accept  deposits  if they  are an authorised 
person  or an exempt  person  in relation  to the carrying  on of that 
40activity  for the purposes  of the Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 
2000. 21 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(3) For the purposes  of subsection  (1)(b), a person  is authorised  to issue  electronic 
money  if— 
(a) the person  is an electronic  money  institution,  and 
(b) 
5the person  is authorised  or registered  under  Part 2 of the Electronic 
Money  Regulations  2011  (S.I. 2011/99)  in relation  to carrying  on the 
activity  of issuing  electronic  money. 
(4) In subsection  (3), “electronic  money”  and “electronic  money  institution”  have 
the meanings  given  by regulation  2(1) of those  Regulations  (and  references 
10to the issue  of electronic  money  are to be construed  in accordance  with  those 
Regulations). 
(5) In this Part,  references  to an amount  in an account  are to an amount  standing 
to the credit  of the account. 
(6) In this Part,  references  to a person  holding  an account  include  references  to— 
(a) a person  holding  an account  jointly  with  one or more  other  persons, 
15 (b) a person  being  a signatory,  or one of the signatories,  to an account, 
and 
(c) an account  being,  in any other  way,  in the person’s  name, 
and “holder”  is to be read  accordingly. 
37 Regulations 
20 (1) The Minister  may  by regulations  make  further  provision  about  direct  deduction 
orders. 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  may,  among  other  things,  make  provision 
about— 
(a) how  notices  and orders  are to be given  by the Minister; 
25 (b) how  notices  and information  are to be given  to the Minister; 
(c) the calculation  of amounts  to be deducted,  including— 
(i) about  establishing  whether  deductions  would  cause  a person 
to suffer  hardship  in meeting  essential  living  expenses,  and 
(ii) 
30about  amounts  which  are, or are not, to be taken  into account 
in calculating  the amounts  credited  to an account  for the 
purposes  of section  22(3); 
(d) the duties  of banks  in relation  to direct  deduction  orders,  including 
before  a direct  deduction  order  is made; 
(e) 
35costs  which  a bank  may  recover  by virtue  of section  24 or from  the 
Minister; 
(f) the interaction  between  direct  deduction  orders  under  this Schedule 
and similar  orders  under  any other  enactment. 
(3) Regulations  under  this section  may,  among  other  things,  apply  sections  17 to 
4036, as they  apply  to banks,  to other  types  of person  who  provide  financial 
products  or services  (including  products  or services  that operate  by reference 
to cryptoassets  or any similar  product  or service). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 22 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(4) In subsection  (3), “cryptoasset”  has the meaning  given  in section  84A of the 
Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002. 
(5) Before  making  relevant  regulations  in reliance  on subsection  (2)(a), (b), (d) 
or (e) the Minister  must  consult— 
5 (a) persons  who  appear  to the Minister  to represent  the interests  of banks, 
and 
(b) such  other  persons  (if any)  as the Minister  considers  appropriate. 
(6) Before  making  relevant  regulations  in reliance  on subsection  (3), the Minister 
must  consult— 
10 (a) persons  who  appear  to the Minister  to represent  the interests  of persons 
to whom  provisions  about  direct  deduction  orders  would  be applied 
by the regulations,  and 
(b) such  other  persons  (if any)  as the Minister  considers  appropriate. 
(7) In this section,  “relevant  regulations”  means— 
15 (a) the first regulations  made  in reliance  on the provisions  in question, 
and 
(b) any subsequent  regulations  made  in reliance  on those  provisions 
which— 
(i) impose  new  duties  on banks,  or 
20 (ii) make  changes  to existing  duties  or provisions  which,  in the 
opinion  of the Minister,  are more  than  minor. 
(8) Regulations  made  in reliance  on subsection  (3) are subject  to the affirmative 
procedure. 
(9) Any  other  regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
25 Deduction  from  earnings 
38 Deduction  from  earnings  orders 
(1) Where  an amount  is recoverable  from  a liable  person  who  is employed,  the 
Minister  may  make  a deduction  from  earnings  order. 
(2) 
30A deduction  from  earnings  order  is an order  requiring  the liable  person’s 
employer— 
(a) to make  deductions  from  the liable  person’s  earnings  from  that 
employer,  and 
(b) pay the amounts  deducted  to the Minister. 
(3) 
35The Minister  may  by regulations  make  provision  about  the meaning  of 
“earnings”  for the purposes  of deduction  from  earnings  orders. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 23 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
39 Content  and effect  of deduction  from  earnings  orders 
(1) A deduction  from  earnings  order  must  set out— 
(a) the amounts  to be deducted  or a method  for calculating  those  amounts, 
(b) 
5the periods  in relation  to which  those  amounts  are to be deducted 
(the “affected  periods”), 
(c) when  amounts  are to be deducted  and paid  to the Minister,  and 
(d) the penalties  that may  be imposed  for a failure  to comply  (see section 
53). 
(2) The Minister  must  give— 
10 (a) the deduction  from  earnings  order  to the liable  person’s  employer, 
and 
(b) a copy  of the order  to the liable  person. 
(3) A deduction  from  earnings  order  may  not require  an amount  to be deducted 
15from  the liable  person’s  earnings  before  the end of the period  of 22 days 
beginning  with  the day on which  the order  is given  to the employer. 
(4) An employer  must  comply  with  a deduction  from  earnings  order. 
40 Requirements  before  making  a deduction  from  earnings  order 
(1) Before  making  a deductions  from  earnings  order  in respect  of a liable  person, 
20the Minister  must  give  the liable  person  a notice  inviting  them  to make 
representations  about  the proposed  order. 
(2) The notice  must  include— 
(a) the terms  of the proposed  order, 
(b) a statement  of the amount  that is recoverable,  and 
(c) 
25the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  representations 
may  be made. 
(3) The period  must  be at least  28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on 
which  the notice  is given. 
(4) The Minister  must— 
(a) 
30consider  any representations  received  in accordance  with  the notice, 
and 
(b) in light  of those  representations— 
(i) decide  whether  to make  a deductions  from  earnings  order  in 
respect  of the liable  person,  and 
(ii) 
35make  any changes  to the terms  of the proposed  order  that the 
Minister  considers  appropriate. 
(5) The Minister  must  give  a copy  of a notice  under  subsection  (1) to the liable 
person’s  employer. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 24 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(6) If, following  the giving  of a notice  under  subsection  (1), the Minister  decides 
not to make  the proposed  deduction  from  earnings  order,  the Minister  must, 
as soon  as reasonably  practicable— 
(a) give  the liable  person  a notice  to that effect,  and 
5 (b) give  a copy  of the notice  to the liable  person’s  employer. 
41 Amount  of deductions 
(1) The Minister  may  make  a deduction  from  earnings  order  only  if satisfied  that 
the terms  of the order— 
(a) 
10will not cause  the liable  person  or a person  within  subsection  (2) to 
suffer  hardship  in meeting  ordinary  living  expenses,  and 
(b) are otherwise  fair in all the circumstances. 
(2) A person  is within  this subsection  if— 
(a) they  live with  the liable  person  for some  or all of the time,  or 
(b) they  are financially  dependent  on the liable  person. 
15 (3) The amount  to be deducted  in relation  to an affected  period  must  not exceed— 
(a) in a case to which  subsection  (4) applies,  40% of the liable  person’s 
net earnings  for the affected  period,  and 
(b) in any other  case,  20% of the liable  person’s  net earnings  for the 
affected  period. 
20 (4) This  subsection  applies  in a case where  the Minister  is satisfied,  on the balance 
of probabilities,  that the payable  amount  to which  the deduction  from  earnings 
order  relates  is recoverable  from  the liable  person  because  the liable  person 
committed  fraud. 
(5) 
25The Minister  must  ensure  that the total  amount  to be deducted  and paid  to 
the Minister  under  a deduction  from  earnings  order  does  not exceed  the 
payable  amount  to which  the order  relates. 
(6) The Minister  may  by regulations  make  further  provision  about  the calculation 
of amounts  to be deducted  from  a liable  person’s  earnings  and paid  to the 
Minister  in accordance  with  a deduction  from  earnings  order. 
30 (7) The regulations  may,  among  other  things,  make  provision  about  establishing 
whether  deductions  would  cause  a person  to suffer  hardship  in meeting 
ordinary  living  expenses. 
(8) Regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
(9) 
35In this section,  “net earnings”  means  the person’s  earnings  after  the following 
have  been  deducted— 
(a) income  tax, 
(b) primary  Class  1 national  insurance  contributions,  and 
(c) any contribution  that the person  pays  to a pension  scheme. 25 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
42 The employer’s  administrative  costs 
(1) A deduction  from  earnings  order  may  include  provision  for the employer  to 
which  it is given  to deduct  from  the liable  person’s  earnings  an amount 
5specified  in, or calculated  in accordance  with,  the order,  for the purpose  of 
meeting  costs  reasonably  incurred  by the employer  in complying  with  the 
order. 
(2) In complying  with  section  41(1) and (3) in relation  to a deduction  from 
earnings  order  the Minister  must  take account  of any deductions  to be made 
under  the order  by virtue  of subsection  (1). 
10 (3) The Minister  may  by regulations  make  provision  about  costs  to which 
subsection  (1) relates. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
43 Suspension  of deduction  from  earnings  orders 
(1) 
15The Minister  may  suspend  and re-start  the requirement  to make  deductions 
and payments  under  a deduction  from  earnings  order  at any time  by notifying 
the employer  to which  the order  was given. 
(2) The Minister  must  notify  the liable  person  if the requirement  is suspended 
or re-started  under  this section. 
44 Duty  to notify  the Minister  of change  of circumstances 
20 (1) A liable  person  in respect  of whom  a deduction  from  earnings  order  is in 
force,  must  notify  the Minister  on each  occasion  that they— 
(a) leave  any employment,  or 
(b) start  a new  employment, 
25within  the period  of 7 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which 
they  leave  or start  the employment. 
(2) If the liable  person  notifies  the Minister  that they  have  started  a new 
employment,  they  must  include  a statement  of their  expected  earnings  from 
their  new  employment. 
(3) A person  who— 
30 (a) becomes  the employer  of a liable  person,  and 
(b) knows  that a deduction  from  earnings  order  is in force  in respect  of 
the liable  person, 
must,  within  10 days  of the beginning  of the liable  person’s  employment, 
35notify  the Minister  that they  have  become  the liable  person’s  employer  and 
include  a statement  of the liable  person’s  expected  earnings  from  the 
employment. 
(4) A person  must  notify  the Minister  if a liable  person  in respect  of whom  a 
deduction  from  earnings  order  is in force  ceases  to be in their  employment. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 26 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(5) The notification  must  be given  within  the period  of 10 days  beginning  with 
the day after  the day on which  the liable  person  leaves  the employment. 
45 Applications  to vary 
(1) 
5A liable  person  may  apply  to the Minister  to vary  a deduction  from  earnings 
order. 
(2) The Minister  must  notify  the liable  person  of the Minister’s  decision  on the 
application. 
46 Variation 
(1) 
10The Minister  may  vary  a deduction  from  earnings  order  given  to an employer 
(whether  on an application  by the liable  person  or otherwise)  by— 
(a) giving  a revised  version  of the order  to the employer,  and 
(b) giving  a copy  of the revised  version  to the liable  person. 
(2) Where  the Minister  proposes  to vary  a deduction  from  earnings  order,  the 
15Minister  must  give  the liable  person  an opportunity  to make  representations 
about  the proposed  variation. 
47 Revocation 
(1) The Minister  may  revoke  a deduction  from  earnings  order. 
(2) The Minister  must  revoke  a deduction  from  earnings  order  if the payable 
amount  to which  it relates  has been  recovered. 
20 (3) Where  the Minister  revokes  a deduction  from  earnings  order,  the Minister 
must  give  notice  of the revocation  to— 
(a) the employer,  and 
(b) the liable  person. 
48 Reviews 
25 (1) This  section  applies  where  the Minister— 
(a) makes  a deduction  from  earnings  order, 
(b) varies  a deduction  from  earnings  order,  or 
(c) decides  not to vary  a deduction  from  earnings  order  in response  to 
an application  under  section  45. 
30 (2) A liable  person  may  apply  to the Minister  for a review  of the decision  to 
make,  to vary  or not to vary  the order. 
(3) An application  under  subsection  (2) must  be made  within  the period  of 28 
days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the liable  person  was— 
(a) given  a copy  of the order  or the order  as varied,  or 
35 (b) notified  of the decision  not to vary  the order. 27 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
(4) An application  for a review  under  subsection  (1) may  not be brought  on, or 
include,  any ground  relating  to the existence  or amount  of a payable  amount 
(unless  the amount  is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(5) 
5Where  an application  is made  under  this section,  the Minister  must  review 
the decision  in question. 
(6) On a review,  the Minister  may— 
(a) uphold  the decision, 
(b) vary  the order,  or 
(c) revoke  the order. 
10 (7) After  a review  has been  carried  out, the Minister  must— 
(a) notify  the liable  person  of the outcome  of the review,  and 
(b) if the outcome  was to vary  the order,  give— 
(i) the varied  order  to the liable  person’s  employer,  and 
(ii) a copy  of the varied  order  to the liable  person. 
15 49 Appeals 
(1) A liable  person  may  appeal  to the First-tier  Tribunal  against— 
(a) the making  of a deduction  from  earnings  order, 
(b) the variation  of a deduction  from  earnings  order,  or 
(c) 
20a refusal  to vary  a deduction  from  earnings  order  after  an application 
under  section  45. 
(2) The liable  person  may  not appeal  under  subsection  (1) unless  they  have— 
(a) applied  for a review  of the decision  to make,  to vary  or not to vary 
the order  under  section  48, and 
(b) been  notified  of the outcome  of the review. 
25 (3) Subsection  (2) does  not apply  where  a deduction  from  earnings  order  is varied 
on a review  under  section  48. 
(4) An appeal  must  be brought  within  the period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the 
day after  the day on which  the liable  person  was notified  of the outcome  of 
the review. 
30 (5) An appeal  under  subsection  (1) may  not be brought  on, or include,  any ground 
relating  to the existence  or amount  of a payable  amount  (unless  the amount 
is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(6) On an appeal  under  this section,  the First-tier  Tribunal  may  suspend  the 
35requirement  on an employer  to comply  with  a deduction  from  earnings  order 
for some  or all of the time  until  the appeal  is finally  determined. 
(7) On an appeal  under  subsection  (1), the First-tier  Tribunal  may— 
(a) amend  the deduction  from  earnings  order, 
(b) revoke  the deduction  from  earnings  order,  or 
(c) dismiss  the appeal. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 28 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  4—Methods  of recovery 
CHAPTER 5 
CIVIL PENALTIES 
50 Penalty  relating  to fraud 
5The Minister  may  impose  a penalty  on a person  if satisfied,  on the balance 
of probabilities,  that the person  has carried  out, or conspired  to carry  out, 
fraud— 
(a) in order  to receive  or help  another  person  to receive  a payment  that 
is or, if the payment  was not made,  would  have  been,  a recoverable 
amount,  or 
10 (b) with  the result  that a public  authority  is entitled  to claim  any other 
recoverable  amount. 
51 Application  to members  etc of bodies 
(1) Subsection  (2) applies  where  a body  is liable  to receive  a penalty  under  section 
1550 by reason  of anything  which  the Minister  is satisfied,  on the balance  of 
probabilities,  was done  or not done  with  the consent  or connivance  of— 
(a) a relevant  individual  in relation  to the body,  or 
(b) an individual  purporting  to act in the capacity  of a relevant  individual 
in relation  to the body. 
(2) 
20The Minister  may  impose  a penalty  under  section  50 on the individual  as 
well  as on the body. 
(3) In this section,  “relevant  individual”  means— 
(a) in relation  to a body  corporate  other  than  one whose  affairs  are 
managed  by its members,  a director,  manager,  secretary  or other  similar 
officer  of the body; 
25 (b) in relation  to a limited  liability  partnership  or other  body  corporate 
whose  affairs  are managed  by its members,  a member  who  exercises 
functions  of management  with  respect  to it; 
(c) in relation  to a limited  partnership,  a general  partner  (within  the 
meaning  given  by section  3 of the Limited  Partnerships  Act 1907); 
30 (d) in relation  to any other  partnership,  a partner; 
(e) in relation  to an unincorporated  association,  a person  who  exercises 
functions  of management  with  respect  to it. 
52 Amount  of penalty  relating  to fraud 
(1) 
35A penalty  imposed  on a person  under  section  50(a) may  not exceed  100%  of 
the payment  to which  it relates. 
(2) Where  a penalty  is imposed  under  section  50(a) in relation  to conduct  which 
does  not result  in a person  receiving  a payment,  subsection  (1) is to be read 1 
as if the reference  to “the payment”  were  to the payment  which,  in the opinion 29 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  5—Civil  penalties 
of the Minister,  a person  would  have  received  if a payment  had been  made 
in consequence  of the conduct. 
(3) A penalty  imposed  on a person  under  section  50(b) may  not exceed  100% 
of— 
5 (a) any loss caused  to the public  authority,  or 
(b) if higher,  the benefit  gained  by the person, 
as a result  of the fraud  in question. 
53 Penalty  for failing  to comply  with  requirements 
10The Minister  may  impose  a penalty  on a person  where  the Minister  considers 
that the person  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  failed  to comply  with— 
(a) a requirement  imposed  by or under  Chapter  2 (investigatory  powers), 
or 
(b) a requirement  imposed  by or under  Chapter  4 (methods  of recovery). 
54 Application  to members  etc of bodies 
15 (1) Subsection  (2) applies  where  the Minister  considers  that— 
(a) a body  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  failed  to comply  with  a 
requirement  mentioned  in section  53, and 
(b) a relevant  individual  in relation  to the body  has, without  reasonable 
excuse,  failed  to prevent  that failure. 
20 (2) The Minister  may  impose  a penalty  under  section  53 on the individual  as 
well  as on the body. 
(3) In this section,  “relevant  individual”  in relation  to a body  has the same 
meaning  that it has in section  51. 
55 Amount  of penalty  for failing  to comply  with  requirements 
25 (1) A penalty  imposed  for a failure  to comply  with  a requirement  to provide 
information  imposed  by or under  Chapter  2   or Chapter  4 must  be an amount 
calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate of £300. 
(2) Any  other  penalty  for a failure  to comply  with  a requirement  imposed  by or 
under  Chapter  2 or Chapter  4 must  be a fixed  amount  of £300. 
30 (3) In this section,  references  to a “daily  rate”  in relation  to a person’s  failure  to 
provide  information  are to an amount  that may  be imposed  for each  day by 
the end of which  the information  has not been  provided,  beginning  with  the 
last day on which  compliance  would  have  resulted  in a penalty  not being 
payable. 
35 (4) The Minister  may  by regulations  amend  the amounts  mentioned  in subsections 
(1) and (2) for the time  being  to reflect  a change  in the value  of money. 
(5) Regulations  under  subsection  (4) are subject  to the negative  procedure. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 30 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  5—Civil  penalties 
56 Procedural  rights 
(1) This  section  and sections  57 and 58 set out steps  that must  be taken  before 
the Minister  may  impose  a penalty  on a person  under  section  50 or 53. 
(2) 
5Where  the Minister  proposes  that a person  should  be given  a penalty  under 
section  50 or 53, the Minister  must  give  the person  a notice  (a “notice  of 
intent”)  inviting  them  to make  representations  about  the proposed  penalty. 
(3) The notice  of intent  must  include— 
(a) the amount  of the proposed  penalty, 
(b) the reasons  for the penalty  being  of that amount,  and 
10 (c) the means  by which,  and the period  within  which,  representations 
may  be made. 
(4) The period  must  be at least  28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on 
which  the notice  is given. 
(5) The Minister  must— 
15 (a) consider  any representations  received  in accordance  with  the notice, 
and 
(b) in light  of those  representations— 
(i) decide  whether  to impose  the penalty,  and 
(ii) 
20make  any changes  to the terms  of the proposed  penalty  that 
the Minister  considers  appropriate. 
(6) Where  the Minister  decides  not to impose  a penalty  on the person,  the Minister 
must  give  the person  a notice  to that effect. 
57 Penalty  decision  notices 
(1) 
25Where  the Minister  decides  to impose  a penalty  on the person,  the Minister 
must  give  the person  a penalty  decision  notice. 
(2) A penalty  decision  notice  is a notice— 
(a) informing  the person  of the decision  that a penalty  should  be imposed 
on the person, 
(b) stating  the amount  of the penalty, 
30 (c) setting  out the reasons  for the penalty  being  of that amount, 
(d) explaining  that the person  can apply  for a review  of the decision  within 
the period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which 
the decision  notice  is given,  and 
(e) 
35explaining  that if the person  does  not seek  a review  within  that period, 
the penalty  notice  will be given  after  the end of that period. 
(3) If a review  of the decision  is requested  in accordance  with  the penalty  decision 
notice,  the penalty  may  not be imposed  until  after  a review  has been  carried 
out. 31 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  5—Civil  penalties 
(4) If no such  review  is requested,  the penalty  may  be imposed  after  the period 
mentioned  in subsection  (2)(d). 
58 Reviews  and decisions 
(1) 
5Where  a review  of the decision  that a penalty  should  be imposed  is requested 
following  receipt  of a penalty  decision  notice,  the Minister  must  carry  out a 
review  of that decision. 
(2) On a review,  the Minister  may— 
(a) uphold  the decision  to impose  the penalty  and the amount  of the 
penalty, 
10 (b) uphold  the decision  to impose  the penalty  but change  its amount,  or 
(c) cancel  the decision  to impose  a penalty. 
(3) Where  the Minister  makes  a decision  within  subsection  (2)(a) or (b), the 
Minister  must— 
(a) give  the person  a notice  in accordance  with  section  59, and 
15 (b) inform  the person  of the right  of appeal  under  section  60. 
(4) Where  the Minister  makes  a decision  within  subsection  (2)(c), the Minister 
must  give  the person  a notice  to that effect. 
59 Penalty  notices 
(1) 
20A penalty  under  section  50 or 53 is imposed  by giving  a person  a notice  (a 
“penalty  notice”)  requiring  the person  to pay a penalty  of a specified  amount 
to the Minister  on or before  a specified  day. 
(2) A person  may  not be given  more  than  one penalty  notice  in respect  of the 
same  act or omission. 
(3) 
25Where  a person  is liable  under  section  53 to a penalty  for a failure  to provide 
information,  and the penalty  is calculated  by reference  to a daily  rate,  the 
failure  to provide  information  by the end of each  day in relation  to which 
the daily  rate accrues  is to be treated  as a separate  omission  for the purposes 
of   subsection  (2). 
(4) In this section,  “specified”  means  specified  in the penalty  notice. 
30 60 Appeals 
(1) A person  may  appeal  against  a penalty  notice  to the appropriate  court. 
(2) An appeal  must  be brought  within  the period  of 28 days  beginning  with  the 
day after  the day on which  the Minister  complies  with  section  58(3). 
(3) On an appeal  under  subsection  (1), the appropriate  court  may— 
35 (a) uphold  the penalty  notice, 
(b) revoke  the penalty  notice,  or 
(c) amend  the penalty  notice. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 32 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  5—Civil  penalties 
(4) Subsection  (5) applies  where— 
(a) an appeal  is against  a penalty  notice  under  section  50 (penalty  relating 
to fraud),  and 
(b) 
5court  proceedings  other  than  an appeal  against  a penalty  notice  have 
reached  a final  determination,  on at least  the balance  of probabilities, 
that the person  to whom  the notice  was given— 
(i) carried  out or conspired  to carry  out, or 
(ii) in a case to which  section  51 applies,  consented  to or connived 
in the act or omission  which  constituted, 
10 the fraud  to which  the penalty  relates. 
(5) For the purposes  of the appeal  against  a penalty  notice,  that final 
determination  is determinative  of the question  whether  the person  carried 
out the fraud. 
(6) 
15The Minister  may  by regulations  make  further  provision  about  appeals  against 
a penalty  notice. 
(7) The regulations  may,  among  other  things,  provide  for appeals  to be heard  at 
the same  time  as proceedings  mentioned  in section  10(1)(a) (proceedings  to 
recover  a recoverable  amount). 
(8) Regulations  under  this section  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
20 (9) In this section,  “the appropriate  court”  means— 
(a) the First-tier  Tribunal,  or 
(b) such  other  court  or tribunal  as may  be specified  in regulations  under 
this section. 
61 Interest 
25 (1) An amount  payable  by a person  in accordance  with  a penalty  notice  carries 
interest  (“late  payment  interest”)  for each  day in the period  beginning  with 
the interest  start  day and ending  with  the day of payment. 
(2) The interest  start  day is the day after  the specified  day included  in a penalty 
notice  in accordance  with  section  59(1). 
30 (3) The late payment  interest  rate applicable  to a day in the interest  period  is the 
percentage  per year  found  by adding  2.5 to the Bank  of England  rate 
applicable  to the day. 
(4) The Bank  of England  rate applicable  to a day is the official  bank  rate 
35announced  by the Bank  of England  Monetary  Policy  Committee  at its most 
recent  meeting  prior  to the day. 
(5) Late  payment  interest  is not payable  on late payment  interest. 33 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  5—Civil  penalties 
62 Code  of practice 
(1) The Minister  must  issue  a code  of practice  about  the administration  of penalties 
under  section  50, including  about  the making  of decisions  about  the imposition 
and amount  of a penalty. 
5 (2) The code  of practice  must  include  provision  about  circumstances  in which, 
and the extent  to which,  the Minister  considers  that it would  be appropriate 
to discount  the amount  of a penalty  as a result  of cooperative  conduct  by the 
person  on whom  the penalty  is imposed. 
(3) The Minister  may  from  time  to time  revise  and reissue  the code  of practice. 
10 (4) The Minister  must  lay the code  of practice,  or any reissued  code  of practice, 
before  Parliament. 
63 Penalties  and criminal  proceedings  or convictions 
(1) The Minister  may  not give  a penalty  notice  to a person  under  section  50 in 
15relation  to an act or omission  which  constitutes  an offence  if the person  has, 
in relation  to that act or omission,  been  found  guilty  of that offence. 
(2) A person  may  not be found  guilty  of an offence  in relation  to an act or 
omission  if the person  has paid  a penalty  in response  to a penalty  notice 
given  under  section  50 in relation  to that act or omission. 
CHAPTER 6 
20 GENERAL 
64 Independent  review 
(1) The Minister  must  appoint  an independent  person  to carry  out reviews  of 
the exercise  of the Minister’s  functions  under  this Part. 
(2) After  each  review,  the independent  person  must  as soon  as practicable— 
25 (a) prepare  a report  on the review,  and 
(b) submit  the report  to the Minister. 
(3) On receiving  a report,  the Minister  must— 
(a) publish  it, and 
(b) lay a copy  before  Parliament. 
30 (4) Each  review  must  consider  the extent  to which— 
(a) functions  under  this Part have  been  exercised  in compliance  with  the 
requirements  of this Part,  relevant  codes  of practice  and relevant 
guidance,  and 
(b) 
35the exercise  of those  functions  has been  effective  in delivering  the 
Minister’s  functions  under  section  1(1)(a) to (c). 
(5) Each  report  must  contain  any recommendations  which  the independent  person 
considers  appropriate  in light  of the review  to which  it relates. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 34 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  6—General 
(6) In subsection  (4)(b), “relevant  codes  of practice”  and “relevant  guidance”  mean 
codes  of practice  and guidance  to which  the Minister  must  have  regard  in 
exercising  functions  under  this Part. 
65 Independent  review:  further  provision 
5 (1) The Minister  may  give  the independent  person  appointed  under  section  64(1) 
directions  as to the period  to be covered  by each  review  carried  out under 
section  64. 
(2) The Minister  must  consult  the independent  person  before  giving  a direction 
under  subsection  (1). 
10 (3) The Minister  may  disclose  information  to the independent  person,  or to a 
person  acting  on behalf  of the independent  person,  for the purposes  of reviews 
being  carried  out under  section  64 
(4) The Minister  may  by regulations  confer  functions  on a person  for the purposes 
of securing  compliance  with  section  64. 
15 (5) Regulations  under  subsection  (4) are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
66 Authorised  officers 
(1) The following  decisions,  if not made  by the Minister  personally,  may  be made 
only  by an individual  authorised  by the Minister  for the purposes  of this 
section  (an “authorised  officer”)— 
20 (a) deciding  to give  an information  notice  under  section  3(2); 
(b) deciding  to give  a recovery  notice  under  section  11(1); 
(c) deciding  to make  a direct  deduction  order  under  section  17(1); 
(d) deciding  to vary  a direct  deduction  order  under  section  29(1); 
(e) deciding  to make  a deduction  from  earnings  order  under  section  38(1); 
25 (f) deciding  to vary  a deduction  from  earnings  order  under  section  46; 
(g) deciding  to give  a notice  of intent  under  section  56(2); 
(h) deciding  to impose  a penalty  under  section  50 or 53 (and  give  a notice 
for that purpose  under  section  59). 
(2) Subsection  (3) applies  where— 
30 (a) the Minister  is required  by virtue  of a provision  of this Part to review 
a decision  mentioned  in subsection  (1), and 
(b) the decision  was made  by an authorised  officer. 
(3) The review  must  be carried  out by— 
(a) 
35an authorised  officer  of a higher  grade  than  the authorised  officer  who 
made  the decision,  or 
(b) the Minister  personally. 
(4) An individual  may  not be an authorised  officer  unless  the individual  is 
employed  in the civil  service  of the state  in the Minister’s  department. 35 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  6—General 
67 Disclosure  of information  etc: interaction  with  external  constraints 
(1) This  section  applies  in relation  to any provision  for the processing  of 
information  made  by or under  this Part. 
(2) 
5The provision  does  not require  or authorise  any processing  of information 
that— 
(a) contravenes  the data  protection  legislation,  or 
(b) is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 of the 
Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. 
(3) 
10But the provision  is to be taken  into account  in determining  whether  the 
disclosure,  obtaining  or use of information  would  contravene  the data 
protection  legislation. 
(4) The disclosure  of information  in accordance  with  the provision  (as read  subject 
to subsection  (2)) does  not breach— 
(a) 
15any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the disclosure, 
or 
(b) any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(5) The provision  does  not require  or authorise  the disclosure  or obtaining  of 
20information  in respect  of which  a claim  to legal  professional  privilege  could 
be maintained  in legal  proceedings  without  the agreement  of the person 
entitled  to maintain  that claim. 
(6) A person  may  not be required  under  the provision  to give  information  which 
tends  to incriminate  the person  or the person’s  spouse  or civil  partner. 
(7) 
25In this section,  “data  protection  legislation”  and “processing”  have  the same 
meanings  as in the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3 of that Act). 
68 Crown  etc application 
(1) Subject  to the following  provisions  of this section,  this Part binds  the Crown 
and applies  in relation  to Crown  premises  as it applies  in relation  to any 
other  premises. 
30 (2) In this section,  “Crown  premises”  means  premises  held,  or used  by, or on 
behalf  of the Crown. 
(3) Sections  16 to 37 (recovery  orders  and recovery  from  bank  accounts)  and 
Chapter  5 (penalties)  do not bind  the Crown. 
(4) 
35If the Minister  or the Secretary  of State  certifies  that it appears  appropriate 
in the interests  of national  security  that powers  of entry  conferred  by this 
Part should  not be exercisable  in relation  to Crown  premises  specified  in the 
certificate,  those  powers  are not exercisable  in relation  to those  premises. 
(5) No power  of entry  conferred  by, or by virtue  of, this Part may  be exercised 
in relation  to— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 36 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  6—General 
(a) land  belonging  to His Majesty  in right  of His private  estates,  or 
(b) premises  occupied  for the purposes  of either  House  of Parliament. 
(6) In subsection  (5)(a), the reference  to His Majesty’s  private  estates  is to be read 
in accordance  with  section  1 of the Crown  Private  Estates  Act 1862. 
5 69 The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Schedule  2 contains  provision— 
(a) setting  up the Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority  (“the  PSFA”),  and 
(b) about  the transfer  to the PSFA  of functions  conferred  on the Minister 
under  this Part. 
10 70 Interpretation 
(1) In this Part— 
“authorised  officer”  has the meaning  given  by section  66; 
“bank”  has the meaning  given  by section  36(1); 
“claimed  amount”  has the meaning  given  by section  10(1)(a); 
15 “core  functions”  has the   meaning  given  by section  1; 
“direct  deduction  order”  means  a regular  direct  deduction  order  or a 
lump  sum  direct  deduction  order; 
“fraud”  includes— 
(a) 
20the offences  in sections  1 and 11 of the Fraud  Act 2006  (fraud 
and obtaining  services  dishonestly),  and 
(b) the offence  at common  law of conspiracy  to defraud; 
“information”  means  information  in the form  of a document  or in any 
other  form; 
“joint  account”  means  an account  held  by more  than  one person; 
25 “liable  person”  has the meaning  given  by section  11(1); 
“lump  sum  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by section 
17(5); 
“the Minister”  means  the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office; 
“payable  amount”  has the meaning  given  by section  15; 
30 “public  authority”    means  a person  with  functions  of a public  nature  so 
far as acting  in the exercise  of those  functions; 
“recoverable  amount”  has the meaning  given  by section  1(3); 
“regular  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by section  17(4); 
“sole  account”  means  an account  held  by one person; 
35 “suspected  fraud”  is conduct  which  the Minister  has reasonable  grounds 
to suspect  may  constitute  fraud; 
“working  day”  means  any day other  than— 
(a) Saturday  or Sunday,  and 
(b) 
40a day which  is a bank  holiday  under  the Banking  and Financial 
Dealings  Act 1971  in any part of the United  Kingdom. 37 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 1—Functions  exercisable  on behalf  of public  authorities 
Chapter  6—General 
(2) In this Part,  references  to giving  a notice  or other  document  (however 
expressed),  include  sending  the notice  or document  by post. 
(3) For the purposes  of this Part— 
(a) 
5court  proceedings  (including  an appeal)  are not finally  determined 
until  any appeal  relating  to the proceedings  has been  withdrawn, 
abandoned  or determined  (ignoring  any possibility  of an appeal  out 
of time  with  permission),  and 
(b) a final  determination  is the determination  reached  when  court 
proceedings  are finally  determined. 
10 71 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  under  this Part are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(2) A power  to make  regulations  under  any provision  of this Part includes  power 
to make— 
(a) 
15consequential,  supplementary,  incidental,  transitional  or saving 
provision; 
(b) different  provision  for different  purposes. 
(3) Where  regulations  under  this Part are subject  to “the affirmative  procedure”, 
the regulations  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory  instrument 
20containing  them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by a resolution  of, each 
House  of Parliament. 
(4) Where  regulations  under  this Part are subject  to “the negative  procedure”, 
the statutory  instrument  containing  them  is subject  to annulment  in pursuance 
of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
(5) 
25Any  provision  that may  be made  by regulations  under  this Part subject  to 
the negative  procedure  may  be made  in regulations  subject  to the affirmative 
procedure. 
PART 2 
SOCIAL SECURITY ETC 
CHAPTER 1 
30 POWERS TO REQUIRE INFORMATION 
72 Information  notices 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 38 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  1—Powers  to require  information 
(2) After  section  109B  insert— 
“109BZA Power  to require  information:  fraud  etc 
(1) An authorised  officer  may  give  a person  (“P”)  a written  notice  (an 
5“information  notice”)  requiring  P to give an authorised  officer  specified 
information  where  the officer— 
(a) has reasonable  grounds  to suspect  that a person  has committed, 
is committing  or intends  to commit  a DWP  offence,  and 
(b) considers  that it is necessary  and proportionate  to require  the 
10specified  information  for a purpose  mentioned  in section 
109A(2)(c)  or (d) (investigating  compliance  with  the relevant 
social  security  legislation  etc). 
(2) Information  may  be specified  in an information  notice  only  if it relates 
to a person  who  is identified  (by name  or description)  in the 
information  notice  as— 
15 (a) the person  suspected  as mentioned  in subsection  (1)(a), or 
(b) a member  of that person’s  family  (within  the meaning  of Part 
7 of the Contributions  and Benefits  Act). 
(3) An authorised  officer  may  require  P to give specified  information  only 
20if the officer  has reasonable  grounds  to suspect  that P has or is able 
to access  the information. 
(4) An information  notice  must  set out— 
(a) the identity  of (or a means  of identifying)  the person  to whom 
the information  requested  relates; 
(b) 
25how,  where  and the period  within  which  the information  must 
be given; 
(c) information  about  the consequences  of not complying  with  the 
notice. 
(5) The power  under  this section  to require  P to give information  includes 
power  to— 
30 (a) take copies  of or extracts  from  information; 
(b) require  P to provide  information  in a specified  form; 
(c) if any specified  information  is not given  to an authorised  officer, 
require  P to state,  to the best of P’s knowledge  and belief,  both 
35where  that information  is and why  it has not been  given  to an 
authorised  officer. 
(6) Subsection  (2E) of section  109B  (communications  data)  applies  to an 
information  notice  under  this section  as it applies  to a notice  under 
that section. 
(7) In this section— 
40 “information”  means  information  in the form  of a document  or 
in any other  form; 
“specified”  means— 39 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  1—Powers  to require  information 
(a) specified,  or described,  in the information  notice,  or 
(b) falling  within  a category  that is specified  or described 
in the information  notice. 
(8) 
5Nothing  in this section  limits  the powers  conferred  on the Secretary 
of State  by Schedule  3B.” 
(3) In section  109A  (authorisations  for investigators)— 
(a) in subsection  (1), for “109B  and 109C  below”  substitute  “109B  to 109C”; 
(b) in subsection  (2)(d),  at the end insert  “or other  DWP  offences”; 
(c) in subsection  (8), for “109B  and 109C  below”  substitute  “109B  to 109C”; 
10 (d) in subsection  (9), for “109B  and 109C  below”  substitute  “109B  to 109C”. 
(4) In section  109B  (power  to require  information)— 
(a) in the heading,  at the end insert  “: eligibility”; 
(b) in subsection  (1)(a),  omit  “or (2A)”; 
(c) in subsection  (1)(b),  for “109A(2)  above”  substitute  “109A(2)(a)  or (b)”; 
15 (d) omit  the following  provisions— 
(i) subsection  (2A); 
(ii) subsection  (2B); 
(iii) subsection  (2C); 
(iv) subsection  (2D); 
20 (v) subsection  (5); 
(vi) subsection  (6); 
(vii) subsection  (7A); 
(e) in subsection  (7) omit  the definitions  of— 
(i) “bank”; 
25 (ii) “credit”; 
(iii) “insurer”; 
(iv) “residential  premises”. 
(5) In section  109BA  (power  of the Secretary  of State  to require  electronic  access 
to information)— 
30 (a) in subsection  (1)(a)  omit  “falling  within  section  109B(2A)”; 
(b) in subsection  (2)(b),  for “109B  above”  substitute  “109B  or 109BZA”; 
(c) in subsection  (4), after  “109B”  insert  “or 109BZA”. 
(6) In section  109C  (powers  of entry),  in subsection  (6), for “Subsections  (2E) and 
35(5) of section  109B  apply  for the purposes  of this section  as they  apply” 
substitute  “Subsection  (2E) of section  109B  applies  for the purposes  of this 
section  as it applies”. 
(7) In section  190 (Parliamentary  control  of orders  and regulations),  in subsection 
(1) omit  paragraph  (aza). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 40 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  1—Powers  to require  information 
73 Code  of practice 
In the Social  Security  Fraud  Act 2001,  in section  3 (code  of practice  about  use 
of information  powers),  in subsection  (1)— 
(a) 
5in the words  before  paragraph  (a), after  “of” insert  “the powers  that 
are exercisable  by an authorised  officer  under  section  109BZA  of the 
Administration  Act.”,  and 
(b) omit  paragraphs  (a) and (b). 
74 Eligibility  verification 
(1) 
10The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  in accordance  with 
subsections  (2) to (4). 
(2) In Part 7 (information),  before  section  121E  (and  the italic  heading  before  it) 
insert— 
“Eligibility  verification 
121DB Eligibility  verification 
15 Schedule  3B makes  provision  about  a power  for the Secretary  of State 
to obtain  information  for the purposes  of identifying  incorrect  payments 
of certain  benefits. ” 
(3) In section  190(1)  (Parliamentary  control  of orders  and regulations),  after 
paragraph  (ac) (inserted  by section  90(4) of this Act)  insert— 
20 “(ad) regulations  under  paragraph  2(1)(b) or 19(2) of Schedule  3B;”. 
(4) After  Schedule  3A insert,  as Schedule  3B, the Schedule  in Part 1 of Schedule 
3 to this Act. 
(5) Part 2 of Schedule  3 to this Act makes  amendments  to the Proceeds  of Crime 
Act 2002. 
25 75 Eligibility  verification:  independent  review 
After  section  121DB  of the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (inserted 
by section  74 of this Act)  insert— 
“121DC Independent  review 
(1) 
30The Secretary  of State  must  appoint  an independent  person  to carry 
out reviews  of the exercise  of the Secretary  of State’s  functions  under 
Schedule  3B (eligibility  verification  measures). 
(2) After  each  review,  the independent  person  must  as soon  as 
practicable— 
(a) prepare  a report,  and 
35 (b) submit  the report  to the Secretary  of State. 
(3) On receiving  a report,  the Secretary  of State  must— 41 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  1—Powers  to require  information 
(a) publish  it, and 
(b) lay a copy  before  Parliament. 
(4) The first review  must  relate  to the period  of 12 months  beginning  with 
5the day on which  section  74 of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error 
and Recovery)  Act 2025  comes  fully  into force. 
(5) Subsequent  reviews  must  relate  to subsequent  periods  of 12 months. 
(6) Each  review  must  consider  the extent  to which— 
(a) the Secretary  of State’s  exercise  of powers  under  Schedule  3B 
10has complied  with  the requirements  of the Schedule  and any 
code  of practice  in force  under  Part 5 of the Schedule  during 
the period, 
(b) the actions  taken  by persons  given  an eligibility  verification 
notice  have  complied  with  the requirements  of Schedule  3B, 
and 
15 (c) the exercise  of the Secretary  of State’s  powers  under  Schedule 
3B has been  effective  in identifying,  or assisting  in identifying, 
incorrect  payments  of relevant  benefits  during  the period 
covered  by the review. 
(7) 
20Regulations  may  confer  functions  on a person  for the purposes  of 
securing  compliance  with  subsections  (1) to (6). 
121DD Independent  review:  further  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  disclose  information  to the independent 
person  appointed  under  section  121DC (1), or to a person  acting  on 
25behalf  of the independent  person,  for the purposes  of reviews  being 
carried  out under  section  121DC . 
(2) Subsection  (1) does  not authorise  the processing  of information  that— 
(a) would  contravene  the data  protection  legislation; 
(b) is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 of 
the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. 
30 (3) But subsection  (1) is to be taken  into account  in determining  whether 
the processing  of information  would  contravene  the data  protection 
legislation. 
(4) A disclosure  of information  under  subsection  (1) (as read  subject  to 
subsection  (2)) does  not breach— 
35 (a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the 
disclosure,  or 
(b) any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed),  subject  to subsection  (2). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 42 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  1—Powers  to require  information 
(5) In this section  "the data  protection  legislation"  and “processing”  have 
the same  meanings  as in the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3 
of that Act). ” 
CHAPTER 2 
5 POWERS OF ENTRY, SEARCH AND SEIZURE ETC 
76 Entry,  search  and seizure  in England  and Wales 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  109C  insert— 
“109D Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  in England  and Wales 
10 (1) This  section  confers  functions  on and in relation  to authorised 
investigators  by applying  provisions  of the Police  and Criminal 
Evidence  Act 1984  (“the  1984  Act”)  with  modifications. 
(2) The functions  are exercisable  only  in relation  to premises  and items 
in England  and Wales. 
15 (3) The provisions  of the 1984  Act listed  in subsection  (4) apply  in relation 
to investigations  of DWP  offences  conducted  by authorised 
investigators  as they  apply  in relation  to investigations  of offences 
conducted  by police  officers,  subject  to the modifications  in Schedule 
3ZC. 
20 (4) The provisions  are— 
(a) section  8(1) to (5) (power  of justice  of the peace  to authorise 
entry  and search  of premises); 
(b) section  9(1) and Schedule  1 (special  provisions  as to access); 
(c) section  15 (search  warrants:  safeguards); 
25 (d) section  16 (execution  of warrants); 
(e) section  19 (general  power  of seizure  etc); 
(f) section  20 (extension  of powers  of seizure  to computerised 
information); 
(g) section  21 (access  and copying); 
30 (h) section  22 (retention); 
(i) section  117 (reasonable  use of force); 
(j) sections  10 to 14, 23 and 118 (interpretation  provisions),  so far 
as necessary  for the application  of the provisions  mentioned 
in paragraphs  (a) to (i). 
35 (5) For the purposes  of this section  and Schedule  3ZC an authorised 
investigator  is an individual  who  is authorised  by the Secretary  of 
State  to exercise  the powers  conferred  by this section. 
(6) An individual  may  be so authorised  only  if the individual— 43 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(a) is an official  of a government  department, 
(b) is a higher  executive  officer,  or 
(c) has a grade  that is equivalent  to, or higher  than,  that of a higher 
executive  officer. ” 
5 (3) After  Schedule  3ZB (inserted  by section  91(3) of this Act)  insert,  as Schedule 
3ZC, the Schedule  in paragraph  1 of Schedule  4 to this Act. 
77 Entry,  search  and seizure  in Scotland 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  109D  (inserted  by section  76 of this Act)  insert— 
10 “109E Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  in Scotland 
Schedule  3ZD  confers  functions  that are exercisable  only  in relation 
to premises  and items  in Scotland  and that correspond  to the functions 
conferred  by section  109D  in relation  to England  and Wales. ” 
(3) 
15After  Schedule  3ZC (inserted  by section  76(3) of this Act)  insert,  as Schedule 
3ZD,  the Schedule  in paragraph  2 of Schedule  4 to this Act. 
78 Entry,  search  and seizure:  Crown  application 
After  section  109E  of the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (inserted 
by section  77 of this Act)  insert— 
“109F Entry,  search  and seizure:  Crown  etc application 
20 (1) Subject  to subsections  (2) and (3), the powers  conferred  by section 
109D  and by Schedule  3ZD , bind  the Crown  and apply  in relation  to 
Crown  premises  as they  apply  in relation  to any other  premises. 
(2) If the Secretary  of State  certifies  that it appears  appropriate  in the 
25interests  of national  security  that powers  of entry  conferred  by this 
Part should  not be exercisable  in relation  to Crown  premises  specified 
in the certificate,  those  powers  are not exercisable  in relation  to those 
premises. 
(3) No power  of entry  conferred  by, or by virtue  of, the provisions 
mentioned  in subsection  (1) may  be exercised  in relation  to— 
30 (a) land  belonging  to His Majesty  in right  of His private  estates, 
or 
(b) premises  occupied  for the purposes  of either  House  of 
Parliament. 
(4) In this section— 
35 (a) “Crown  premises”  means  premises  held,  or used  by, or on 
behalf  of the Crown,  and Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 44 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(b) the reference  to His Majesty’s  private  estates  is to be read  in 
accordance  with  section  1 of the Crown  Private  Estates  Act 
1862. ” 
79 Offence  of delay,  obstruction  etc 
5 In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  in section  111 (delay, 
obstruction  etc of inspector)— 
(a) in paragraph  (a) of subsection  (1), after  “officer”  insert  “, or authorised 
investigator,”,  and 
(b) after  subsection  (2) insert— 
10 “(2A) In subsection  (1)(a),  “authorised  investigator”  means  an 
individual  who  is authorised  by the Secretary  of State  to 
exercise  the powers  conferred  by section  109D  or Schedule 
3ZD .” 
80 Disposal  of property 
15 In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  109F  (inserted 
by section  78 of this Act)  insert— 
“109G Disposal  of property 
(1) The appropriate  court  may,  on an application  by the Secretary  of State 
or a person  with  an interest  in relevant  property— 
20 (a) order  the delivery  of the relevant  property  to the person 
appearing  to the court  to be its owner,  or 
(b) if its owner  cannot  be ascertained,  make  any other  order  about 
the relevant  property. 
(2) 
25An order  under  subsection  (1)(a) may  include  provision  for the 
Secretary  of State  to make  any changes  to the relevant  property  that 
the court  considers  necessary  for the purpose  of avoiding  or reducing 
any risk of the relevant  property  being  used  in the commission  of an 
offence. 
(3) 
30An order  under  subsection  (1)(b) may  not provide  for the destruction 
or disposal  of relevant  property  until  the end of the period  of 6 months 
beginning  with  the day on which  the order  is made. 
(4) An order  under  subsection  (1)(b) (“the  first order”)  does  not prevent 
further  applications  being  made  for an order  under  subsection  (1) in 
respect  of the relevant  property  to which  the first order  applies. 
35 (5) Where  an order  is made  following  a further  application— 
(a) the order  may  not provide  for the destruction  or disposal  of 
the relevant  property  before  the end of the period  of 6 months 
beginning  with  the day on which  the first order  was made, 
but 45 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(b) the order  may  otherwise  contain  such  provision  as to the timing 
of the destruction  or disposal  of the relevant  property  as the 
court  thinks  fit. 
(6) In this section— 
5 “appropriate  court”  means— 
(a) in relation  to England  and Wales,  a magistrates’  court, 
and 
(b) in relation  to Scotland,  the sheriff; 
10“relevant  property”  means  tangible  property  which  has come  into 
the possession  of the Secretary  of State  in the course  of, or in 
connection  with,  an investigation  into a DWP  offence. ” 
81 Amendments  to the Criminal  Justice  and Police  Act 2001 
(1) The Criminal  Justice  and Police  Act 2001  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  57 (retention  of seized  items),  in subsection  (1), at the end insert— 
15 “(w) paragraph  4(3) of Schedule  3ZD  to the Social  Security 
Administration  Act 1992. ” 
(3) In section  63 (copies),  in subsection  (2), at the end insert— 
“(j) paragraph  2 of Schedule  3ZD  to the Social  Security 
Administration  Act 1992. ” 
20 (4) In Part 1 of Schedule  1 (powers  of seizure  to which  section  50 of the Act 
applies),  after  paragraph  56 insert— 
“Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992 
56ZA The power  of seizure  conferred  by paragraph  2(1)(d) of Schedule 
3ZD  to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992. ” 
25 82 Incidents  etc in England  and Wales 
(1) Part 2 of the Police  Reform  Act 2002  (complaints  and misconduct)  is amended 
as follows. 
(2) In section  10 (general  functions  of the Director  General  of the Independent 
Office  for Police  Conduct)— 
30 (a) in subsection  (1), at the end of paragraph  (gc) (inserted  by section 
9(2)(a) of this Act)  insert  “; and 
(gd) to carry  out such  corresponding  functions  in relation 
to DWP  investigators  acting  in the exercise  of functions 
35conferred  on them  by section  109D  of the Social  Security 
Administration  Act 1992  (Police  and Criminal  Evidence 
Act 1984  powers  for DWP  investigators). ”, Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 46 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(b) in subsection  (3), after  paragraph  (bf) (inserted  by section  9(2)(b) of 
this Act)  insert— 
“(bg) any regulations  under  section  26H of this Act (DWP 
investigators); ”, and 
5 (c) after  subsection  (7A)  (inserted  by section  9(2)(c) of this Act insert— 
“(7B) In this section,  “DWP  investigators”  means  authorised 
investigators  within  the meaning  given  by section  109D  of the 
Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992. ” 
(3) After  section  26G (inserted  by section  9 of this Act)  insert— 
10 “26H DWP  investigators 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  make  regulations  conferring  functions  on 
the Director  General  in relation  to DWP  investigators  acting  in the 
exercise  of functions  conferred  on them  by section  109D  of the Social 
15Security  Administration  Act 1992  (Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 
1984  powers  for DWP  investigators). 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  may,  in particular— 
(a) apply  (with  or without  modifications),  or make  provision 
similar  to, any provision  of or made  under  this Part; 
(b) 
20make  provision  for payment  by the Secretary  of State  to, or in 
respect  of, the Office  or in respect  of the Director  General. 
(3) The Director  General  and the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for 
Administration  may  jointly  investigate  a matter  in relation  to which— 
(a) the Director  General  has functions  by virtue  of this section, 
and 
25 (b) the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for Administration  has 
functions  by virtue  of the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 
1967. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  disclose  information  to the Director  General 
30or to a person  acting  on the Director  General’s  behalf,  for the purposes 
of the exercise  by the Director  General  or by any person  acting  on the 
Director  General’s  behalf,  of a DWP  complaints  function. 
(5) The Director  General  and the Parliamentary  Commissioner  for 
Administration  may  disclose  information  to each  other  for the purposes 
of the exercise  of a function— 
35 (a) by virtue  of this section,  or 
(b) under  the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967. 
(6) Regulations  under  this section  may,  in particular,  make— 
(a) further  provision  about  the disclosure  of information  under 
subsection  (4) or (5); 
40 (b) provision  about  the further  disclosure  of information  that has 
been  so disclosed. 47 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(7) A disclosure  of information  authorised  by or under  this section  does 
not breach— 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the 
disclosure,  or 
5 (b) any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(8) No provision  made  by or under  this section  authorises  a disclosure 
of information  that— 
(a) 
10would  contravene  the data  protection  legislation  (but in 
determining  whether  a disclosure  would  do so, the power 
conferred  by this section  is to be taken  into account),  or 
(b) is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 of 
the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. 
(9) In this section— 
15 “data  protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in the Data 
Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3 of that Act); 
“DWP  complaints  function”  means  a function  in relation  to the 
exercise  of functions  conferred  by section  109D  of the Social 
Security  Administration  Act 1992; 
20 “DWP  investigator”  means  an authorised  investigator  within  the 
meaning  given  by section  109D  of that Act.” 
83 Incidents  etc in Scotland 
(1) The Police  and Fire Reform  (Scotland)  Act 2012  (Consequential  Provisions 
and Modifications)  Order  2013  (S.I. 2013/602)  is amended  as follows. 
25 (2) In Article  2 (interpretation),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
““DWP  investigator”  means  an authorised  investigator  within  the meaning 
given  by paragraph  6 of Schedule  3ZD  to the Social  Security 
Administration  Act 1992; ”. 
(3) 
30In Article  3 (agreements  to investigate  serious  incidents),  after  paragraph  17B 
insert— 
“(17C)  The Commissioner  and the Secretary  of State  may  enter  into an 
agreement  for the Commissioner  to investigate  and report,  where  requested 
to do so by the Secretary  of State,  on any serious  incident  involving  DWP 
35investigators  acting  in the exercise  of functions  conferred  on them  by Schedule 
3ZD  to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (entry,  search  and seizure 
powers). 
(17D)  A “serious  incident  involving  DWP  investigators”  has the same 
meaning  as a “serious  incident  involving  the police”  in section  41B of the 
402006  Act except  that “a person  serving  with  the police”  means  a DWP 
investigator  acting  in the exercise  of functions  conferred  on them  by Schedule 
3ZD  to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992. ” Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 48 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  2—Powers  of entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
(4) In Article  4 (investigation  of crimes  and deaths),  after  paragraph  (i) insert  “; 
(j) a DWP  investigator  acting  in the exercise  of functions  conferred  on 
them  by Schedule  3ZD  to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 
1992. ” 
5 CHAPTER 3 
FURTHER PROVISION RELEVANT TO INVESTIGATORY POWERS 
84 DWP  offence 
In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  in section  121DA  (interpretation 
of Part relating  to enforcement),  in subsection  (5), at the end insert— 
10 ““DWP  offence”  means— 
(a) a benefit  offence, 
(b) any other  offence  relating  to a benefit,  payment,  credit  or grant 
in relation  to which  the Secretary  of State  with  responsibility 
15for social  security  exercises  functions  (whether  or not the 
benefit,  payment,  credit  or grant  concerns  social  security), 
(c) an offence  relating  to the allocation  or use of a national 
insurance  number,  and 
(d) any attempt  or conspiracy  to commit  an offence  within 
paragraph  (b) or (c).” 
20 85 Disclosure  of information  etc: interaction  with  external  constraints 
In Part 6 of the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (enforcement),  after 
section  109G  (inserted  by section  80 of this Act)  insert— 
“109H Disclosure  of information  etc: interaction  with  external  constraints 
(1) 
25This  section  applies  in relation  to any provision  for the processing  of 
information  made  by or under  this Part. 
(2) The provision  does  not require  or authorise  any processing  of 
information  that— 
(a) contravenes  the data  protection  legislation,  or 
(b) 
30is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 of 
the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. 
(3) But the provision  is to be taken  into account  in determining  whether 
the processing  of information  would  contravene  the data  protection 
legislation. 
(4) 
35The disclosure  of information  in accordance  with  the provision  (as 
read  subject  to subsection  (2)) does  not breach— 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the 
disclosure,  or 49 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  3—Further  provision  relevant  to investigatory  powers 
(b) any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed). 
(5) The provision  does  not require  or authorise  the disclosure  or obtaining 
5of information  in respect  of which  a claim  to legal  professional 
privilege  could  be maintained  in legal  proceedings  without  the 
agreement  of the person  entitled  to maintain  that claim. 
(6) In the application  of subsection  (5) in Scotland,  the reference  to legal 
professional  privilege  is to be read  as a reference  to confidentiality  of 
communications. 
10 (7) A person  may  not be required  under  the provision  to give information 
which  tends  to incriminate  the person  or the person’s  spouse  or civil 
partner. 
(8) A person  who  provides  services  on a not for profit  basis  in relation 
15to social  security,  housing  (including  the provision  of temporary 
accommodation)  or debt,  may  not be required  under  the provision  to 
give  personal  data  about  the recipients  of the services. 
(9) The provision  does  not require  or authorise  the disclosure  of— 
(a) excluded  material,  or 
(b) special  procedure  material, 
20 within  the meanings  of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984 
(see sections  11 to 14 of that Act). 
(10) But subsection  (9) is subject  to— 
(a) the provisions  of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984 
25as applied  by section  109D (4)(b) and paragraph  3(5) of Schedule 
3ZC, and 
(b) Part 2 of Schedule  3ZD . 
(11) In this section  “the data  protection  legislation”,  “personal  data”  and 
“processing”  have  the same  meanings  as in the Data  Protection  Act 
2018  (see section  3 of that Act). ” 
30 86 Giving  notices  etc 
In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  in section  121DA  (interpretation 
of Part relating  to enforcement),  after  subsection  (7) insert— 
“(8) In this Part,  references  to giving  a notice  or other  document  (however 
expressed)  include  sending  the notice  or document  by post. ” Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 50 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  3—Further  provision  relevant  to investigatory  powers 
87 Independent  review 
In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  109H  (inserted 
by section  85 of this Act)  insert— 
“109I Independent  review 
5 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  appoint  an independent  person  to carry 
out reviews  of the exercise  of functions  under  sections  109A  to 109H 
and Schedule  3ZD  (“investigative  functions”). 
(2) After  each  review,  the independent  person  must  as soon  as 
practicable— 
10 (a) prepare  a report  on the review,  and 
(b) submit  the report  to the Secretary  of State. 
(3) On receiving  a report,  the Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) publish  it, and 
(b) lay a copy  before  Parliament. 
15 (4) Each  review  must  consider  the extent  to which  — 
(a) investigative  functions  have  been  exercised  in compliance  with 
the requirements  of provisions  mentioned  in subsection  (1), 
relevant  codes  of practice  and relevant  guidance,  and 
(b) 
20the exercise  of those  functions  has been  effective  in meeting 
the purposes  set out in section  109A(2). 
(5) Each  report  must  contain  any recommendations  which  the independent 
person  considers  appropriate  in light  of the review  to which  it relates. 
(6) In subsection  (4)(a), “relevant  codes  of practice”  and “relevant 
25guidance”  mean  codes  of practice  and guidance  to which  the Secretary 
of State  must  have  regard  in exercising  investigative  functions. 
109J Independent  review:  further  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  give  the independent  person  appointed 
under  section  109I(1) directions  as to the period  to be covered  by each 
review  under  section  109I. 
30 (2) The Secretary  of State  must  consult  the independent  person  before 
giving  a direction  under  subsection  (1). 
(3) The Secretary  of State  may  disclose  information  to the independent 
person,  or to a person  acting  on behalf  of the independent  person,  for 
the purposes  of reviews  being  carried  out under  section  109I. 
35 (4) Regulations  may  confer  functions  on a person  for the purposes  of 
securing  compliance  with  section  109I. 51 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  3—Further  provision  relevant  to investigatory  powers 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  comply  with  the duty  in section  109I(1) by 
appointing  different  independent  persons  to carry  out reviews  in 
relation  to the exercise  of investigative  functions— 
(a) in England  and Wales,  and 
5 (b) in Scotland. ” 
CHAPTER 4 
OVERPAYMENTS: RECOVERY AND ENFORCEMENT 
88 Enforcement  of non-benefit  payments 
In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  71ZH  insert— 
10 “Recovery  of non-benefit  payments 
71ZI Overpayment  of non-benefit  payments:  overview  and recovery 
(1) For the purposes  of this section  and sections  71ZJ  and 71ZK , an 
overpayment  of a non-benefit  payment  occurs  where— 
(a) 
15a person  (“P”)  misrepresents,  or fails to disclose,  a material 
fact, and 
(b) in consequence  of the misrepresentation  or failure,  P or another 
person  receives  a non-benefit  payment,  or an amount  of a 
non-benefit  payment,  (whether  directly  or indirectly)  that they 
would  not otherwise  have  received, 
20 and the “overpayment”  is that payment  or amount. 
(2) The overpayment  is recoverable  from  P as if it were  an amount 
recoverable  under  section  71(1)  if, in relation  to the misrepresentation 
or failure  to disclose,  P— 
(a) 
25is convicted  of an offence  (under  this Act or any other 
enactment),  or 
(b) agrees  to pay a penalty  under  section  115A. 
(3) But subsection  (2) is subject  to section  71ZJ . 
(4) The right  to recover  an overpayment  under  this section  does  not affect 
30any other  right  that the Secretary  of State  may  have  to recover  the 
overpayment  (or any other  amount  in relation  to the non-benefit 
payment). 
(5) In this section  and sections  71ZJ  and 71ZK , “non-benefit  payment” 
has the meaning  given  by section  121DA(5). 
71ZJ 
35Overpayment  of non-benefit  payments:  overpayment  decision  and 
notice 
(1) Before  exercising  powers  under  this Act to recover  an overpayment 
of a non-benefit  payment  from  a person  (“P”)— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 52 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
(a) the Secretary  of State  must  give  a notice  (an “overpayment 
notice”)  to P, and 
(b) the condition  in subsection  (5) must  be met (opportunity  for 
P to challenge  the notice). 
5 (2) The Secretary  of State  may  give  P an overpayment  notice  only  if— 
(a) P has been  convicted  of an offence  (under  this Act or any other 
enactment),  or 
(b) it appears  to the Secretary  of State  that there  are grounds  to 
10institute  proceedings  against  P for an offence  (under  this Act 
or any other  enactment), 
in relation  to the overpayment. 
(3) An overpayment  notice  must— 
(a) state  the amount  that the Secretary  of State  regards  as an 
overpayment, 
15 (b) provide  the Secretary  of State’s  reasons  for regarding  that 
amount  as an overpayment, 
(c) set out the effect  of the giving  of the overpayment  notice,  and 
(d) set out P’s right  to seek  a review  of the notice  and the right  to 
appeal  the outcome  of that review  (see section  71ZK ). 
20 (4) In subsection  (3)(c), the reference  to the effect  of the giving  of the 
overpayment  notice  is a reference  to the Secretary  of State’s  powers 
to— 
(a) invite  P to agree  to a penalty  under  section  115A  in relation 
to the overpayment; 
25 (b) recover  the overpayment  (if P agrees  to pay such  a penalty,  or 
is convicted  of an offence,  in relation  to the overpayment). 
(5) The condition  in this subsection  is met where— 
(a) the time  for P to seek  a review  of the overpayment  notice  has 
passed  without  P seeking  a review,  or 
30 (b) if P sought  a review  of the notice  within  the time  allowed,  the 
review  has taken  place  and— 
(i) the time  for P to appeal  the outcome  of the review  has 
passed  without  P bringing  an appeal,  or 
(ii) 
35P’s appeal  (including  any onward  appeal)  against  the 
outcome  of the review  has been  withdrawn,  abandoned 
or finally  determined. 
71ZK Overpayment  of non-benefit  payments:  reviews  and appeals 
(1) A person  (“P”)  given  an overpayment  notice  under  section  71ZJ  may 
40apply  to the Secretary  of State  for a review  of the notice  on the 
following  grounds— 
(a) that there  has been  no overpayment  of a non-benefit  payment, 
or 53 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
(b) that the amount  stated  in the notice  is not correct. 
(2) An application  under  subsection  (1) must  be made  before  the end of 
the period  of one month  beginning  with  the day after  the day on 
which  P was given  the notice. 
5 (3) On a review,  the Secretary  of State  may— 
(a) uphold  the notice, 
(b) amend  the notice,  or 
(c) revoke  the notice. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  notify  P of the outcome  of the review. 
10 (5) Where  an overpayment  notice  is upheld  or varied  on a review,  P may 
appeal  to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the notice  on the following 
grounds— 
(a) that there  has been  no overpayment,  or 
(b) that the amount  stated  in the notice  is not correct. 
15 (6) An appeal  under  subsection  (5) must  be brought  within  the period  of 
one month  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  P is notified 
of the outcome  of the review. 
(7) The First-tier  Tribunal  may— 
(a) uphold  the notice, 
20 (b) vary  the notice,  or 
(c) revoke  the notice. ” 
89 Recovery  and enforcement  mechanisms 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  80 insert— 
25 “Further  provision  about  recovery 
80A Further  methods  of recovery 
(1) This  section  applies  in relation  to— 
(a) section  80B (and  Schedule  3ZA ) (recovery  from  a person’s  bank 
accounts  etc), and 
30 (b) section  80C (and  Schedule  3ZB) (disqualification  from  driving). 
(2) References  to a recoverable  amount  are to— 
(a) an amount  which  is recoverable  by virtue  of any provision  of 
sections  71 to 78, and 
(b) 
35a penalty  which  is payable  by virtue  of any provision  of 
sections  115A  to 115D. 
(3) References  to a “liable  person”  are to a person  liable  to pay a 
recoverable  amount. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 54 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
(4) Nothing  in Schedule  3ZA  or Schedule  3ZB affects  any other  method 
of recovery  or enforcement  that is available  in relation  to a recoverable 
amount. 
(5) 
5The Secretary  of State  may  not exercise  a power  under  Schedule  3ZA 
or Schedule  3ZB for the purpose  of recovering  an amount  from  a liable 
person  unless  the Secretary  of State  has— 
(a) given  the liable  person  a reasonable  opportunity  to settle  their 
liability  in respect  of the amount, 
(b) 
10notified  the liable  person  that the Secretary  of State  may 
exercise  the power  for the purpose  of recovering  the amount 
if the liable  person  does  not settle    their  liability  in   respect  of 
the amount,  and 
(c) given  the liable  person  a summary  of how  the power  would 
be exercised. 
15 (6) The Secretary  of State  may  not exercise  the powers  under  Schedule 
3ZA  in relation  to a recoverable  amount  unless  satisfied  that it is not 
reasonably  possible  to recover  the amount  by way  of deductions  from 
benefit,  deductions  from  earnings  or an adjustment  of benefit. 
(7) 
20The Secretary  of State  may  not exercise  the powers  under  Schedule 
3ZB in relation  to a recoverable  amount  unless  satisfied  that it is not 
reasonably  possible  to recover  the amount  by way  of deductions  from 
benefit,  deductions  from  earnings,  an adjustment  of benefit  or 
deductions  from  the person’s  bank  account. 
(8) In subsections  (6) and (7)— 
25 “an adjustment  of benefit”  means  an adjustment  of benefit  under, 
or by virtue  of, section  71 or 71ZF; 
“deductions  from  benefit”  means  deductions  from  benefit  under, 
or by virtue  of, section  71 or 71ZC; 
30“deductions  from  earnings”  means  deductions  from  earnings 
under,  or by virtue  of, section  71 or 71ZD. 
(9) In subsection  (7), the reference  to a deduction  from  a person’s  bank 
account  is a reference  to a deduction  by way  of a direct  deduction 
order  under  Schedule  3ZA .” 
(3) 
35In section  111 (delay,  obstruction  etc of inspector),  in subsection  (1)(b),  after 
“otherwise  than”  insert  “under  Schedule  3ZA , Schedule  3B or”. 
(4) In section  191 (interpretation),  at the appropriate  places  insert  the following 
definitions— 
““direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph  1 of 
Schedule  3ZA ;”; 
40 ““immediate  DWP  disqualification  order”  has the meaning  given  by 
paragraph  2(2) of Schedule  3ZB;”; 55 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
““lump  sum  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph 
1(5) of Schedule  3ZA ;”; 
““regular  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph 
1(4) of Schedule  3ZA ; 
5 ““suspended  DWP  disqualification  order”  has the meaning  given  by 
paragraph  1(3) of Schedule  3ZB;”. 
90 Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  80A (inserted  by section  89 of this Act)  insert— 
10 “80B Recovery  from  bank  accounts 
Schedule  3ZA  (recovery  from  bank  accounts)  makes  provision  for a 
recoverable  amount  to be recoverable  directly  from  a person’s  bank 
account. ” 
(3) 
15After  Schedule  3 insert,  as Schedule  3ZA , the Schedule  in Schedule  5 to this 
Act. 
(4) In section  190 (Parliamentary  control  of orders  and regulations),  in subsection 
(1), after  paragraph  (ab) insert— 
“(ac) regulations  making  provision  in reliance  on paragraph  24(3) 
of Schedule  3ZA ; or”. 
20 91 Disqualification  from  driving 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  in accordance  with 
subsections  (2) and (3). 
(2) After  section  80B (inserted  by section  90(2) of this Act)  insert— 
“80C Disqualification  from  driving 
25 Schedule  3ZB makes  provision  for a liable  person  to be disqualified 
from  driving  while  some  or all of a recoverable  amount  remains 
unrecovered. ” 
(3) After  Schedule  3ZA  (inserted  by section  90(3) of this Act)  insert,  as Schedule 
3ZB, the Schedule  in Schedule  6 to this Act. 
30 (4) The Road  Traffic  Offenders  Act 1988  is amended  in accordance  with 
subsections  (5) to (7). 
(5) In section  27 (production  of licence),  in subsection  (3), after  “Child  Support 
Act 1991”  insert  “or paragraph  5 of Schedule  3ZB to the Social  Security 
Administration  Act 1992”. 
35 (6) In section  37 (effect  of order  of disqualification),  in subsection  (1A),  at the 
end of paragraph  (a)— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 56 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
(a) omit  the “or”,  and 
(b) insert— 
“(aa) the disqualification  is for a period  shorter  than  56 days 
5under  paragraph  2 of Schedule  3ZB to the Social 
Security  Administration  Act 1992,  or”. 
(7) In section  42 (removal  of disqualification),  in subsection  (6), after  “Act”  insert 
“or under  paragraph  2 of Schedule  3ZB to the Social  Security  Administration 
Act 1992”. 
(8) 
10In the Road  Traffic  Act 1988,  in section  164 (power  of constables  to require 
production  of driving  licence  etc), in subsection  (5), after  “required  under” 
insert  “paragraph  5 of Schedule  3ZB to the Social  Security  Administration 
Act 1992,”. 
92 Code  of practice 
15In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  80C (inserted  by 
section  91 of this Act)  insert— 
“80D Code  of practice 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  issue  a code  of practice  about  the exercise 
of the Secretary  of State’s  functions  under  Schedule  3ZA  and Schedule 
3ZB. 
20 (2) The code  of practice  must  include  provision  about— 
(a) the giving  of notices  to banks  requiring  the provision  of 
information  under  Schedule  3ZA ; 
(b) the processing  of information  received  in response; 
(c) the circumstances  in which  penalties  may  be issued  to banks; 
25 (d) the circumstances  in which  the Secretary  of State  expects  to 
exercise  functions  under  Schedule  3ZB. 
(3) Before  issuing  the code  of practice  for the first time,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  carry  out a public  consultation  on a draft  of the code. 
(4) 
30The requirement  in subsection  (3) may  be satisfied  by public 
consultation  carried  out before  this section  comes  into force. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  from  time  to time  revise  and re-issue  the 
code  of practice. 
(6) The Secretary  of State  must  lay the code  of practice,  or any reissued 
code  of practice,  before  Parliament. ” 57 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
93 Rights  of audience 
In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  80D (inserted  by 
section  92 of this Act)  insert— 
“80E Rights  of audience 
5 (1) An officer  of the Secretary  of State  who  is authorised  by the Secretary 
of State  for the purposes  of this section  has a right  of audience  and 
the right  to conduct  litigation  in relation  to proceedings  for or in 
connection  with  the recovery  of overpayments  under  a provision  of 
this Part before— 
10 (a) a magistrates’  court, 
(b) the county  court,  and 
(c) the Crown  Court. 
(2) In this section,  “right  of audience”  and “right  to conduct  litigation” 
15have  the same  meanings  as in section  119 of the Courts  and Legal 
Services  Act 1990. ” 
94 Recovery  of costs 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  71ZE,  omit  subsection  (3). 
(3) After  section  80E (inserted  by section  93 of this Act)  insert— 
20 “80F Recovery  of costs 
Any  costs  which  the Secretary  of State  reasonably  incurs  in recovering 
an amount  that is recoverable  under  any provision  of sections  71 to 
80, Schedule  3ZA  or Schedule  3ZB may  be recovered  by the Secretary 
of State  as if they  were  amounts  recoverable  under  that provision. ” 
25 95 Recovery:  further  provision 
(1) In the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  after  section  80F (inserted  by 
section  94 of this Act)  insert— 
“80G Recovery:  further  provision 
(1) 
30Subsection  (2) applies  in relation  to any provision  for the processing 
of information  made  by or under  this Part. 
(2) The provision  does  not require  or authorise  any processing  of 
information  that— 
(a) contravenes  the data  protection  legislation,  or 
(b) 
35is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 9 to 
the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 58 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  4—Overpayments:  recovery  and enforcement 
(3) But the provision  is to be taken  into account  in determining  whether 
the processing  of information  would  contravene  the data  protection 
legislation. 
(4) 
5The disclosure  of information  in accordance  with  the provision  (as 
read  subject  to subsection  (2))   does  not breach— 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person  making  the 
disclosure,  or 
(b) any other  restriction  on the disclosure  of information  (however 
imposed). 
10 (5) In this section,  “data  protection  legislation”  and “processing”  have  the 
same  meanings  as in the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3 of 
that Act). 
(6) In this Part,  references  to giving  a notice  or other  document  (however 
expressed)  include  sending  the notice  or document  by post. ” 
15 CHAPTER 5 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES ETC 
96 Offences:  non-benefit  payments 
(1) The Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  111A  (dishonest  representations  for obtaining  benefit  etc)— 
20 (a) in subsection  (1), in the words  after  paragraph  (b), after  “legislation” 
insert  “or a non-benefit  payment”; 
(b) after  subsection  (1G)  insert— 
“(1H) For the purposes  of subsections  (1A)  to (1G),  references  to— 
(a) 
25a person  being  entitled  to, or having  a right  to receive, 
a payment  under  a provision  of the relevant  social 
security  legislation  include  references  to a person  being 
entitled  to, or having  a right  to receive,  or qualifying 
for, a non-benefit  payment,  and 
(b) 
30a person’s  entitlement  to a payment  under  a provision 
of the relevant  social  security  legislation  include 
references  to a person’s  entitlement  to, or qualification 
for, a non-benefit  payment. ” 
(3) In section  112 (false  representations  for obtaining  benefit  etc)— 
(a) after  subsection  (1) insert— 
35 “(1ZA) A person  is guilty  of an offence  if, for the purpose  of obtaining 
a non-benefit  payment  for themselves  or another  person,  they— 
(a) make  a statement  or representation  which  they  know 
to be false,  or 59 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  5—Offences  and penalties  etc 
(b) produce  or furnish,  or knowingly  cause  or knowingly 
allow  to be produced  or furnished,  any document  or 
information  which  they  know  to be false  in a material 
particular. ”; 
5 (b) after  subsection  (1F) insert— 
“(1G) For the purposes  of subsections  (1A)  to (1F),  references  to— 
(a) a person  being  entitled  to, or having  a right  to receive, 
a payment  under  a provision  of the relevant  social 
10security  legislation  include  references  to a person  being 
entitled  to, or having  a right  to receive,  or qualifying 
for, a non-benefit  payment,  and 
(b) a person’s  entitlement  to a payment  under  a provision 
of the relevant  social  security  legislation  include 
15references  to a person’s  entitlement  to, or qualification 
for, a non-benefit  payment. ” 
(4) In section  121DA(5)  (interpretation  of Part 6), at the appropriate  place  insert— 
““non-benefit  payment”  means  a prescribed  payment  which— 
(a) is not a payment  of a relevant  social  security  benefit,  and 
(b) 
20is made  by the Secretary  of State  with  responsibility  for social 
security  for the purposes  of providing  financial  assistance  to 
a person,  whether  directly  or indirectly. ” 
97 Penalty  as alternative  to prosecution:  extension  to non-benefit  payments 
(1) Section  115A  of the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (penalty  as 
25alternative  to prosecution)  is amended  in accordance  with  subsections  (2) to 
(6). 
(2) After  subsection  (1A)  insert— 
“(1B) This  section  also applies  where— 
(a) an overpayment  notice  has been  given  to a person  (“P”)  under 
30section  71ZJ  (overpayment  notice  in relation  to non-benefit 
payment),  and 
(b) in relation  to the overpayment  notice,  the condition  in 
subsection  (1C) is met. 
(1C) The condition  in this subsection  is met where— 
(a) 
35the time  for P to seek  a review  of the overpayment  notice  under 
section  71ZK  has passed  without  P seeking  a review,  or 
(b) if P sought  a review  of the notice  within  the time  allowed,  the 
review  has taken  place,  and— 
(i) the time  for P to appeal  the outcome  of the review 
40under  section  71ZK  has passed  without  P bringing  an 
appeal,  or Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 60 
Part 2—Social  security  etc 
Chapter  5—Offences  and penalties  etc 
(ii) P’s appeal  (including  any onward  appeal)  against  the 
outcome  of the review  has been  withrawn,  abandoned 
or finally  determined. ” 
(3) 
5In subsection  (2)(a),  after  “above”  insert  “, or in relation  to the overpayment 
notice  referred  to in subsection  (1B),”. 
(4) In subsection  (3), after  “(1)”  insert  “or (1B)”. 
(5) In subsection  (8), in the words  before  paragraph  (a), after  “section”  insert  “, 
except  in relation  to a case referred  to in subsection  (1B),”. 
(6) After  subsection  (8) insert— 
10 “(8A) In relation  to a case referred  to in subsection  (1B),  “overpayment”  has 
the meaning  given  in section  71ZI (1).” 
(7) In section  115B  of the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  (penalty  as 
alternative  to prosecution:  colluding  employers  etc), in subsection  (2)(b),  after 
15“benefit  offence”  insert  “or an offence  in relation  to an overpayment  of a 
non-benefit  payment”. 
98 Amendments  to the Social  Security  Fraud  Act 2001:  loss of benefits  following 
penalty 
(1) The Social  Security  Fraud  Act 2001  is amended  as follows. 
(2) 
20In section  6B(2)  (loss  of benefits  in case of conviction,  penalty  or caution  for 
benefit  offence)— 
(a) in paragraph  (a) omit  the words  from  “section  115A”  to “or”,  and 
(b) omit  sub-paragraph  (i) of paragraph  (b). 
(3) In section  6C (section  6B: supplementary  provision)— 
(a) 
25in subsection  (2)(b)  omit  the words  “the Social  Security  Act 1998  or”, 
and 
(b) in subsection  (3) omit  the words  “the Social  Security  Act 1998  or”. 
PART 3 
GENERAL 
99 Application  and limitation 
30 (1) Subject  to subsection  (2), any function  conferred  by a provision  of this Act 
(including  by way  of amendments  to another  enactment)  is exercisable— 
(a) so far as the function  relates  to investigations  or enforcement,  in respect 
of things  done  or not done  before  the provision  comes  into force,  and 
(b) 
35so far as the function  relates  to the recovery  of money,  for the purposes 
of recovering  money  which  a public  authority  (whether  or not the 
public  authority  on which  the function  is conferred)  was entitled  to 
recover  before  the provision  comes  into force. 61 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 3—General 
(2) Subsection  (1)(a) does  not apply  in relation  to the amendments  made  by— 
(a) section  96 (offences:  non-benefit  payments),  and 
(b) section  97 (penalty  as alternative  to prosecution:  extension  to 
non-benefit  payments). 
5 (3) Subsection  (4) applies  in relation  to an action— 
(a) for an amount  that an England  and Wales  public  authority  is entitled 
to claim  from  a person  as a result  of fraud  which  the person  carried 
out, before  the day on which  this section  comes  into force,  in 
connection  with  coronavirus,  and 
10 (b) in relation  to which  a limitation  period  of less than  twelve  years  from 
the date  on which  the cause  of action  accrues  would  otherwise  have 
applied. 
(4) The time  limit  for bringing  the action  is twelve  years  beginning  with  the day 
15on which  the England  and Wales  public  authority  discovers  the fraud  or 
could  with  reasonable  diligence  discover  it (whether  that day is before,  on 
or after  the day on which  this section  comes  into force). 
(5) For the purposes  of subsections  (3) and (4)— 
(a) an “England  and Wales  public  authority”  is a person  who— 
(i) exercises  functions  of a public  nature,  and 
20 (ii) is not a devolved  Scottish  authority  or a devolved  Welsh 
authority; 
(b) an authority  is a “devolved  Scottish  authority”  if its functions— 
(i) are exercisable  only  in or as regards  Scotland,  and 
(ii) 
25are wholly  or mainly  functions  that do not relate  to reserved 
matters  within  the meaning  of the Scotland  Act 1998; 
(c) “Welsh  devolved  authority”  has the meaning  given  in section  157A 
of the Government  of Wales  Act 2006. 
(6) For the purposes  of subsection  (3), “coronavirus”  has the meaning  given  by 
section  1(1) of the Coronavirus  Act 2020. 
30 (7) In the Limitation  Act 1980,  in section  38 (interpretation),  in subsection  (11)— 
(a) in paragraph  (a), after  “1992,”  insert  “including  as amended  by the 
Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Act 2025,”, 
(b) omit  “or” at the end of paragraph  (b), and 
(c) at the end of paragraph  (c) insert  “, or 
35 (d) Part 1 of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and 
Recovery)  Act 2025, ”. 
100 Power  to make  consequential  provision 
(1) The Secretary  of State  or the Minister  may  by regulations  make  provision 
that is consequential  on this Act. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 62 
Part 3—General 
(2) Regulations  under  this section  may  amend,  repeal  or revoke  provision  made 
by or under  an Act passed— 
(a) before  this Act, or 
(b) later  in the same  session  of Parliament  as this Act. 
5 (3) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  that amend 
or repeal  provision  made  by an Act (whether  alone  or with  other  provisions) 
may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory  instrument  has been  laid 
before,  and approved  by a resolution  of, each  House  of Parliament. 
10 (5) Any  other  statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is 
subject  to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of 
Parliament. 
101 Financial  provision 
There  is to be paid out of money  provided  by Parliament— 
15 (a) any expenditure  incurred  under,  or by virtue  of, this Act by a Minister  of 
the Crown,  a person  holding  office  under  His Majesty  or a government 
department,  and 
(b) any increase  attributable  to this Act in the sums  payable  under  or by virtue 
of any other  Act out of money  so provided. 
20 102 Extent 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland,  subject  as follows. 
(2) Part 1 of this Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(3) Any  amendment,  repeal  or revocation  made  by this Act has the same  extent 
as the provision  amended,  repealed  or revoked. 
25 103 Commencement 
(1) Except  as provided  by subsection  (2), this Act comes  into force  on such  day 
as the Secretary  of State  or the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  may  by 
regulations  appoint. 
(2) 
30The following  provisions  come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is 
passed— 
(a) this Part,  and 
(b) any other  provision  of this Act so far as it confers  power  to make 
regulations  or is otherwise  necessary  for enabling  the exercise  of such 
a power  on or after  the day on which  this Act is passed. 
35 (3) Different  days  may  be appointed  under  subsection  (1) for different  purposes. 63 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Part 3—General 
(4) The Secretary  of State  or the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  may  by regulations 
make  transitional  or saving  provision  in connection  with  the coming  into 
force  of any provision  of this Act. 
(5) 
5The power  to make  regulations  under  subsection  (4) includes  power  to make 
different  provision  for different  purposes. 
(6) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
104 Short  title 
This  Act may  be cited  as the Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery) 
Act 2025. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 64 
Part 3—General 
SCHEDULES 
Section  7 SCHEDULE  1 
FRAUD AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITIES: POLICE AND CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT 1984 
POWERS 
5 Introduction 
1 This  Schedule  contains  modifications  of the provisions  of the Police  and 
Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  mentioned  in section  7(2) for the purposes  of 
their  application  to authorised  investigators  in accordance  with  section  7(1). 
General  modifications 
10 2 Each  reference  to a constable  (however  expressed)  is to be read  as including 
a reference  to an authorised  investigator. (1) 
(2) Each  reference  to an offence  is to be read  as a reference  to an offence  of 
fraud  against  a public  authority,  except  for the reference  to an offence  in 
section  21(8)(b). 
15 (3) Each  reference  to a criminal  investigation  is to be read  as a reference  to a 
criminal  investigation  in connection  with  an offence  of fraud  against  a 
public  authority. 
Specific  modifications 
3 Section  15 (search  warrants:  safeguards)  is to be read  as if— (1) 
20 (a) in subsection  (2)(c),  for “articles  or persons”    there  were  substituted 
“material”; 
(b) in subsection  (6)(b),  for “articles  or persons”  there  were  substituted 
“material”. 
(2) Section  16 (execution  of warrants)  is to be read  as if— 
25 (a) in subsections  (3A)  and (3B),  for the words  “a police  officer  of at 
least  the rank  of inspector”,  in each  case,  there  were  substituted  “an 
authorised  investigator  of at least  the grade  of senior  executive 
officer”; 
(b) after  subsection  (3B) there  were  inserted— 
30 “(3C) In subsections  (3A)  and (3B),  the references  to an authorised 
investigator  of at least  the grade  of senior  executive  officer 
include— 
(a) an authorised  investigator  who  has a grade  that is 
equivalent  to that of a senior  executive  officer,  and 
35 (b) an authorised  investigator  who  is a higher  executive 
officer,  or has a grade  equivalent  to that of a higher 1 
executive  officer,  who  has been  authorised  in writing 65 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  1—Fraud  against  public  authorities:  Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  powers 
for the purposes  of those  subsections  by an authorised 
investigator  who  is a grade  7 or has a grade  that is 
equivalent  to, or higher  than,  that of a grade  7.”; 
(c) in subsection  (5)(a),  the words  “, if not in uniform,”  were  omitted; 
5 (d) in subsection  (9)(a),  for “articles  or persons  sought  were”  there  were 
substituted  “material  sought  was”. 
(3) Section  21 (access  and copying)  is to be read  as if in subsection  (3)(b),  the 
reference  to the police  were  a reference  to an authorised  investigator. 
(4) Section  22 (retention)  is to be read  as if— 
10 (a) for subsection  (1), there  were  substituted— 
“(1) Subject  to subsection  (4), anything  which  has been— 
(a) seized  by an authorised  investigator, 
(b) taken  away  by an authorised  investigator  following 
a requirement  made  by virtue  of section  19 or 20, or 
15 (c) seized  or taken  away  by another  person  under  any 
enactment  and accepted  by an authorised  investigator, 
may  be retained  so long  as is necessary  in all the 
circumstances. ”; 
(b) after  subsection  (2) there  were  inserted— 
20 “(2A) Nothing  in subsections  (1) or (2) prevents  anything  lawfully 
seized  by an authorised  investigator  from  being  accepted 
and retained  by a constable. ”; 
(c) for subsection  (5) there  were  substituted— 
“(5) 
25Nothing  in this section  affects  any power  of a court  to make 
an order  under  section  8 of the Public  Authorities  (Fraud, 
Error  and Recovery)  Act 2025. ”; 
(d) subsection  (6) were  omitted. 
Section  69 SCHEDULE  2 
THE PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD AUTHORITY 
30 PART 1 
ESTABLISHMENT 
1 A body  corporate  called  the Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority  is established. (1) 
(2) In this Schedule,  references  to “the PSFA”  are to that body. 
(3) The PSFA  acts on behalf  of the Crown. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 66 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 1—Establishment 
PART 2 
CONSTITUTION ETC 
Constitution 
2 The PSFA  is to consist  of— (1) 
5 (a) a chair,  who  is to be a non-executive  member, 
(b) at least  3, but not more  than  6, other  non-executive  members, 
(c) a chief  executive,  and 
(d) at least  2, but not more  than  5, other  executive  members. 
(2) The members  are to be appointed  in accordance  with  paragraphs  3 to 6. 
10 Appointment  of non-executive  members 
3 The Minister  is to appoint  the non-executive  members. (1) 
(2) A person  may  not be appointed  as a non-executive  member  if the person 
is a member  of the PSFA’s  staff. 
Appointment  of executive  members 
15 4 The chair  is to appoint  the chief  executive  and the other  executive  members, 
subject  to paragraph  5. (1) 
(2) The executive  members  are to be members  of the PSFA’s  staff. 
Interim  chief executive 
5 
20The Minister  may  appoint  a person  (an “interim  chief  executive”)  to be the 
PSFA’s  chief  executive  until  the appointment  of a chief  executive  by the 
chair  under  paragraph  4(1) first takes  effect. (1) 
(2) An interim  chief  executive  may  incur  expenditure  and do other  things  in 
the name  and on behalf  of the PSFA  until  the PSFA  is first constituted  in 
accordance  with  paragraph  2(1). 
25 (3) In exercising  the power  in sub-paragraph  (2), an interim  chief  executive 
must  act in accordance  with  any directions  given  by the Minister. 
(4) Paragraphs  4, 7 and 9 do not apply  to an interim  chief  executive. 
Appointment  of members:  eligibility 
6 
30The Minister  may  by regulations  make  provision  about  criteria  which  must 
be met by persons  in order  to be appointed  as members  of the PSFA. (1) 
(2) The regulations  may  make  provision  for a person  to cease  to be a member 
of the PSFA  if the person  no longer  meets  those  criteria. 
(3) Regulations  under  this paragraph  are subject  to the negative  procedure. 67 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 2—Constitution  etc 
Terms  of membership 
7 A member  of the PSFA  holds  and vacates  office  in accordance  with  the 
terms  of the member’s  appointment,  subject  to provision  made  by or under 
this Schedule. (1) 
5 (2) A member  may  resign  from  office  by giving  notice  to the appropriate 
person. 
(3) A member  may  be removed  from  office  by notice  given  by the appropriate 
person  on the grounds  that the member— 
(a) 
10has without  reasonable  excuse  failed  to discharge  the member’s 
functions,  or 
(b) is, in the opinion  of the appropriate  person,  unable  or unfit  to carry 
out the member’s  functions. 
(4) A person  ceases  to be— 
(a) 
15a non-executive  member  of the PSFA  upon  becoming  a member  of 
its staff; 
(b) an executive  member  of the PSFA  upon  ceasing  to be a member  of 
its staff. 
(5) In this paragraph,  “appropriate  person”  means— 
(a) in the case of the non-executive  members,  the Minister; 
20 (b) in the case of the executive  members,  the chair. 
Non-executive  members:  payments 
8 The PSFA  must  pay,  or make  provision  for the payment  of, such 
remuneration,  pensions,  allowances  or gratuities  as the Minister  determines 
to or in respect  of a person  who  is or has been  a non-executive  member. (1) 
25 (2) Sub-paragraph  (3) applies  if— 
(a) a person  ceases  to be a non-executive  member,  and 
(b) the Minister  determines  that the person  should  be compensated 
because  of special  circumstances. 
(3) 
30Where  this sub-paragraph  applies,  the PSFA  must  pay the person 
compensation  of such  amount  as the Minister  may  determine. 
Staffing 
9 The PSFA  may— (1) 
(a) appoint  employees,  and 
(b) 
35make  such  other  arrangements  for the staffing  of the PSFA  as it 
determines. 
(2) The PSFA  must  pay its staff  such  remuneration  as may  be determined  in 
accordance  with  this paragraph. 
(3) The PSFA  must  pay,  or make  provision  for the payment  of, such  pensions, 1 
allowances,  gratuities  or compensation  as may  be determined  in accordance Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 68 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 2—Constitution  etc 
with  this paragraph  to or in respect  of any person  who  is or has been  a 
member  of staff  of the PSFA. 
(4) Members  of staff  of the PSFA  are to be appointed  on such  other  terms  as 
may  be determined  in accordance  with  this paragraph. 
5 (5) A matter  is determined  in accordance  with  this paragraph  if— 
(a) in the case of a matter  which  relates  to an executive  member,  it is 
determined  by the chair; 
(b) in the case of a matter  which  relates  to any other  member  of staff, 
it is determined  by the PSFA. 
10 (6) Before  making  a determination  as to remuneration,  pensions,  allowances, 
gratuities  or compensation  for the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (2) or (3), 
the PSFA  must  obtain  the approval  of the Minister  as to its policy  on that 
matter. 
Discharge  of functions  etc 
15 10 The PSFA  must  have  regard  to the need  to exercise  its functions  effectively, 
efficiently  and economically. (1) 
(2) The PSFA  may  authorise  the following  to exercise  any of its functions— 
(a) a member  of the PSFA, 
(b) a member  of the PSFA’s  staff  authorised  for that purpose,  or 
20 (c) a committee  or sub-committee. 
(3) An authorisation  may  be to such  extent  and on such  terms  as the PSFA 
determines. 
(4) The PSFA  may  pay such  remuneration  and allowances  as it may  determine 
to any person  who— 
25 (a) is a member  of a committee  or a sub-committee,  but 
(b) is not a member  of staff  of the PSFA, 
whether  or not that person  is a non-executive  member  of the PSFA. 
Procedure 
11 
30The PSFA  may  determine  its own  procedure  and the procedure  of any of 
its committees  or sub-committees. (1) 
(2) The validity  of any proceedings  of the PSFA,  or any committee  or 
sub-committee  of the PSFA,  is not affected  by any vacancy  among  its 
members  or by any defect  in the appointment  of such  a member. 
Annual  report 
35 12 As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the end of each  financial  year  the 
PSFA  must  prepare  a report  on the exercise  of its functions  during  that 
financial  year. (1) 
(2) The PSFA  must  send  the report  to the Minister. 69 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 2—Constitution  etc 
(3) The Minister  must  lay the report  before  Parliament  and publish  it. 
(4) In this Schedule,  “financial  year”  means— 
(a) the period  beginning  with  the date  on which  the PSFA  is established 
and ending  with  31 March  following  that date,  and 
5 (b) each  successive  period  of 12 months. 
Seal and evidence 
13 The application  of the PSFA’s  seal must  be authenticated  by a signature 
of— (1) 
(a) a member  of the PSFA,  or 
10 (b) another  person  authorised  for that purpose  by the PSFA. 
(2) A document  purporting  to be duly  executed  under  the PSFA’s  seal or 
signed  on its behalf— 
(a) is to be received  in evidence,  and 
(b) 
15is to be taken  to be executed  or signed  in that way,  unless  the 
contrary  is shown. 
(3) But this paragraph  does  not apply  in relation  to any document  which  is, 
or is to be, signed  in accordance  with  the law of Scotland. 
Supplementary  powers 
14 
20Subject  to sub-paragraph  (2), the PSFA  may  do anything  it thinks  necessary 
or expedient  for the purposes  of, or in connection  with,  the exercise  of its 
functions. (1) 
(2) The PSFA  may  not— 
(a) borrow  money; 
(b) accept  gifts  of money,  land  or other  property. 
25 Transfer  schemes 
15 The Minister  may  make  one or more  schemes  (“transfer  schemes”)  for the 
purpose  of transferring  to the PSFA  such  property,  rights  and liabilities  of (1) 
a relevant  person  as the Minister  considers  appropriate  for the purposes 
30of enabling  the PSFA  to exercise  functions  transferred  to it by regulations 
under  paragraph  21. 
(2) In this paragraph,  “relevant  person”  means— 
(a) the Secretary  of State, 
(b) the Minister,  or 
(c) the Chancellor  of the Duchy  of Lancaster. 
35 (3) The things  that may  be transferred  under  a transfer  scheme  include— 
(a) property,  rights  and liabilities  that could  not otherwise  be 
transferred; Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 70 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 2—Constitution  etc 
(b) property  acquired,  and rights  and liabilities  arising,  after  the making 
of the scheme; 
(c) criminal  liabilities. 
(4) 
5A transfer  scheme  may  make  supplementary,  incidental,  transitional  or 
consequential  provision  and may,  in particular— 
(a) create  rights,  or impose  liabilities,  in relation  to property  or rights 
transferred; 
(b) make  provision  about  the continuing  effect  of things  done  by a 
relevant  person  in respect  of anything  transferred; 
10 (c) make  provision  about  the continuation  of things  (including  legal 
proceedings)  in the process  of being  done  by, on behalf  of, or in 
relation  to, a relevant  person  in respect  of anything  transferred; 
(d) make  provision  for the shared  ownership  or use of property; 
(e) 
15make  provision  which  is the same  as or similar  to the Transfer  of 
Undertakings  (Protection  of Employment)  Regulations  2006  (S.I. 
2006/246); 
(f) make  other  supplemental,  incidental,  transitional  or consequential 
provision. 
(5) A transfer  scheme  may  provide  for— 
20 (a) modifications  by agreement; 
(b) modifications  to have  effect  from  the date  when  the original  scheme 
came  into effect. 
(6) For the purposes  of this paragraph— 
(a) 
25references  to rights  and liabilities  include  rights  and liabilities 
relating  to a contract  of employment; 
(b) references  to the transfer  of property  include  the grant  of a lease. 
(7) For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (6)— 
(a) an individual  who  holds  employment  in the civil  service  is to be 
treated  as employed  by virtue  of a contract  of employment,  and 
30 (b) the terms  of the individual’s  employment  in the civil  service  are to 
be regarded  as constituting  the terms  of the contract  of employment. 
Amendments  to other  enactments 
16 In Part 2 of the table  in paragraph  3 of Schedule  1 to the Public  Records 
Act 1958  (definition  of public  records),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
35 “Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority. ” 
17 In Schedule  2 to the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967  (departments 
etc subject  to investigation),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority. ” 71 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 2—Constitution  etc 
18 In Part 2 of Schedule  1 to the House  of Commons  Disqualification  Act 1975 
(bodies  of which  all members  are disqualified),  at the appropriate  place 
insert— 
“The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority. ” 
5 19 In Part 6 of Schedule  1 to the Freedom  of Information  Act 2000  (public 
authorities  to which  that Act applies),  at the appropriate  place  insert— 
“The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority. ” 
20 In Part 1 of Schedule  19 to the Equality  Act 2010  (authorities  subject  to the 
10public  sector  equality  duty),  after  the group  of entries  under  the heading 
“Environment,  housing  and development”  insert— 
“Fraud  against  the public  sector 
The Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority. ” 
PART 3 
TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS ETC 
15 21 The Minister  may  by regulations— (1) 
(a) provide  for all or any of the functions  conferred  by Chapters  1 to 
5 of Part 1 of this Act (including  functions  conferred  by an 
amendment  of another  enactment)— 
(i) on the Minister,  to be transferred  to the PSFA; 
20 (ii) on authorised  officers  of the Minister,  to be transferred  to 
authorised  officers  of the PSFA; 
(b) make  further  provision  about  the application,  with  any necessary 
modifications,  of Part 1 of this Act in relation  to the PSFA; 
(c) 
25provide  for the Minister  to give  the PSFA  general  or specific 
directions  about  the exercise  of its functions. 
(2) The references  to functions  in sub-paragraph  (1)(a) do not include  any 
power  or duty  to make  regulations  or issue  a code  of practice. 
(3) Where,  as a result  of a provision  of Chapters  1 to 5 of Part 1 of this Act, a 
30function  is to be exercised  by an authorised  officer  of the Minister  of a 
particular  grade,  rank  or description  (if not exercised  by the Minister 
personally),  regulations  made  in reliance  on sub-paragraph  (1)(a)(ii) must 
provide  for the function  to be exercised  by an authorised  officer  of the 
PSFA  of a corresponding  grade,  rank  or description. 
(4) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  amend— 
35 (a) Part 1 of this Act, except  this Schedule,  and 
(b) any provision  amended  by Part 1 of this Act. 
(5) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (1) are subject  to the affirmative 
procedure. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 72 
Schedule  2—The  Public  Sector  Fraud  Authority 
Part 3—Transfer  of functions  etc 
22 The Minister  may  by regulations  amend  section  69 of this Act and this 
Schedule  so as to change  the name  of the PSFA. (1) 
(2) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  not be made  after  regulations 
are made  under  paragraph  21. 
5 (3) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (1) are subject  to the negative  procedure. 
Section  74 SCHEDULE  3 
ELIGIBILITY VERIFICATION ETC 
PART 1 
ELIGIBILITY VERIFICATION 
10 1 The Schedule  to be inserted  into the Social  Security  Administration  Act 
1992  after  Schedule  3A is— 
Section  121DB “SCHEDULE  3B 
ELIGIBILITY VERIFICATION 
PART 1 
15 POWER TO REQUIRE INFORMATION 
Power  to require  information  by way of an eligibility  verification  notice 
1 The Secretary  of State  may,  for the purposes  of identifying,  or 
assisting  in identifying,  incorrect  payments  of a relevant  benefit, (1) 
20give  a person  of a type  mentioned  in paragraph  2 a notice  (an 
“eligibility  verification  notice”)  requiring  the person  to take the 
following  steps. 
(2) The first step is to identify  relevant  accounts  (see paragraph  20(1)) 
which— 
(a) the person  provides,  and 
25 (b) are accounts— 
(i) into which  a specified  relevant  benefit  has been 
paid,  or are accounts  linked  to such  accounts,  and 
(ii) which  meet  specified  criteria  (“eligibility 
30indicators”)  whether  alone  or with  other  accounts 
within  paragraph  (a) and sub-paragraph  (i) of this 
paragraph. 
(3) The second  step is to give  to the Secretary  of State  the following 
information  for each  identified  account— 
(a) 
35specified  details  about  the account  (for example,  sort code 
and account  number), 73 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(b) specified  details  about  the account  holders  (for example, 
their  names  and dates  of birth),  and 
(c) specified  details  about  how  the account  meets  the 
eligibility  indicators. 
5 (4) Information  that amounts  to transaction  information  or special 
category  data— 
(a) may  not be required  by the Secretary  of State  by way  of 
an eligibility  verification  notice,  and 
(b) 
10must  not be given  to the Secretary  of State  in response  to 
such  a notice. 
(5) But the prohibition  against  the requiring  and giving  of special 
category  data  does  not prohibit  the requiring  and giving  of data 
to establish  that an individual  is in receipt  of the specified  relevant 
benefit. 
15 (6) A person  given  an eligibility  verification  notice  is not required 
to carry  out the steps  set out in sub-paragraphs  (2) and (3) in 
relation  to any account  that is held  outside  the United  Kingdom. 
(7) In this paragraph  the reference  to an account  which  is linked  to 
20an account  into which  a specified  relevant  benefit  is paid  is to 
an account  held  by the same  person  who  holds  the account  into 
which  that benefit  is paid. 
(8) In this Schedule,  references  to an incorrect  payment  of a benefit— 
(a) are references  to a payment  of an amount  in respect  of 
25that benefit  which  is not equal  to the amount  for which 
the benefit  recipient  is eligible,  and 
(b) include  references  to payments  that have  been  made  or 
that may  be made. 
Types  of person  to whom  an eligibility  verification  notice  can be given 
2 The types  of persons  referred  to in paragraph  1(1) are persons— (1) 
30 (a) to whom  sub-paragraph  (2) applies,  or 
(b) who  are described  in regulations. 
(2) This  sub-paragraph  applies  to persons  who— 
(a) are authorised— 
(i) to accept  deposits,  or 
35 (ii) to issue  electronic  money,  and 
(b) in the course  of that activity,  provide  relevant  accounts 
into which  a relevant  benefit  may  be paid. 
(3) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (1)(b) may  describe  only  types 
40of person  who  provide  accounts  which  are, or correspond  to, 
relevant  accounts  (including  accounts  that operate  by reference 
to cryptoassets  or any similar  asset). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 74 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(4) In sub-paragraph  (3), “cryptoasset”  has the meaning  given  in 
section  84A of the Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002. 
(5) For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (2)(a)(i) — 
(a) 
5the reference  to accepting  deposits  is to carrying  on the 
regulated  activity  of accepting  deposits  for the purposes 
of the Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 2000  (see section 
22 of that Act and article  5 of the Financial  Services  and 
Markets  Act 2000  (Regulated  Activities)  Order  2001  (S.I. 
2001/544)),  and 
10 (b) a person  is authorised  to accept  deposits  if they  are an 
authorised  person  or an exempt  person  in relation  to the 
carrying  on of that activity  for the purposes  of the 
Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 2000. 
(6) 
15For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (2)(a)(ii), a person  is authorised 
to issue  electronic  money  if the person— 
(a) is an electronic  money  institution,  and 
(b) the person  is authorised  or registered  under  Part 2 of the 
Electronic  Money  Regulations  2011  (S.I. 2011/99)  in 
20relation  to carrying  on the activity  of issuing  electronic 
money. 
(7) In this paragraph,  “electronic  money”  and “electronic  money 
institution”  have  the meanings  given  by regulation  2(1) of those 
Regulations  (and  references  to the issue  of electronic  money  are 
to be construed  in accordance  with  those  Regulations). 
25 Eligibility  indicators 
3 The eligibility  indicators  in an eligibility  verification  notice  must 
be criteria  which  indicate  that the specified  relevant  benefit  may 
have  been,  or may  be, incorrectly  paid. (1) 
(2) 
30The eligibility  indicators  may  be criteria  to be met by a single 
account  or by two or more  accounts  combined. 
(3) The eligibility  indicators  must  not include  personal  data. 
Further  provision  about  eligibility  verification  notices 
4 An eligibility  verification  notice  must  specify  a period  within 
35which  the person  given  the notice  must  comply  with  the notice 
to avoid  liability  to a penalty  under  Part 2 of this Schedule. (1) 
(2) The period  specified— 
(a) must  begin  with  the day on which  the notice  is given,  and 
(b) must  not be less than  14 days. 
(3) An eligibility  verification  notice  must  give  details  about— 
40 (a) the right  to seek  a review  of the notice  under  paragraph 
13, 75 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(b) the right  to appeal  against  the notice  under  paragraph  14, 
and 
(c) the penalties  that may  be imposed  under  Part 2 of this 
Schedule. 
5 (4) An eligibility  verification  notice  (a “periodic  eligibility  verification 
notice”)  may  require  a person  to take the steps  set out in 
paragraph  1(2) and (3) at specified  intervals  within  a period  not 
exceeding  one year  from  the date  of the notice. 
(5) 
10If it does  so, the eligibility  verification  notice  must  set out the 
periods  within  which  the person  must  comply  with  the eligibility 
verification  notice  for each  specified  interval. 
(6) Each  such  period  must  not be less than  14 days. 
(7) An eligibility  verification  notice  may  not require  a person  to 
15examine  historic  data,  except  for the purpose  set out in 
sub-paragraph  (9). 
(8) Data  is historic,  in relation  to an eligibility  verification  notice,  if 
it relates  to a time  before  the beginning  of the period  of one year 
ending  with  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(9) 
20An eligibility  verification  notice  may  require  a person  to provide 
the date  that an account  which  meets  an eligibility  indicator  first 
began  to meet  that indicator. 
(10) An eligibility  verification  notice  may  require  information— 
(a) to be compiled  or collated  in a specified  manner; 
(b) 
25to be provided  in a specified  way  (including  by electronic 
transmission  to a specified  address  or portal). 
(11) The Secretary  of State  may  vary  or revoke  an eligibility  verification 
notice  by giving  notice  to the person  to whom  it was given. 
Use of information  obtained 
5 
30Information  given  to the Secretary  of State  in response  to an 
eligibility  verification  notice  (“EVM  information”)  may  be used— 
(a) to identify,  or assist  in identifying,  incorrect  payments  of 
any benefit,  or 
(b) in criminal  or civil proceedings  relating  to such  payments, 
but not for any other  purpose. 
35 Restrictions  on processing  and data protection 
6 This  Schedule  does  not require  or authorise  any processing  of 
information  that— (1) 
(a) contravenes  the data  protection  legislation; 
(b) 
40is prohibited  by any of Parts  1 to 7 or Chapter  1 of Part 
9 of the Investigatory  Powers  Act 2016. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 76 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(2) But the powers  conferred,  and the requirements  imposed,  by the 
Schedule  are to be taken  into account  in determining  whether 
the processing  of information  would  contravene  the data 
protection  legislation. 
5 (3) Any  processing  of information  carried  out in accordance  with 
this Schedule  (as read  subject  to sub-paragraph  (1)) does  not 
breach— 
(a) any obligation  of confidence  owed  by the person 
processing  the information,  or 
10 (b) any other  restriction  on the processing  of information 
(however  imposed). 
PART 2 
PENALTIES 
Fixed  penalty  for failure  to comply  with an eligibility  verification  notice 
15 7 If the Secretary  of State  considers  that a person  given  an eligibility 
verification  notice— (1) 
(a) has failed  to comply  with  the notice  within  the period 
specified,  and 
(b) has no reasonable  excuse  for the failure, 
20 the Secretary  of State  may  impose  a penalty  (a “fixed  penalty”) 
on the person. 
(2) But the Secretary  of State  may  not impose  a fixed  penalty  before— 
(a) giving  the person  an opportunity  to make  representations 
about  their  compliance,  and 
25 (b) if the person  has sought  a review  of the notice  under 
paragraph  13, the conclusion  of that review. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  imposes  a fixed  penalty  by giving  the 
person  a notice  of the penalty  (a “fixed  penalty  notice”). 
(4) A fixed  penalty  notice  must  state— 
30 (a) the reason  for the penalty, 
(b) the amount  of the penalty,  and 
(c) the period  within  which  it must  be paid. 
(5) A fixed  penalty  may  not exceed  £1,000. 
(6) 
35The Secretary  of State  may  vary  or revoke  a fixed  penalty  notice 
by giving  notice  to the person  to whom  it was given. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  may  not impose  more  than  one fixed 
penalty  in respect  of an eligibility  verification  notice  except  a 
periodic  eligibility  verification  notice. 77 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(8) In the case of a periodic  eligibility  verification  notice,  the Secretary 
of State  may  not impose  more  than  one fixed  penalty  in respect 
of each  specified  interval. 
Daily  rate penalty  for continuing  failure  to comply 
5 8 The Secretary  of State  may  impose  a penalty  (a “daily  rate 
penalty”)  on a person  if— (1) 
(a) a fixed  penalty  has been  imposed  on the person  in relation 
to a failure  to comply  with  an eligibility  verification  notice, 
and 
10 (b) the Secretary  of State  considers  that the person’s  failure 
to comply  without  reasonable  excuse  is continuing. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  imposes  a daily  rate penalty  by giving  the 
person  a notice  of the penalty  (a “daily  rate penalty  notice”). 
(3) A daily  rate penalty  notice  must  state— 
15 (a) the reason  for the penalty, 
(b) the daily  rate of the penalty,  and 
(c) that the penalty  will be payable  in relation  to each  day 
by the end of which  the person  has failed  to comply  with 
20the eligibility  verification  notice  or such  earlier  date  as 
may  be specified  or described  in the notice. 
(4) The daily  rate of a daily  rate penalty  may  not exceed  £40. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  vary  or revoke  a daily  rate penalty 
notice  by giving  notice  to the person  to whom  it was given. 
(6) 
25The Secretary  of State  may  not impose  more  than  one daily  rate 
penalty  in respect  of an eligibility  verification  notice  except  a 
periodic  eligibility  verification  notice. 
(7) In the case of a periodic  eligibility  verification  notice,  the Secretary 
of State  may  not impose  more  than  one fixed  penalty  in respect 
of each  specified  interval. 
30 Increased  daily  rate penalties 
9 This  paragraph  applies  if— (1) 
(a) a daily  rate penalty  is imposed  on a person, 
(b) the failure  to which  the penalty  relates  continues  for more 
35than  30 days  beginning  with  the first day on which  the 
daily  rate penalty  is payable,  and 
(c) the person  has been  notified  that the Secretary  of State 
may  apply  for an increased  daily  rate penalty  to be 
payable. 
(2) 
40The Secretary  of State  may  make  an application  to the Tribunal 
for an increased  daily  rate penalty  to be payable  by the person. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 78 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(3) If the Tribunal  determines  that an increased  daily  rate penalty 
must  be paid,  it must  determine— 
(a) the increased  daily  rate,  and 
(b) 
5the date  from  which  the increased  rate begins  to be 
payable. 
(4) In deciding  the increased  daily  rate,  the Tribunal,  must,  in 
particular,  have  regard  to— 
(a) the likely  cost to the person  of complying  with  the 
eligibility  verification  notice, 
10 (b) any benefits  to the person  in not complying  with  it, and 
(c) any benefits  to anyone  else resulting  from  the person’s 
non-compliance. 
(5) The Tribunal  may  not determine  a daily  rate that exceeds  £1,000. 
(6) 
15The Secretary  of State  must  notify  the person  of the Tribunal’s 
determination. 
Penalties  for inaccurate  or prohibited  information 
10 The Secretary  of State  may  impose  a penalty  (an “inaccurate 
information  penalty”)  on a person  under  this paragraph  if the 
Secretary  of State  considers  that— (1) 
20 (a) in complying  with  an eligibility  verification  notice,  the 
person  has given  the Secretary  of State  inaccurate 
information,  and 
(b) condition  A, B or C is met. 
(2) Condition  A is that the inaccuracy  was— 
25 (a) deliberate,  or 
(b) due to a failure,  without  reasonable  excuse,  by the person 
to take reasonable  care. 
(3) Condition  B is that the person— 
(a) 
30knew  of the inaccuracy  at the time  of giving  the 
information, 
(b) failed  to inform  the Secretary  of State  at that time,  and 
(c) has no reasonable  excuse  for the failure. 
(4) Condition  C is that the person— 
(a) discovered  the inaccuracy  some  time  later,  and 
35 (b) failed  to take reasonable  steps  to inform  the Secretary  of 
State,  and 
(c) has no reasonable  excuse  for the failure. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  impose  a penalty  (a “prohibited 
40information  penalty”)  under  this paragraph  if the person,  without 1 
reasonable  excuse,  gives  the Secretary  of State  information  in 79 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
contravention  of paragraph  1(4) (transaction  information  or special 
category  data). 
(6) But the Secretary  of State  may  not impose  a penalty  under  this 
5paragraph  before  giving  the person  an opportunity  to make 
representations  about— 
(a) in the case of an inaccurate  information  penalty,  whether 
or not— 
(i) the information  is inaccurate; 
(ii) condition  A, B or C is met; 
10 (b) in the case of a prohibited  information  penalty,  whether 
or not the person  has given  information  in contravention 
of paragraph  1(4) without  any reasonable  excuse. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  imposes  a penalty  under  this paragraph 
by giving  a notice  (an “information  penalty  notice”). 
15 (8) An information  penalty  notice  must  state— 
(a) the reason  for the penalty, 
(b) the amount  of the penalty,  and 
(c) the period  within  which  it must  be paid. 
(9) A penalty  under  this paragraph  may  not exceed  £3,000. 
20 (10) The Secretary  of State  may  vary  or revoke  an information  penalty 
notice  by giving  notice  to the person  to whom  it was given. 
Recovery  of penalties 
11 In England  and Wales,  a penalty  imposed  under  this Part of this 
Schedule  is recoverable— (1) 
25 (a) if the county  court  so orders,  as if it were  payable  under 
an order  of that court; 
(b) if the High  Court  so orders,  as if it were  payable  under 
an order  of that court. 
(2) 
30In Scotland,  a penalty  imposed  under  this Part of this Schedule 
may  be enforced  in the same  manner  as an extract  registered 
decree  arbitral  bearing  a warrant  for execution  issued  by the 
sheriff  court  of any sheriffdom  in Scotland. 
Power  to change  maximum  amount  of penalties 
12 
35Regulations  may  amend  the amount  for the time  being  specified 
in paragraph  7(5), 8(4), 9(5) or 10(9) to reflect  a change  in the 
value  of money. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 80 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
PART 3 
REVIEWS 
13 A person  to whom  an eligibility  verification  notice  is given  may 
5apply  to the Secretary  of State  for a review  of the decision  to give 
the notice. (1) 
(2) An application  under  sub-paragraph  (1) must  be made  within 
the period  of 7 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the notice 
is given. 
(3) On a review,  the Secretary  of State  may— 
10 (a) revoke  the notice, 
(b) uphold  the notice,  or 
(c) vary  the notice. 
(4) After  a review  has been  carried  out, the Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) 
15notify  the person  who  applied  for the review  of the 
outcome  of the review,  and 
(b) if the outcome  was to vary  the notice,  give  the person  the 
varied  notice. 
(5) Where  an application  for a review  of an eligibility  verification 
notice  is made  under  sub-paragraph  (1) — 
20 (a) the notice  is of no effect  until  the application  is determined 
or withdrawn,  and 
(b) if the notice  is upheld  or varied,  the period  for compliance 
(or the first period  for compliance  in the case of a periodic 
25eligibility  verification  notice)  begins  with  the day on which 
the outcome  of the review  is notified  to the person  to 
whom  the eligibility  verification  notice  was given. 
PART 4 
APPEALS 
Appeals  against  eligibility  verification  notices 
30 14 A person  who  is given  an eligibility  verification  notice  may  appeal 
to the Tribunal  against  the notice  on any of the following 
grounds— (1) 
(a) the person  is not a person  to whom  an eligibility 
verification  notice  may  be given; 
35 (b) the notice  is not in accordance  with  this Schedule; 
(c) it is unduly  onerous  to comply  with  the notice. 
(2) An appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) must  be brought  within  the 
period  of 14 days  beginning  with— 81 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(a) the day on which  the eligibility  verification  notice  was 
given,  or 
(b) if the person  seeks  a review  of the notice  under  paragraph 
513, the day on which  the person  is notified  of the outcome 
of the review. 
(3) On an appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the Tribunal  may— 
(a) amend  the eligibility  verification  notice, 
(b) revoke  the eligibility  verification  notice,  or 
(c) dismiss  the appeal. 
10 (4) Where  an appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) is brought  against  an 
eligibility  verification  notice  the notice  is of no effect  until  the 
appeal  is determined  or withdrawn,  unless  the Tribunal  orders 
otherwise. 
Appeals  against  penalty  notices 
15 15 A person  on whom  a penalty  is imposed  under  Part 2 of this 
Schedule  may  appeal  to the Tribunal  against— (1) 
(a) the penalty; 
(b) the amount  of the penalty; 
(c) 
20in the case of a daily  rate penalty,  the period  during  which 
the daily  amounts  are payable. 
(2) But a person  may  not appeal  against  a decision  of the Tribunal 
to increase  a daily  rate penalty  under  paragraph  9. 
(3) An appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  not be brought  after  the 
25end of the period  of 30 days  beginning  with  the date  on which 
the penalty  notice  in relation  to the penalty  being  appealed  was 
given. 
(4) On an appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the Tribunal  may— 
(a) revoke  the decision  to impose  the penalty; 
(b) amend  the amount  of the penalty; 
30 (c) amend  the period  within  which  all or part of the penalty 
is to be paid; 
(d) dismiss  the appeal. 
(5) If an appeal  is brought  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the penalty 
35which  is the subject  of the appeal  is not payable  until  the appeal 
is determined  or withdrawn. 
Appeals:  further  provision 
16 If the Tribunal  confirms  or varies  an eligibility  verification  notice 
or the imposition  of a penalty  on an appeal  under  this Part of (1) 
40this Schedule,  the person  to whom  the notice  was given,  or on 
whom  the penalty  was imposed,  must  comply  with  the notice  or 
pay the penalty— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 82 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(a) within  such  period  as may  be specified  by the Tribunal, 
or 
(b) if the Tribunal  does  not specify  a period,  within  such 
5period  as may  be specified  by the Secretary  of State  and 
notified  to the person. 
(2) A decision  by the Tribunal  on an appeal  under  this Part of this 
Schedule  is final  (despite  the provisions  of sections  11 and 13 of 
the Tribunals,  Courts  and Enforcement  Act 2007). 
PART 5 
10 CODE OF PRACTICE 
Requirement  to issue  a code of practice 
17 The Secretary  of State  must  issue  a code  of practice  about 
eligibility  verification  notices  before  giving  the first such  notice 
under  this Schedule. (1) 
15 (2) The code  of practice  must  include  provision  about— 
(a) the exercise  of the power  to issue  an eligibility  verification 
notice; 
(b) the processing,  use and retention  of information  given  in 
response  to an eligibility  verification  notice; 
20 (c) the circumstances  in which  the Secretary  of State  will 
regard  a person  as having  complied  with  an eligibility 
verification  notice; 
(d) the imposition  of penalties  in relation  to an eligibility 
verification  notice; 
25 (e) reviews  under  paragraph  13. 
(3) Before  issuing  the code  of practice,  the Secretary  of State  must 
carry  out a public  consultation  on a draft  of the code. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  lay the code  of practice  before 
Parliament. 
30 (5) The requirement  in sub-paragraph  (3) may  be satisfied  by public 
consultation  carried  out before  this paragraph  comes  into force. 
Code  of practice:  revisions 
18 The Secretary  of State  may  from  time  to time  revise  and re-issue 
the code  of practice  issued  under  paragraph  17. (1) 
35 (2) Paragraph  17(3) and (4) apply  in relation  to a re-issue  of a code 
of practice  as they  apply  in relation  to the issue  of the first code 
of practice. 
(3) But paragraph  17(3) does  not apply  if the only  changes  to be 
made  to the code  of practice  are— 83 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(a) updates  to references  to legislation  or documents  which 
have  become  out of date,  or 
(b) in the opinion  of the Secretary  of State,  other  minor 
corrections. 
5 PART 6 
GENERAL PROVISION AND INTERPRETATION 
Relevant  benefits 
19 In this Schedule  “relevant  benefit”  means  any of the following 
benefits— (1) 
10 (a) universal  credit; 
(b) employment  and support  allowance; 
(c) state  pension  credit. 
(2) Regulations  may  amend  this paragraph  so as to add,  or remove, 
types  of benefit  to, or from,  the definition  of “relevant  benefit”. 
15 (3) Regulations  under  sub-paragraph  (2) may  add a type  of benefit 
only  to the extent  that the benefit  is administered  by, or on behalf 
of, the Secretary  of State. 
Accounts 
20 
20In this Schedule  “relevant  account”  means  a personal  account 
which  operates  as— (1) 
(a) a current  account, 
(b) a savings  account,  or 
(c) an investment  account, 
25including  such  an account  which  operates  by reference  to 
electronic  money. 
(2) For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (1)— 
(a) “personal  account”  means  an account  held  by one or more 
individuals  other  than  an account  that is provided  for 
purposes  relating  to a trade,  business  or profession; 
30 (b) a current  account  includes  any account— 
(i) in which  individuals  can hold,  and from  which 
individuals  can withdraw,  money,  and 
(ii) which  is designed  to allow  the holder’s  money  to 
35be used  for executing  transactions  with  third 
parties, 
but does  not include  credit  card  accounts  or current 
account  mortgages; 
(c) “electronic  money”  has the meaning  it has in the Electronic 
40Money  Regulations  2011  (S.I. 2011/99)  (see regulation 
2(1)). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 84 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
(3) In this Schedule  a reference  to a person  holding  an account 
includes  a reference  to— 
(a) a person  holding  an account  jointly  with  one or more 
other  persons,  and 
5 (b) an account  being,  in any way,  in the person’s  name, 
and “holder”  is to be read  accordingly. 
(4) Sub-paragraphs  (5) to (8) apply  for the purposes  of this Schedule 
where  an eligibility  verification  notice  is given  to a body  corporate 
(“P”). 
10 (5) The reference  in paragraph  1(2)(a) to P providing  an account 
includes  a reference  to another  person  in the same  group  as P 
providing  an account  if the condition  in sub-paragraph  (6) is met. 
(6) The condition  is that P— 
(a) 
15is able to identify  accounts  provided  by the other  person 
that are within  paragraph  1(2)(b), and 
(b) is able to obtain  the information  about  those  accounts 
mentioned  in paragraph  1(3). 
(7) For the purposes  of sub-paragraph  (5), two persons  are in the 
same  group  if both  are bodies  corporate  and— 
20 (a) one of them  is a subsidiary  of the other,  or 
(b) both  of them  are subsidiaries  of the same  body  corporate. 
(8) In sub-paragraph  (7), “subsidiary”  has the meaning  given  by 
section  1159  of the Companies  Act 2006. 
Service 
25 21 In this Schedule,  references  to giving  a notice  or other  document 
(however  expressed)  include  sending  the notice  or document  by 
post. 
General  interpretation 
22 In this Schedule— 
30 “benefit”  means— 
(a) any relevant  social  security  benefit  as defined  in 
section  121DA(7),  other  than  a state  pension,  and 
(b) any payment  mentioned  in subsection  (2)(d)  of 
35section  2 of the Employment  and Training  Act 
1973,  under  arrangements  made  under  that section; 
“daily  rate penalty”  means  a penalty  imposed  under 
paragraph  8(1); 
“the data  protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as in 
the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act); 85 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
“eligibility  indicators”  has the meaning  given  in paragraph 
1(2)(b)(ii) (and  see paragraph  3 for conditions  that 
eligibility  indicators  must  meet); 
5“eligibility  verification  notice”  has the meaning  given  in 
paragraph  1(1); 
“fixed  penalty”  means  a penalty  imposed  under  paragraph 
7(1); 
“incorrect  payment”  , in relation  to a benefit,  has the meaning 
given  in paragraph  1(8); 
10 “notice”  means  notice  in writing  (and  “notify”  is to be read 
accordingly); 
“periodic  eligibility  verification  notice”  has the meaning 
given  in paragraph  4(4); 
15“personal  data”  has the same  meaning  as in the Data 
Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(2) of that Act); 
“processing” , in relation  to information,  has the same 
meaning  as in the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section 
3(4) of that Act); 
20“special  category  data”  means  the types  of personal  data  the 
processing  of which  is prohibited  (to any extent)  from 
time  to time  under  Article  9 of Regulation  (EU)  2016/679 
of the European  Parliament  and of the Council  of 27 April 
2016  on the protection  of natural  persons  with  regard  to 
25the processing  of personal  data  and on the free movement 
of such  data,  and repealing  Directive  95/46/EC  (General 
Data  Protection  Regulation); 
“specified”  means  specified  or described  in an eligibility 
verification  notice,  unless  the context  requires  otherwise; 
“state  pension”  means— 
30 (a) a state  pension  under  Part 1 of the Pensions  Act 
2014; 
(b) a retirement  pension,  including  a Graduated 
Retirement  Benefit,  under  Part 2 or 3 of the Social 
Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992; 
35 (c) a shared  additional  pension  under  Part 2 of that 
Act; 
“transaction  information” , in relation  to an account,  means 
information  which— 
(a) 
40may  enable  the identification  of the subject  matter 
or the amount  of a transaction  completed  through 
the account,  or 
(b) may  enable  the identification  of a party  to such  a 
transaction  who  is not a holder  of the account, 
45but does  not include  information  which  relates  to the 
payment  of a relevant  benefit  into the account; 
“the Tribunal”  means  the First-tier  Tribunal. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 86 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 1—Eligibility  verification 
Relationship  with other  powers 
23 Nothing  in this Schedule  limits  the powers  conferred  on the 
Secretary  of State  by sections  109B  and 109BZA  (powers  to require 
information). ” 
5 PART 2 
PROCEEDS OF CRIME ACT 2002 
2 The Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002  is amended  as follows. (1) 
(2) In section  330 (failure  to disclose:  regulated  sector),  after  subsection  (7D) 
insert— 
10 “(7E) Nor does  a person  commit  an offence  under  this section  if— 
(a) the information  or other  matter  mentioned  in subsection  (3) 
consists  of or includes  information  that was obtained  only 
in consequence  of complying  with  an eligibility  verification 
15notice  given  to the person  under  paragraph  1(1) of Schedule 
3B to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  and 
(b) but for the information  so obtained  the person  would  not 
know  or suspect,  or have  reasonable  grounds  for knowing 
or suspecting,  that another  person  is engaged  in money 
laundering. ” 
20 (3) In section  331 (failure  to disclose:  nominated  officers  in the regulated  sector), 
after  subsection  (6B) insert— 
“(6C) Nor does  a person  commit  an offence  under  this section  if— 
(a) the information  or other  matter  mentioned  in subsection  (3) 
25consists  of or includes  information  that was obtained  only 
in consequence  of complying  with  an eligibility  verification 
notice  given  to the person  under  paragraph  1(1) of Schedule 
3B to the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992,  and 
(b) but for the information  so obtained  the person  would  not 
30know  or suspect,  or have  reasonable  grounds  for knowing 
or suspecting,  that another  person  is engaged  in money 
laundering. ” 87 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  3—Eligibility  verification  etc 
Part 2—Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002 
Sections  76 and 77 SCHEDULE  4 
SOCIAL SECURITY FRAUD: SEARCH AND SEIZURE POWERS ETC 
1 The Schedule  to be inserted  in the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992 
after  Schedule  3ZB (inserted  by section  91(3) of this Act)  is— 
Section  109D 5 “SCHEDULE  3ZC 
ENTRY, SEARCH AND SEIZURE ETC: ENGLAND AND WALES 
Introduction 
1 This  Schedule  contains  modifications  of the provisions  of the 
10Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984  mentioned  in section 
109D (4) for the purposes  of their  application  to authorised 
investigators  in accordance  with  section  109D (3). 
General  modifications 
2 Each  reference  to a constable  (however  expressed)  is to be read 
as including  a reference  to an authorised  investigator. (1) 
15 (2) Each  reference  to an offence  is to be read  as a reference  to a DWP 
offence,  except  for the reference  to an offence  in section  21(8)(b). 
(3) Each  reference  to a criminal  investigation  is to be read  as a 
reference  to a criminal  investigation  in connection  with  a DWP 
offence. 
20 Specific  modifications 
3 (1) Section  15 (search  warrants:  safeguards)  is to be read  as if— 
(a) in subsection  (2)(c),  for “articles  or persons”  there  were 
substituted  “material”; 
(b) 
25in subsection  (6)(b),  for “articles  or persons”  there  were 
substituted  “material”. 
(2) Section  16 (execution  of warrants)  is to be read  as if— 
(a) in subsections  (3A)  and (3B),  for the words  “a police  officer 
of at least  the rank  of inspector”,  in each  case,  there  were 
30substituted  “an authorised  investigator  of at least  the grade 
of senior  executive  officer”; 
(b) in subsection  (5)(a),  the words  “, if not in uniform,”  were 
omitted; 
(c) in subsection  (9)(a),  for the words  “articles  or persons 
35sought  were”  there  were  substituted  “material  sought 
was”. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 88 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
(3) Section  21 (access  and copying)  is to be read  as if, in subsection 
(3)(b),  the reference  to the police  were  a reference  to an authorised 
investigator. 
(4) Section  22 (retention)  is to be read  as if— 
5 (a) for subsection  (1), there  were  substituted— 
“(1) Subject  to subsection  (4), anything  which  has 
been— 
(a) seized  by an authorised  investigator, 
(b) 
10taken  away  by an authorised  investigator 
following  a requirement  made  by virtue  of 
section  19 or 20, or 
(c) seized  or taken  away  by another  person 
under  any enactment  and accepted  by an 
authorised  investigator, 
15 may  be retained  so long  as is necessary  in all the 
circumstances. ”; 
(b) after  subsection  (2) there  were  inserted— 
“(2A) Nothing  in subsection  (1) or (2) prevents  anything 
20lawfully  seized  by an authorised  investigator  from 
being  accepted  and retained  by a constable. ”; 
(c) for subsection  (5) there  were  substituted— 
“(5) Nothing  in this section  affects  any power  of a court 
to make  an order  under  section  109G  of the Social 
Security  Administration  Act 1992. ”; 
25 (d) subsection  (6) were  omitted. 
(5) Schedule  1 (special  procedure)  is to be read  as if— 
(a) references  to “special  procedure  material”  did not include 
special  procedure  material  within  section  14(1)(b) 
(journalistic  material,  other  than  excluded  material); 
30 (b) references  to “excluded  material”  did not include  excluded 
material  within— 
(i) section  11(1)(b)  (human  tissue  etc), or 
(ii) section  11(1)(c)  (certain  journalistic  material); 
(c) 
35in paragraph  2(a)(ii),  for the words  “and  does  not also 
include  excluded  material”  there  were  substituted  “, or 
consists  of or includes  excluded  material,”; 
(d) paragraph  3 (second  set of access  conditions)  were 
omitted. ” 89 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
2 The Schedule  to be inserted  in the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992 
after  Schedule  3ZC (inserted  by section  76(3) of this Schedule)  is— 
Section  109E “SCHEDULE  3ZD 
ENTRY, SEARCH AND SEIZURE ETC: SCOTLAND 
5 PART 1 
NORMAL MATERIAL 
Warrants  for entry,  search  and seizure  etc 
1 Where,  on an application  by an authorised  investigator,  a sheriff 
10is satisfied  that the condition  in sub-paragraph  (3) is met,  the 
sheriff  may  grant  a specific  premises  warrant. (1) 
(2) A specific  premises  warrant  is a warrant  to exercise  the powers 
described  in paragraph  2 in relation  to premises  specified  in the 
application. 
(3) 
15The condition  in this sub-paragraph  is that there  are reasonable 
grounds  for believing— 
(a) that a DWP  offence  which  is an indictable  offence  has 
been  committed, 
(b) there  is material  on premises  to which  the application 
20relates  which  is likely  to be of substantial  value  (whether 
by itself  or with  other  material)  to the investigation  of the 
offence, 
(c) the material  is likely  to be relevant  evidence, 
(d) the material  does  not consist  of or include  items  subject 
25to legal  privilege,  excluded  material  or special  procedure 
material,  and 
(e) any of the following  applies— 
(i) it is not practicable  to communicate  with  a person 
entitled  to grant  entry  to the premises; 
(ii) 
30it is not practicable  to communicate  with  a person 
entitled  to grant  access  to the material  (if different 
from  the person  entitled  to grant  entry); 
(iii) entry  to the premises  will not be granted  unless  a 
warrant  is produced; 
(iv) 
35the purpose  of a search  may  be frustrated  or 
seriously  prejudiced  unless  an authorised 
investigator  arriving  at the premises  can secure 
immediate  access  to them. 
(4) The power  to issue  a warrant  under  paragraph  1 is in addition 
40to any other  power  to issue  a warrant  in relation  to entry  to or 
search  of premises. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 90 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
Powers  exercisable  under  a warrant 
2 The powers  granted  by a warrant  under  paragraph  1 are powers 
to— (1) 
(a) enter  the premises; 
5 (b) search  the premises; 
(c) examine  any document,  equipment  or other  item  or 
material  on the premises  (including  by operating  a 
computer  or other  device  in order  to gain  access  to 
information); 
10 (d) seize  any document,  equipment  or other  item  or material 
on the premises  and remove  it; 
(e) take a copy  of or otherwise  record  (in any form)  a 
document,  equipment  or other  item  or material  on the 
15premises,  or any information  contained  in or accessible 
by means  of any such  document,  equipment,  item  or 
material; 
(f) require  any person  on the premises  to provide  information 
or assistance  for the purpose  of— 
(i) 
20enabling  or facilitating  the exercise  of the powers 
described  in paragraphs  (a) to (e), or 
(ii) allowing  anything  inspected,  seized  or recorded 
in the exercise  of those  powers  to be better 
understood. 
(2) 
25A person  may  exercise  those  powers  only  so far as the person 
considers  it necessary  to do so for the purposes  of investigating 
a DWP  offence. 
(3) A person  may  not exercise  the power  to seize  and remove  an 
item  unless  the person  considers  that exercising  the power  to take 
a copy  or record  it would  be insufficient. 
30 (4) A person  may  not exercise  the power  to seize  and remove  an 
item  subject  to legal  privilege,  excluded  material  or special 
procedure  material. 
(5) The powers  granted  by a warrant  under  paragraph  1 may  be 
subject  to conditions  or limitations. 
35 Execution  of warrants 
3 A warrant  under  paragraph  1 may  be executed  by any authorised 
investigator. (1) 
(2) An authorised  investigator  may  take other  persons,  equipment 
40and materials  onto  the premises  for the purposes  of assisting  in 
the exercise  of the powers  granted  by the warrant. 91 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
(3) A person  so taken  onto  the premises  may  also exercise  the powers 
granted  by the warrant  if the person  is in the company,  and under 
the supervision,  of an authorised  investigator. 
(4) 
5The powers  granted  by a warrant  under  paragraph  1 may  be 
exercised— 
(a) only  at a reasonable  hour,  unless  it appears  to the 
investigator  executing  the warrant  that the purpose  of a 
search  may  be frustrated  on an entry  at a reasonable  hour, 
and 
10 (b) only  within  the period  of three  months  beginning  with 
the day on which  it is issued. 
(5) When  premises  are entered  in reliance  on a warrant  under 
paragraph  1, the authorised  investigator  executing  the warrant— 
(a) 
15must  give  a copy  of the warrant  to any person  appearing 
to be in charge  of the premises  at the earliest  opportunity 
(if possible  before  entering  the premises); 
(b) if no such  copy  is given  during  the period  of entry  on the 
premises,  must  leave  a copy  of the warrant  in a prominent 
place  on the premises; 
20 (c) must  produce,  on request  by any person  appearing  to be 
in charge  of the premises,  proof  of the person’s  identity 
and status  as an authorised  investigator; 
(d) if no person  appearing  to be in charge  of the premises  is 
25present  when  the person  executing  the warrant  is on the 
premises,  must  leave  the premises  as effectively  secured 
against  trespassers  as that person  found  them. 
(6) A person  exercising  powers  granted  by a warrant  under 
paragraph  1 may  use reasonable  force  if necessary,  except  to 
enforce  the requirement  described  in paragraph  2(1)(f). 
30 Seizure  of items 
4 This  section  applies  where  a person  exercises  the power  of seizure 
and removal  described  in paragraph  2(1)(d). (1) 
(2) The person  must,  on request  by any person  appearing  to be in 
charge  of the premises— 
35 (a) give  a receipt  for the thing  seized,  and 
(b) in the case of a document  readily  capable  of being  copied, 
give  a copy  of it. 
(3) The thing  seized  may  be retained  in the possession  of the 
40Secretary  of State  for so long  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
necessary  for the purposes  of investigating  any DWP  offence 
(irrespective  of the purpose  for which  it was initially  obtained). 
(4) For any such  purpose,  a person  acting  on behalf  of the Secretary 
of State  may— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 92 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
(a) examine  the thing  seized  (using  reasonable  force  if 
necessary),  and 
(b) record  (in whatever  form)  any information  obtained  from 
the thing  seized. 
5 (5) Sub-paragraph  (6) applies  where— 
(a) an item  has been  seized  and removed,  and 
(b) a person  who  had custody  or control  of the item  before 
it was seized,  or a person  acting  on behalf  of such  a 
person,  requests  access  to it. 
10 (6) An authorised  investigator  must  give  the person  access  to the 
item  under  the investigator’s  supervision,  unless  the investigator 
has reasonable  grounds  for believing  that doing  so would 
prejudice— 
(a) an investigation  of a DWP  offence,  or 
15 (b) criminal  proceedings  relating  to a DWP  offence. 
Return  of warrant  etc 
5 If a warrant  under  paragraph  1 is executed,  the person  who 
executed  it must  return  it to the court  from  which  it was issued (1) 
20as soon  as reasonably  practicable  with  an endorsement 
summarising  the exercise  of the powers  in paragraph  2. 
(2) If a warrant  under  paragraph  1 is not executed,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  return  it to the court  from  which  it was issued  as soon 
as reasonably  practicable  with  an endorsement  stating  that it was 
not executed. 
25 (3) A warrant  must  be retained  for 12 months  by the court  to which 
it is returned. 
Authorised  investigators 
6 In this Schedule,  an authorised  investigator  is an individual  who 
30is authorised  by the Secretary  of State  to exercise  the powers 
conferred  by this Schedule. (1) 
(2) An individual  may  be authorised  as an authorised  investigator 
only  if the individual— 
(a) is an official  of a government  department, 
(b) is a higher  executive  officer,  or 
35 (c) has a grade  that is equivalent  to, or higher  than,  that of 
a higher  executive  officer. 93 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
PART 2 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE 
Production  orders 
7 
5Where,  on an application  by an authorised  investigator,  a sheriff 
is satisfied  that the condition  in sub-paragraph  (4) is met,  the 
sheriff  may  grant  a production  order. (1) 
(2) A production  order  is an order  requiring  the person  who  appears 
to the sheriff  to be in possession  of material  specified  in the 
application  to— 
10 (a) give  the material  to an authorised  investigator,  or 
(b) give  an authorised  investigator  access  to the material. 
(3) A person  must  comply  with  a production  order  within— 
(a) the period  of 7 days  beginning  with  the day on which  the 
order  is made,  or 
15 (b) such  longer  period  as may  be specified  in the order. 
(4) The condition  in this sub-paragraph  is that there  are reasonable 
grounds  for believing  that— 
(a) a DWP  offence  which  is an indictable  offence  has been 
committed, 
20 (b) material  which  is specified  in the application  is likely  to 
be of substantial  value  (whether  by itself  or with  other 
material)  to the investigation  of the offence, 
(c) the material  consists  of or includes— 
(i) personal  records,  or 
25 (ii) confidential  professional  material, 
(d) the material  is likely  to be relevant  evidence, 
(e) other  methods  of obtaining  the material— 
(i) have  been  tried  without  success,  or 
(ii) 
30have  not been  tried  because  it appeared  that they 
were  bound  to fail, and 
(f) it is in the public  interest  that the material  should  be given, 
or that access  to it should  be given,  having  regard  to— 
(i) the benefit  likely  to accrue  to the investigation  if 
the material  is obtained,  and 
35 (ii) the circumstances  under  which  the person  in 
possession  of the material  holds  it. 
(5) Where  the material  consists  of information  stored  in an electronic 
form— 
(a) 
40a production  order  under  sub-paragraph  (2)(a), requires 
the material  to be given  in a form  in which— 
(i) it can be taken  away,  and Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 94 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
(ii) in which  it is visible  and legible  or from  which  it 
can readily  be produced  in a visible  and legible 
form,  and 
(b) 
5a production  order  under  sub-paragraph  (2)(b), requires 
an authorised  investigator  to be given  access  to the 
material  in a form  in which  it is visible  and legible. 
(6) Paragraph  4 applies  in relation  to material  given  to an authorised 
investigator  under  a production  order  as it applies  to material 
10seized  and removed  under  the power  described  in paragraph 
2(1)(d). 
Warrants 
8 On an application  by an authorised  investigator,  a sheriff  may 
grant  a specific  premises  warrant  within  the meaning  of paragraph 
1(2) where  the sheriff  is satisfied  that— (1) 
15 (a) a production  order  could  be issued  in relation  to material 
(see paragraph  7(4)), and 
(b) sub-paragraphs  (2) and (3) of this paragraph  apply. 
(2) This  sub-paragraph  applies  where  there  are reasonable  grounds 
20for believing  that the material  is on the premises  specified  or 
described  in the application. 
(3) This  sub-paragraph  applies  where  any of the following  apply— 
(a) it is not practicable  to communicate  with  a person  entitled 
to grant  entry  to the premises; 
(b) 
25it is not practicable  to communicate  with  a person  entitled 
to grant  access  to the material  (if different  from  the person 
entitled  to grant  entry); 
(c) a production  order  relating  to the material  has not been 
complied  with; 
(d) 
30entry  to the premises  will not be granted  unless  a warrant 
is produced; 
(e) the purpose  of a search  may  be frustrated  or seriously 
prejudiced  unless  an authorised  investigator  arriving  at 
the premises  can secure  immediate  access  to them; 
(f) 
35the material  contains  information  disclosure  of which,  in 
the absence  of a warrant,  would  be a breach  of a restriction 
on disclosure,  or an obligation  of secrecy,  contained  in 
any enactment  whenever  passed. 
(4) The provisions  of Part 1 of this Schedule  that apply  in relation 
40to a specific  premises  warrant  apply  to a specific  premises  warrant 
under  this paragraph  as if, at the end of paragraph  2(4), there 
were  inserted  “other  than  confidential  professional  material  or 
personal  records”. 95 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
PART 3 
GENERAL 
Procedural  rules 
9 
5Provision  may  be made  in rules  of court  about  proceedings  under 
this Schedule. (1) 
(2) Rules  of court  are, without  prejudice  to section  305 of the Criminal 
Procedure  (Scotland)  Act 1995,  to be made  by Act of Adjournal. 
Interpretation 
10 For the purposes  of this Schedule— 
10 “authorised  investigators”  has the meaning  given  in 
paragraph  6; 
“confidential  professional  material”  means  material  to which 
section  14(2)  of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984 
applies; 
15 “excluded  material”  has the meaning  given  by section  11 of 
that Act (and  see sections  12 and 13 of that Act); 
“items  subject  to legal  privilege”  has the meaning  given  by 
section  10 of that Act; 
20“personal  records”  means  personal  records  within  the 
meaning  of “excluded  information”  given  by section  11(1) 
of that Act; 
“premises”  includes— 
(a) a vehicle  or vessel, 
(b) a tent or moveable  structure,  and 
25 (c) any other  place; 
“relevant  evidence” , in relation  to an offence,  means  anything 
that would  be admissible  in evidence  at a trial for the 
offence; 
30“special  procedure  material”  has the meaning  given  by 
section  14 of the Police  and Criminal  Evidence  Act 1984. ” Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 96 
Schedule  4—Social  security  fraud:  search  and seizure  powers  etc 
Section  90 SCHEDULE  5 
RECOVERY FROM BANK ACCOUNTS ETC 
The Schedule  to be inserted  in the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  after 
Schedule  3 is— 
Section  80B 5 “SCHEDULE  3ZA 
RECOVERY OF AMOUNTS FROM BANK ACCOUNTS ETC 
PART 1 
DEDUCTIONS FROM ACCOUNTS 
Direct  deduction  orders 
10 1 Where  an amount  is recoverable  from  a liable  person  who  holds  an account 
with  a bank,  the Secretary  of State  may  make  an order  (a “direct  deduction 
order”)  in respect  of that account. (1) 
(2) A direct  deduction  order  must  be given  to the bank  with  which  the account 
is held. 
15 (3) A direct  deduction  order  may  be— 
(a) a regular  direct  deduction  order; 
(b) a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order. 
(4) A regular  direct  deduction  order  is an order  requiring  the bank— 
(a) to make  regular  deductions  from  the liable  person’s  account,  and 
20 (b) to pay the amounts  deducted  to the Secretary  of State. 
(5) A lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  is an order  requiring  the bank— 
(a) to deduct  from  the liable  person’s  account  an amount  specified  in 
the order,  and 
(b) to pay that amount  to the Secretary  of State. 
25 (6) The Secretary  of State  may  give  a regular  direct  deduction  order  and a 
lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  in respect  of the same  account. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  must  give  a copy  of a direct  deduction  order  to— 
(a) the liable  person,  and 
(b) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders. 
30 (8) Paragraphs  3 to 5 set out steps  that the Secretary  of State  must  take before 
making  a direct  deduction  order. 
Accounts  which  may be the subject  of a direct  deduction  order 
2 The Secretary  of State  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of any 
account  which— (1) 
35 (a) is held  by a liable  person,  and 97 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(b) contains  an amount  in which  the Secretary  of State  considers  the 
liable  person  has a beneficial  interest. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of a 
5joint  account  only  if the liable  person  does  not hold  a sole account  in respect 
of which  a direct  deduction  order  may  be made  which  would  be likely  to 
result  in the recovery  of the recoverable  amount  within  a reasonable  period 
of time. 
(3) But sub-paragraph  (2) does  not apply  if all the holders  of a joint  account 
are liable  persons  in relation  to the same  recoverable  amount. 
10 Requirement  for banks  to provide  information 
3 Before  the Secretary  of State  makes  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of 
a liable  person’s  account,  the Secretary  of State  must  obtain  and consider 
bank  statements  for the account  covering  a period  of at least  three  months. (1) 
(2) 
15To obtain  the statements,  the Secretary  of State  must  give  the bank  with 
which  the Secretary  of State  believes  the liable  person  holds  the account  a 
notice  (an “account  information  notice”)  requiring  the bank  to give  the 
Secretary  of State  statements  for the account  covering— 
(a) the three  months  immediately  before  the notice  is given,  or 
(b) 
20such  longer  period,  ending  immediately  before  the notice  is given, 
as may  be specified  in the notice. 
(3) An account  information  notice  must— 
(a) contain  the name  of the liable  person,  and 
(b) identify  the account  (for example,  by number  and sort code). 
(4) 
25The Secretary  of State  may  give  an account  information  notice  relating  to 
an account  only  for the purpose  of determining  whether  to make  a direct 
deduction  order  in respect  of the account. 
(5) At any time,  for the purposes  of determining  whether  to make  a direct 
deduction  order  in relation  to a liable  person,  the Secretary  of State  may 
30give  a notice  (“a general  information  notice”)  to a bank  requiring  the bank 
to— 
(a) identify  every  account  that the liable  person  holds  with  the bank, 
(b) for each  identified  account,  give  the Secretary  of State  the following 
information— 
(i) a description  of the type  of account, 
35 (ii) identifiers  for the account, 
(iii) if the account  is a sole account,  the balance  of the account 
at the date  that it is identified,  and 
(iv) if the account  is a joint  account,  the name  of each  other 
account  holder,  and 
40 (c) give  the Secretary  of State— 
(i) the correspondence  address  that the bank  holds  for the liable 
person,  and Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 98 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(ii) in the case of a joint  account,  the correspondence  address 
that the bank  holds  for each  other  account  holder. 
(6) The Secretary  of State  may  give— 
(a) 
5more  than  one account  information  notice,  or general  information 
notice,  in relation  to the same  recoverable  amount; 
(b) more  than  one account  information  notice  in respect  of the same 
account. 
(7) A notice  under  this paragraph  must— 
(a) set out how  and when  the bank  must  comply  with  the notice,  and 
10 (b) explain  that the bank  may  be liable  to a penalty  under  paragraph 
20 if it fails to do so without  reasonable  excuse. 
(8) The bank  must  comply  with  a notice  given  under  this paragraph. 
(9) A bank  that is given  an account  information  notice,  or a general  information 
15notice,  must  not notify  any of the following  people  that the notice  has been 
given— 
(a) the liable  person; 
(b) any other  holder  of the account  in respect  of which  an account 
information  notice  is given; 
(c) 
20any other  holder  of an account  identified  in accordance  with  a 
general  information  notice. 
(10) Information  given  to the Secretary  of State  in response  to a notice  under 
this paragraph  may  be used  by the Secretary  of State  for purposes  connected 
with  the Secretary  of State’s  functions  under  this Part of this Act, but not 
for any other  purpose. 
25 Joint  accounts 
4 Before  making  a direct  deduction  order  in respect  of a joint  account,  the 
Secretary  of State  must  make  an assessment  of the liable  person’s  beneficial (1) 
interest  in the amounts  which  are or may  be in the account  from  time  to 
time. 
30 (2) The Secretary  of State  must  presume  that the liable  person’s  beneficial 
interest  entitles  them  to the following  share  in any amounts  which  are or 
may  be in the account  from  time  to time— 
1
N
where  “N” is the number  of account  holders. 
35 (3) But the presumption  does  not apply  where  the Secretary  of State  has reason 
to believe  that the liable  person’s  beneficial  interest  is different  from  the 
presumed  share. 
(4) In making  an assessment  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the Secretary  of State 
must  have  regard  to— 99 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(a) the bank  statements  obtained  for the account  under  paragraph  3, 
and 
(b) any responses  to a notice  under  paragraph  5. 
Further  requirements  before  making  a direct  deduction  order 
5 5 Before  making  a direct  deduction  order,  the Secretary  of State  must  give 
the liable  person,  and,  in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other 
account  holders,  a notice— (1) 
(a) identifying  the account  that would  be subject  to the proposed  order, 
(b) 
10stating  the amount  that would  be recoverable  under  the proposed 
order, 
(c) setting  out the terms  of the proposed  order, 
(d) if the account  is a joint  account,  setting  out the Secretary  of State’s 
duty  to make  an assessment  as to the liable  person’s  beneficial 
interest  and the presumption  that applies  (see paragraph  4), and 
15 (e) identifying,  for the benefit  of the liable  person,  the recoverable 
amount  to which  the order  relates. 
(2) The notice  must  invite  the liable  person  and,  in the case of a joint  account, 
each  other  account  holder— 
(a) to make  representations  about  the terms  of the proposed  order,  and 
20 (b) in the case of a joint  account,  to make  representations  about  the 
liable  person’s  beneficial  interest  in amounts  in the account. 
(3) The notice  must  set out the means  by which,  and the period  within  which, 
representations  may  be made. 
(4) 
25The period  must  be a period  of at least  one month  beginning  with  the day 
after  the day on which  the notice  is given. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) consider  representations  made  in accordance  with  the notice,  and 
(b) in light  of those  representations  — 
(i) 
30in the case of a joint  account,  make  the assessment  required 
under  paragraph  4(1), and 
(ii) in any case,  decide  whether,  and in what  terms,  to make  a 
direct  deduction  in respect  of the account. 
(6) A notice  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  be given  to the bank,  including 
35before  it is given  to the persons  to whom  it is required  to be given  under 
that sub-paragraph  (and  for the effect  of giving  the notice  to the bank  see 
paragraph  11 (restrictions  on accounts)). 
(7) Where  a notice  is given  to the bank  before  it is given  to the person  to whom 
it is required  to be given,  in reliance  on sub-paragraph  (6), the notice  must 
40be given  to the other  persons  as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  being 
given  to the bank. 
(8) If, following  the giving  of a notice  under  this paragraph,  the Secretary  of 1 
State  decides  not to make  a direct  deduction  order,  the Secretary  of State Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 100 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
must,  as soon  as reasonably  practicable,  notify  every  person  given  a notice 
under  sub-paragraph  (1) of the decision. 
Amounts  of deductions 
6 
5The Secretary  of State  may  make  a direct  deduction  order  only  if satisfied 
on the basis  of information  received  by virtue  of paragraphs  3 and 5 that 
the terms  of the order— (1) 
(a) will not cause  the liable  person,  any other  account  holder,  or any 
person  within  sub-paragraph  (2) to suffer  hardship  in meeting 
essential  living  expenses,  and 
10 (b) are otherwise  fair in all the circumstances. 
(2) A person  is within  this subsection  if— 
(a) they  live with  the liable  person,  or any other  account  holder,  for 
some  or all of the time,  or 
(b) 
15they  are financially  dependent  on the liable  person  or any other 
account  holder. 
(3) The total  amount  of deductions  to be made  under  a regular  direct  deduction 
order  in relation  to any period  of one month  must  not exceed  40% of the 
amounts  credited  to the account  in the relevant  period. 
(4) 
20The “relevant  period”  is the period  of three  months  mentioned  in paragraph 
3(2)(a) (and  if more  than  one notice  is given  under  paragraph  3 in relation 
to the same  direct  deduction  order,  the reference  in paragraph  3(2)(a) to 
“the notice”  is to be read  as a reference  to the most  recent  of those  notices). 
(5) The Secretary  of State  must  ensure  that the amount  to be deducted  and 
25paid  to the Secretary  of State  under  a direct  deduction  order  does  not 
exceed  the recoverable  amount  to which  the order  relates. 
Content  and effect  of direct  deduction  orders 
7 A regular  direct  deduction  order  must  specify— (1) 
(a) the amounts,  or a method  for calculating  the amounts,  to be 
deducted  (see paragraph  6), 
30 (b) when  those  amounts  are to be deducted  and paid  to the Secretary 
of State,  and 
(c) the penalties  that may  be imposed  for a failure  to comply  (see 
paragraph  20). 
(2) 
35A regular  direct  deduction  order  may  specify  different  amounts,  or different 
methods  for calculating  the amounts,  to be deducted  at different  times. 
(3) A lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  must  specify— 
(a) the amount,  or method  for calculating  the amount,  to be deducted, 
(b) when  the amount  is to be deducted  and paid  to the Secretary  of 
State,  and 
40 (c) the penalties  that may  be imposed  for a failure  to comply  (see 
paragraph  20). 101 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(4) A direct  deduction  order  may  not require  an amount  to be deducted  from 
a person’s  bank  account  before  the end of the period  of one month 
beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the Secretary  of State 
complies  with  paragraph  1(7). 
5 (5) A bank  must  comply  with  a direct  deduction  order. 
Bank’s  administrative  costs 
8 A direct  deduction  order  may  include  provision  for the bank  to deduct 
from  the liable  person’s  account  an amount  specified  in, or calculated  in (1) 
10accordance  with,  the order,  for the purposes  of meeting  costs  reasonably 
incurred  by the bank  in complying  with  the order. 
(2) A bank  may  deduct  the costs  to which  they  are entitled  under  a direct 
deduction  order  immediately  prior  to making  the deduction  which  is to 
be paid  to the Secretary  of State  under  the order. 
(3) 
15In complying  with  paragraph  6(1) and (3) in relation  to a direct  deduction 
order  the Secretary  of State  must  take account  of any deductions  to be 
made  under  the order  by virtue  of sub-paragraph  (1). 
Insufficient  funds 
9 Where  the amount  in an account  is lower  than  the amount  to be deducted 
20in accordance  with  a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order  at the time  that the 
bank  is (apart  from  this sub-paragraph)  required  to make  the deduction— (1) 
(a) no deduction  is to be made,  and 
(b) the bank  must  notify  the Secretary  of State  as soon  as possible. 
(2) Where  the amount  in an account  is lower  than  the amount  to be deducted 
25in accordance  with  a regular  direct  deduction  order  at the time  that the 
bank  is (apart  from  this sub-paragraph)  required  to make  the deduction— 
(a) the order  is to be read  as requiring  the deduction  and payment  to 
the Secretary  of State  to take place  on the same  day the following 
week,  and 
(b) 
30if, on that day,  the amount  in the account  is lower  than  the amount 
to be deducted  in accordance  with  the order— 
(i) no deduction  is to be made,  and 
(ii) the bank  must  notify  the Secretary  of State  as soon  as 
possible. 
(3) 
35References  in this paragraph  to the amount  to be deducted  in accordance 
with  a direct  deduction  order  include  any amounts  to be deducted  in respect 
of a bank’s  costs  by virtue  of provision  under  paragraph  8(1). 
Non-working  days 
10 If (apart  from  this paragraph)  a bank  would  be required  to make  a 1 
deduction  and payment  under  a direct  deduction  order  on a day that is (1) Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 102 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
not a working  day,  the obligation  to make  the deduction  and payment 
applies  in relation  to the next  working  day after  that day. 
(2) In this paragraph,  “working  day”  means  any day other  than— 
(a) Saturday  or Sunday,  or 
5 (b) a day which  is a bank  holiday  under  the Banking  and Financial 
Dealings  Act 1971  in any part of the United  Kingdom. 
Restrictions  on accounts 
11 Where  a notice  under  paragraph  5 (a “first  notice”),  or a direct  deduction 
10order  under  paragraph  1, is given  to a bank  in relation  to a liable  person’s 
account,  the bank  must— (1) 
(a) ensure  that the account  is not closed  at the request  of an account 
holder,  and 
(b) if the notice  relates  to a proposed  lump  sum  direct  deduction  order, 
or the order  is a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order— 
15 (i) secure  that no transaction  takes  place  (except  for any 
deduction  under  the order)  which  would  result  in the 
amount  in the account  falling  below  the specified  amount 
or, if the amount  in the account  is already  below  that 
amount,  falling  any further,  or 
20 (ii) take the action  set out in sub-paragraph  (2). 
(2) The action  is to— 
(a) transfer  the specified  amount,  or the amount  in the account  if that 
is less than  the specified  amount,  from  the account  into a different 
25account  (a “hold  account”)  created  by the bank  for the sole purpose 
of holding  that transferred  amount,  and 
(b) secure  that no transaction  takes  place  (except  for any deduction 
under  the order)  which  would  result  in the amount  in the hold 
account  falling  below  the amount  transferred. 
(3) 
30Where  a bank  takes  the action  set out in sub-paragraph  (2) in relation  to 
a lump  sum  direct  deduction  order,  the order  is to be read  as if it required 
deductions  to be made  from  the hold  account. 
(4) A bank  must  ensure  that taking  the action  set out in sub-paragraph  (2) 
does  not cause  any disadvantage  to the liable  person,  and in the case of a 
35joint  account,  any other  account  holder,  that the liable  person,  and any 
other  account  holder,  would  not have  experienced  if the bank  had instead 
acted  in accordance  with  sub-paragraph  (1)(b)(i). 
(5) The requirements  in sub-paragraph  (1) cease  to apply  when— 
(a) in relation  to a first notice,  a notice  is given  to the bank  under 
40paragraph  5(8) (notice  of decision  not to make  a direct  deduction 
order)  or a direct  deduction  order  is given  to the bank  under 
paragraph  1; 
(b) in relation  to a direct  deduction  order— 
(i) all the deductions  under  the order  have  been  made,  or 103 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(ii) the order  is revoked. 
(6) In this paragraph,  “specified”  means  specified  in, or calculated  in accordance 
with,  a first notice  or direct  deduction  order. 
Applications  to vary 
5 12 Any  holder  of an account  to which  a direct  deduction  order  applies  may 
apply  to the Secretary  of State  to vary  the order. (1) 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  give  any other  holders  of the account  an 
opportunity  to make  representations  in relation  to the application. 
(3) 
10The Secretary  of State  must  notify  the applicant  and any other  account 
holders  of the Secretary  of State’s  decision  on the application. 
Variation 
13 The Secretary  of State  may  vary  a direct  deduction  order  (whether  after  an 
application  by an account  holder  or otherwise). (1) 
(2) 
15The provisions  in this paragraph  apply  in relation  to any variation  of a 
direct  deduction  order,  including  one that results  from  a review  under 
paragraph  18. 
(3) Where  the Secretary  of State  proposes  to vary  a direct  deduction  order 
other  than  under  sub-paragraph  (7), the Secretary  of State  must  give— 
(a) the liable  person,  and 
20 (b) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders, 
an opportunity  to make  representations  about  the proposed  variation. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  comply  with  sub-paragraph  (3) at the same  time 
as complying  with  paragraph  12(2). 
(5) 
25A variation  to a direct  deduction  order  takes  effect  when  the Secretary  of 
State  gives  the varied  order  to the bank  or, if later,  in accordance  with  the 
terms  of the order  as varied. 
(6) The Secretary  of State    must  give  a copy  of the varied  order  to the liable 
person  and,  in the case of a joint  account  holder,  each  other  account  holder. 
(7) 
30The Secretary  of State  may  vary  a direct  deduction  order  so that the order 
applies  to another  account  held  by the liable  person  (including  an account 
administered  by a different  bank)  only  if— 
(a) the variation  is requested  by the liable  person,  and 
(b) if the other  account  is a joint  account,  each  of the other  account 
holders  consents. 
35 (8) Where  a direct  deduction  order  is varied  under  sub-paragraph  (7)— 
(a) if the order  is varied  so that it applies  to an account  administered 
by another  bank— 
(i) the reference  in sub-paragraph  (5) to “the bank”  is to the 
bank  which  administers  that account, Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 104 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(ii) paragraph  7(5) applies  to the order  as varied  as it applied 
to the original  order,  and 
(iii) the Secretary  of State  must  notify  the bank  given  the original 
order  of the effect  of the variation,  and 
5 (b) if the order  is varied  so that it applies  to a joint  account— 
(i) the requirement  in sub-paragraph  (6) is to give  a copy  of 
the order  to each  other  holder  of that joint  account,  and 
(ii) if the original  order  applied  to a joint  account,  the Secretary 
10of State  must  notify  each  other  holder  of that joint  account 
of the effect  of the variation. 
(9) The steps  set out in paragraphs  3 to 5 do not apply  to a decision  to vary 
a direct  deduction  order. 
Revocation  of direct  deduction  order 
14 The Secretary  of State  may  revoke  a direct  deduction  order. (1) 
15 (2) The Secretary  of State  must  revoke  a direct  deduction  order  as soon  as 
reasonably  practicable  after  becoming  aware  that— 
(a) the recoverable  amount  has been  recovered,  or 
(b) the liable  person  to whom  the order  relates  has died. 
(3) 
20Where  the Secretary  of State  revokes  a direct  deduction  order,  the Secretary 
of State  must  give  a notice  of the revocation  to— 
(a) the bank  to which  the order  was given, 
(b) the liable  person  (apart  from  in a case within  sub-paragraph  (2)(b)), 
and 
(c) in the case of a joint  account,  each  of the other  account  holders. 
25 Further  information  notices 
15 For the purposes  of determining  whether  to revoke  or vary  a direct 
deduction  order,  the Secretary  of State  may  give  a bank  a notice  (a “further 
information  notice”)  requiring  the bank— (1) 
(a) 
30to give  the Secretary  of State  statements  for an account  held  by the 
liable  person  covering— 
(i) the three  months  immediately  before  the notice  was given, 
or 
(ii) such  longer  period,  ending  immediately  before  the notice 
was given,  as may  be specified  in the notice; 
35 (b) to take the steps  set out in paragraphs  (a) to (c) of paragraph  3(5). 
(2) Sub-paragraphs  (6), (7) and (10) of paragraph  3 apply  in relation  to a further 
information  notice  as they  apply  in relation  to a notice  under  that paragraph. 
(3) Before  giving  a further  information  notice  to a bank  requiring  statements 
40to be given  in respect  of a joint  account,  the Secretary  of State  must  notify 
each  account  holder  other  than  the liable  person— 
(a) that the notice  will be given,  and 105 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(b) of the effect  of the notice. 
(4) A further  information  notice  may  be given  to the bank  before,  at the same 
time  as or after  the Secretary  of State  complies  with  paragraph  13(3). 
Suspending  of direct  deduction  orders 
5 16 The Secretary  of State  may  suspend  and re-start  the requirement  to make 
deductions  and payments  under  a regular  direct  deduction  order  at any 
time  by notifying  the bank  to which  the order  was given. (1) 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  notify  the liable  person  and,  in the case of a 
10joint  account,  each  other  account  holder,  if the requirement  is suspended 
or re-started  under  this paragraph. 
Cessation  on death  of liable  person 
17 A bank  ceases  to be subject  to a direct  deduction  order  on becoming  aware 
of the liable  person’s  death. 
Reviews 
15 18 This  paragraph  applies  where  the Secretary  of State— (1) 
(a) makes  a direct  deduction  order, 
(b) varies  a direct  deduction  order,  or 
(c) decides  not to vary  a direct  deduction  order  in response  to an 
application  under  paragraph  12. 
20 (2) Any  of the following  persons  (“relevant  persons”)  may  apply  to the 
Secretary  of State  for a review  of the decision  to make,  to vary  or not to 
vary  the order— 
(a) the liable  person  to whom  the order  relates,  and 
(b) in the case of a joint  account,  any other  account  holder. 
25 (3) An application  under  sub-paragraph  (2) must  be made  before  the end of 
the period  of one month  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which 
the applicant  was— 
(a) given  a copy  of the order  or the order  as varied,  or 
(b) notified  of the decision  not to vary  the order. 
30 (4) An application  for a review  under  this paragraph  may  not be made  on, or 
include,  any ground  relating  to the existence  or amount  of a recoverable 
amount  (unless  the amount  is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(5) On a review,  the Secretary  of State  may— 
(a) uphold  the decision, 
35 (b) vary  the order,  or 
(c) revoke  the order. 
(6) After  a review  has been  carried  out, the Secretary  of State  must— Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 106 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(a) notify  the applicant  and other  relevant  persons  of the outcome  of 
the review,  and 
(b) if the outcome  was to vary  the order,  give— 
(i) 
5the order  as varied  to the bank  which  was given  the original 
order,  and 
(ii) a copy  of the varied  order  to the liable  person  and,  in the 
case of a joint  account,  each  other  account  holder. 
(7) See paragraph  13 for provisions  about  varying  a direct  deduction  order. 
Appeals 
10 19 A relevant  person  may  appeal  to the First-tier  Tribunal  against— (1) 
(a) the making  of a direct  deduction  order, 
(b) the variation  of a direct  deduction  order,  or 
(c) a refusal  to vary  a direct  deduction  order  after  a request  by a 
relevant  person. 
15 (2) A relevant  person  may  not appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) in relation  to 
a matter  within  paragraph  (a), (b) or (c) of that sub-paragraph  unless  they— 
(a) made  representations  in accordance  with  paragraph  5, 12 or 13 (or, 
in relation  to a variation  of a direct  deduction  order,  requested  the 
variation),  or 
20 (b) sought  a review  under  paragraph  18, 
in relation  to the matter. 
(3) Sub-paragraph  (2) does  not apply  where  a direct  deduction  order  is varied 
on a review  under  paragraph  18. 
(4) 
25An appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) must  be brought  within  the period  of 
one month  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the appellant 
was— 
(a) given  a copy  of the direct  deduction  order,  or the varied  deduction 
order,  in a case within  sub-paragraph  (1)(a) or (b), or 
(b) 
30notified  under  sub-paragraph  (3) or, where  a review  was sought, 
paragraph  18(6), in a case within  sub-paragraph  (1)(c). 
(5) An appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  not be made  on, or include,  any 
ground  relating  to the existence  or amount  of a recoverable  amount  (unless 
the amount  is said to be incorrectly  stated  in the order). 
(6) 
35Where  a relevant  person  appeals  under  this paragraph  in relation  to a 
direct  deduction  order,  the First-tier  Tribunal  may  suspend  the requirement 
on the bank  to which  the order  has been  given  to give  effect  to the order 
for some  or all of the time  until  the appeal  (including  any onward  appeal) 
is withdrawn,  abandoned  or finally  determined. 
(7) On an appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the First-tier  Tribunal  may— 
40 (a) amend  the direct  deduction  order; 
(b) revoke  the direct  deduction  order; 107 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(c) dismiss  the appeal. 
(8) In this paragraph,  “relevant  person”  has the meaning  that it has in 
paragraph  18. 
PART 2 
5 PENALTIES 
Penalties  for failure  to comply 
20 If the Secretary  of State  has reasonable  grounds  to believe  that a bank— (1) 
(a) has failed  to comply  with  a requirement  imposed  by or under  this 
Schedule,  and 
10 (b) has no reasonable  excuse  for the failure, 
the Secretary  of State  may  impose  on the bank  a penalty  of £500. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  not impose  a penalty  before  giving  the bank 
an opportunity  to make  representations  about  their  compliance. 
(3) 
15The Secretary  of State  imposes  a penalty  by giving  the bank  a notice  of the 
penalty  (a “penalty  notice”). 
(4) A penalty  notice  must  state— 
(a) the amount  of the penalty, 
(b) the period  within  which  it must  be paid,  and 
(c) the bank’s  right  to appeal  against  the penalty. 
20 (5) The Secretary  of State  may  vary  or revoke  a penalty  notice  by giving  a 
notice  to that effect  to the bank. 
Recovery  of penalties 
21 In England  and Wales,  a penalty  imposed  under  this Part of this Schedule 
is recoverable— (1) 
25 (a) if the county  court  so orders,  as if it were  payable  under  an order 
of that court; 
(b) if the High  Court  so orders,  as if it were  payable  under  an order 
of that court. 
(2) 
30In Scotland,  a penalty  imposed  under  this Part of this Schedule  may  be 
enforced  in the same  manner  as an extract  registered  decree  arbitral  bearing 
a warrant  for execution  issued  by the sheriff  court  of any sheriffdom  in 
Scotland. 
Appeal  against  a penalty  notice 
22 
35A bank  on which  a penalty  is imposed  under  paragraph  20 may  appeal  to 
the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the imposition  of the penalty. (1) Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 108 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(2) An appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) may  not be brought  after  the end of 
the period  of one month  beginning  with  the date  on which  the penalty 
notice  in relation  to the penalty  being  appealed  was given. 
(3) 
5On an appeal  under  sub-paragraph  (1) the Tribunal  may  confirm  or quash 
the decision  to impose  the penalty. 
(4) If an appeal  is brought  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the penalty  which  is the 
subject  of the appeal  is not payable  until  the appeal  (including  any onward 
appeal)  is determined  or withdrawn. 
PART 3 
10 GENERAL 
Interpretation 
23 In this Schedule— (1) 
“bank”  means  a person  who  is authorised— 
(a) to accept  deposits,  or 
15 (b) to issue  electronic  money; 
“direct  deduction  order”  means  a regular  direct  deduction  order  or a 
lump  sum  direct  deduction  order; 
“joint  account”  means  an account  held  by more  than  one person; 
20“lump  sum  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by 
paragraph  1(5); 
“regular  direct  deduction  order”  has the meaning  given  by paragraph 
1(4); 
“sole  account”  means  an account  held  by one person. 
(2) 
25For the purposes  of paragraph  (a) in the definition  of “bank”  in 
sub-paragraph  (1)— 
(a) the reference  to accepting  deposits  is to carrying  on the regulated 
activity  of accepting  deposits  for the purposes  of the Financial 
Services  and Markets  Act 2000  (see section  22 of that Act and article 
305 of the Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 2000  (Regulated 
Activities)  Order  2001  (S.I. 2001/544)),  and 
(b) a person  is authorised  to accept  deposits  if they  are an authorised 
person  or an exempt  person  in relation  to the carrying  on of that 
activity  for the purposes  of the Financial  Services  and Markets  Act 
2000. 
35 (3) For the purposes  of paragraph  (b) in the definition  of “bank”  in 
sub-paragraph  (1), a person  is authorised  to issue  electronic  money  if— 
(a) the person  is an electronic  money  institution,  and 
(b) the person  is authorised  or registered  under  Part 2 of the Electronic 
40Money  Regulations  2011  (S.I. 2011/99)  in relation  to carrying  on the 
activity  of issuing  electronic  money. 109 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(4) In sub-paragraph  (3), “electronic  money”  and “electronic  money  institution” 
have  the meanings  given  by regulation  2(1) of those  Regulations  (and 
references  to the issue  of electronic  money  are to be construed  in accordance 
with  those  Regulations). 
5 (5) In this Schedule,  references  to an amount  in an account  are to an amount 
standing  to the credit  of the account. 
(6) In this Schedule,  references  to a person  holding  an account  include 
references  to— 
(a) a person  holding  an account  jointly  with  one or more  other  persons, 
10 (b) a person  being  a signatory,  or one of the signatories,  to an account, 
and 
(c) an account  being,  in any other  way,  in the person’s  name, 
and “holder”  is to be read  accordingly. 
Regulations 
15 24 Regulations  may  make  further  provision  about  direct  deduction  orders. (1) 
(2) Regulations  under  this paragraph  may,  among  other  things,  make 
provision— 
(a) about  how  notices  and orders  are to be given  by the Secretary  of 
State  under  this Schedule; 
20 (b) about  how  notices  and information  are to be given  to the Secretary 
of State  under  this Schedule; 
(c) about  the calculation  of amounts  to be deducted,  including— 
(i) about  establishing  whether  deductions  would  cause  a person 
to suffer  hardship  in meeting  essential  living  expenses,  and 
25 (ii) about  amounts  which  are, or are not, to be taken  into account 
in calculating  the amounts  credited  to an account  for the 
purposes  of paragraph  6(3); 
(d) setting  a maximum  percentage  that is less than  40% for the purposes 
of paragraph  6(3) in some  or all cases; 
30 (e) amending  the amount  for the time  being  specified  in paragraph 
20(1) to reflect  a change  in the value  of money; 
(f) about  the duties  of banks  in relation  to direct  deduction  orders, 
including  before  a direct  deduction  order  is made; 
(g) 
35about  costs  which  a bank  may  recover  by virtue  of paragraph  8 or 
from  the Secretary  of State; 
(h) about  the interaction  between  direct  deduction  orders  under  this 
Schedule  and similar  orders  under  any other  enactment. 
(3) Regulations  under  this paragraph  may,  among  other  things,  apply  this 
40Schedule,  as it applies  to banks,  to other  types  of person  who  provide 
financial  products  or services  (including  products  or services  that operate 
by reference  to cryptoassets  or any similar  product  or service). Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 110 
Schedule  5—Recovery  from  bank  accounts  etc 
(4) In sub-paragraph  (3), “cryptoasset”  has the meaning  given  in section  84A 
of the Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002. 
(5) Before  making  relevant  regulations  in reliance  on sub-paragraph  (2)(a), (b), 
(f) or (g), the Secretary  of State  must  consult— 
5 (a) persons  who  appear  to the Secretary  of State  to represent  the 
interests  of banks,  and 
(b) such  other  persons  (if any)  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
appropriate. 
(6) 
10Before  making  relevant  regulations  in reliance  on sub-paragraph  (3), the 
Secretary  of State  must  consult— 
(a) persons  who  appear  to the Secretary  of State  to represent  the 
interests  of persons  to whom  provisions  about  direct  deduction 
orders  would  be applied  by the regulations,  and 
(b) 
15such  other  persons  (if any)  as the Secretary  of State  considers 
appropriate. 
(7) In this paragraph,  “relevant  regulations”  means— 
(a) the first regulations  made  in reliance  on the provisions  in question, 
and 
(b) 
20any subsequent  regulations  made  in reliance  on those  provisions 
which— 
(i) impose  new  duties  on banks,  or 
(ii) make  changes  to existing  duties  or provisions  which,  in the 
opinion  of the Secretary  of State,  are more  than  minor. ” 
Section  91 SCHEDULE  6 
25 DISQUALIFICATION FROM DRIVING 
The Schedule  to be inserted  in the Social  Security  Administration  Act 1992  after 
Schedule  3ZA  (inserted  by section  90(3) of this Act)  is— 
Section  80C “SCHEDULE  3ZB 
DISQUALIFICATION FROM DRIVING 
30 Suspended  DWP  disqualification  orders 
1 This  Schedule  applies  where— (1) 
(a) the Secretary  of State  has sought  to recover  a recoverable  amount 
from  a liable  person,  and 
(b) some  or all of the amount  has not been  recovered. 
35 (2) Where  the amount  still to be recovered  is at least  £1,000,  the Secretary  of 
State  may  apply  to the court  for a suspended  DWP  disqualification  order 
(but see sub-paragraph  (7)). 111 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
(3) A suspended  DWP  disqualification  order  is an order— 
(a) setting  out terms  of repayment  with  which  the liable  person  must 
comply,  and 
(b) 
5stating  that the liable  person  may  be subject  to an immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order  if the person  fails to comply  with  the terms 
of repayment. 
(4) Subject  to sub-paragraph  (6), the court  must  make  a suspended  DWP 
disqualification  order  if the court  is satisfied,  on the balance  of probabilities, 
10that the liable  person  has, without  reasonable  excuse,  not paid  the 
recoverable  amount. 
(5) The terms  of repayment  must  include  terms  for the payment  of any costs 
awarded  by the court  to the Secretary  of State  relating  to the order. 
(6) The court  may  not make  a suspended  DWP  disqualification  order  if the 
court  considers  that the liable  person— 
15 (a) needs  a driving  licence  to earn  a living,  or 
(b) has another  essential  need  for a driving  licence. 
(7) The Secretary  of State  may  apply  for a second  or subsequent  suspended 
DWP  disqualification  order  in relation  to a recoverable  amount  even  if the 
amount  still to be recovered  has fallen  to less than  £1,000. 
20 (8) A suspended  DWP  disqualification  order  ceases  to have  effect  when— 
(a) revoked  under  paragraph  4, or 
(b) the Secretary  of State  has recovered  the whole  of the recoverable 
amount  and the costs  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (5) from  the 
liable  person. 
25 (9) Before  determining  an application  under  this paragraph  the court  must 
give the Secretary  of State  and the liable  person  an opportunity  to be heard. 
(10) In this Schedule— 
“the court”  means— 
(a) in England  and Wales,  a magistrates’  court,  and 
30 (b) in Scotland,  a sheriff  or a summary  sheriff; 
“driving  licence”  means  a licence  to drive  a motor  vehicle  granted 
under  Part 3 of the Road  Traffic  Act 1988. 
Immediate  DWP  disqualification  orders 
2 
35Subject  to sub-paragraph  (6), if a liable  person  fails to comply  with  terms 
of repayment  in a suspended  DWP  disqualification  order,  the Secretary  of 
State  may  apply  to the court  for an immediate  DWP  disqualification  order. (1) 
(2) An immediate  DWP  disqualification  order  is an order— 
(a) setting  out terms  of repayment  with  which  the liable  person  must 
comply,  and Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 112 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
(b) disqualifying  the liable  person  from  holding  or obtaining  a driving 
licence  for such  period  as the court  considers  likely  to result  in the 
person  paying  the recoverable  amount  to the Secretary  of State 
(3) 
5Subject  to sub-paragraph  (5), if the court  is satisfied  on the balance  of 
probabilities  that the liable  person  has failed,  without  reasonable  excuse, 
to comply  with  terms  of repayment  in a suspended  DWP  disqualification 
order,  the court  must  make  an immediate  DWP  disqualification  order  on 
an application  under  sub-paragraph  (1). 
(4) 
10The period  mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (2)(b) may  not be longer  than  2 
years  beginning  with  the day on which  the order  is made. 
(5) The court  may  not make  an immediate  DWP  disqualification  order  if the 
court  is of the opinion  that the liable  person— 
(a) needs  a driving  licence  to earn  a living,  or 
(b) has another  essential  need  for a driving  licence. 
15 (6) Where  the terms  of repayment  provide  for repayment  in instalments,  the 
failure  to pay a single  instalment  is not to be regarded  as a failure  to comply 
with  the terms  unless  the liable  person  fails to repay  the entire  recoverable 
amount  by the time  the final  instalment  is due. 
(7) 
20The Secretary  of State  may  apply  for more  than  one immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order  in relation  to the same  suspended  DWP 
disqualification  order. 
(8) Before  determining  an application  under  this paragraph  the court  must 
give the Secretary  of State  and the liable  person  an opportunity  to be heard. 
Terms  of repayment 
25 3 The court  must  be satisfied  that the terms  of repayment  set out in a 
suspended  or immediate  DWP  disqualification  order  are ones  with  which 
the liable  person  has the means  to comply. 
Variation  and revocation  of orders 
4 
30On an application  by the liable  person  or the Secretary  of State,  the court 
may,  where  some  of the recoverable  amount  to which  a suspended  or (1) 
immediate  DWP  disqualification  order  relates  has been  recovered,  make 
an order  varying,  or revoking,  a suspended  or immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order. 
(2) 
35But the court  may  revoke  a suspended  or immediate  DWP  disqualification 
order  in reliance  on sub-paragraph  (1) only  where  the court  considers  that 
revoking  the order  will increase  the likelihood  of the remainder  of the 
recoverable  amount  being  recovered. 
(3) When  considering  an application  under  sub-paragraph  (1), the court  must 
invite  representations  from— 
40 (a) the Secretary  of State,  where  the application  was made  by the liable 
person,  and 113 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
(b) the liable  person,  where  the application  was made  by the Secretary 
of State, 
or give  both  the Secretary  of State  and the liable  person  an opportunity  to 
be heard. 
5 (4) The court  may  vary  or revoke  a suspended  or immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order  on an application  from  the liable  person  where— 
(a) the order  was made  without  the liable  person  being  heard  despite 
being  given  an opportunity  to be heard  under  paragraph  1(9), and 
(b) 
10the court  considers  that the liable  person  had a good  reason  for not 
taking  advantage  of the opportunity  to be heard. 
(5) An application  under  sub-paragraph  (4) must  be made  within  the period 
of 21 days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  the liable  person 
is given  notice  that the order  has been  made. 
(6) 
15Before  determining  an application  under  this paragraph,  the court  must 
give the Secretary  of State  and the liable  person  an opportunity  to be heard. 
(7) Where  the Secretary  of State  has recovered  the whole  of the recoverable 
amount  and the costs  mentioned  in paragraph  1(5) from  a liable  person 
subject  to an immediate  DWP  disqualification  order— 
(a) the Secretary  of State  must  notify  the court,  and 
20 (b) a court  officer  must  make  an order  (without  a hearing)  revoking 
the immediate  DWP  disqualification  order. 
(8) In this paragraph,  references  to varying  a suspended  or immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order  includes  varying  the terms  of repayment  set out in 
the order. 
25 (9) In sub-paragraph  (7)(b), “court  officer”  means  a member  of the staff  of the 
court  authorised  by the court  for the purposes  of that sub-paragraph. 
Holding  of driving  licence  for period  of disqualification 
5 Where  the court  makes  an immediate  DWP  disqualification  order,  the 
court— 
30 (a) may  require  the liable  person  to whom  the order  relates  to give  to 
the court  by, or on, a specified  date  any driving  licence  which  the 
liable  person  holds,  and 
(b) must  transfer  each  driving  licence  received  in accordance  with 
paragraph  (a) to the Secretary  of State. 
35 Appeals 
6 The liable  person  or the Secretary  of State  may  appeal  to the appropriate 
appellate  court  on a point  of law against— (1) 
(a) a decision  to, or not to, make,  vary  or revoke  a DWP  disqualification 
order; 
40 (b) the terms  of a DWP  disqualification  order. Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 114 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
(2) An appeal  under  this paragraph  must  be made  within  the period  of 21 
days  beginning  with  the day after  the day on which  notice  of the decision 
to which  it relates  is given. 
(3) On an appeal  under  this paragraph,  the appropriate  appellate  court  may— 
5 (a) where  the appeal  relates  to a DWP  disqualification  order  that has 
been  made— 
(i) dismiss  the appeal, 
(ii) vary  the order  in any way  that would  have  been  available 
to the court  that made  it, or 
10 (iii) revoke  the order,  or 
(b) where  the appeal  is against  a decision  not to make  a DWP 
disqualification  order— 
(i) dismiss  the appeal,  or 
(ii) 
15make  a DWP  disqualification  order  that the court  could  have 
made. 
(4) In this Schedule,  the “appropriate  appellate  court”  means— 
(a) in England  and Wales,  the Crown  Court,  and 
(b) in Scotland,  the Sheriff  Appeal  Court. 
DWP  disqualification  orders:  further  provision 
20 7 A court  must  give  the Secretary  of State  and the liable  person  notice  if— (1) 
(a) it makes  or refuses  to make  a suspended  or immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order, 
(b) it makes  or refuses  to make  an order  under  paragraph  4, or 
(c) 
25it allows  an appeal  against  a suspended  or immediate  DWP 
disqualification  order. 
(2) Notice  under  this paragraph  is to be given  to the Secretary  of State  in such 
manner  and to such  addresses,  and to contain  such  particulars,  as the 
Secretary  of State  may  require. 
(3) 
30The court  may  grant  permission  for an application  or an appeal  after  the 
periods  mentioned  in paragraphs  4(5) and 6(2) (as the case may  be) where 
satisfied  that there  is a compelling  reason  to do so. 
(4) Regulations  may  make  provision  for the purposes  of enabling  the court  to 
assess  the matters  mentioned  in paragraphs  1(6), 2(5) and 3. 
(5) 
35In this paragraph,  the reference  to “a court”  is to “the court”  and “the 
appropriate  appellate  court”. 
Information  sharing 
8 A public  authority  that holds  information  about  a liable  person’s  driving 
licence  may,  on a request  by the Secretary  of State,  disclose  that information 
40to the Secretary  of State  for the purpose  of facilitating  the exercise  of the 
Secretary  of State’s  functions  under  this Schedule. 115 Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
Northern  Ireland  licences 
9 Section  109(1)  of the Road  Traffic  Act 1988  (Northern  Ireland  licences)  has 
effect  subject  to any provision  made  by or under  this Schedule. (1) 
(2) 
5For the purposes  of that section,  the reference  in paragraph  2(2)(b) to 
disqualifying  a person  from  holding  or obtaining  a driving  licence  is to be 
read  as a reference  to disqualifying  a person  from  driving  any vehicle 
under  Part 3 of the 1988  Act.” Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 116 
Schedule  6—Disqualification  from  driving 
Public  Authorities  (Fraud,  Error  and Recovery)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the prevention  of fraud  against  public  authorities  and the making 
of erroneous  payments  by public  authorities;  about  the recovery  of money  paid  by 
public  authorities  as a result  of fraud  or error;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Secretary  Liz Kendall 
supported  by the Prime  Minister , 
the Chancellor  of the Exchequer , Pat McFadden , 
Secretary  Jonathan  Reynolds  and Georgia  Gould . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   22nd  January  2025 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 167



Baroness Jones  of Whitchurch  
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State  
Department for Science, Innovation & 
Technology  
100 Parliament Street  
London SW1A 2BQ  
 
www.gov.uk/dsit  
   
 6 January  2025 
 
 
Dear Viscount Camrose , 
 
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision -Making Systems Bill – Second 
Reading Debate  
 
I am writing in response to the important questions you raised during the deb ate on Lord 
Clement -Jones' Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision -Making Systems Bill  on 
Friday 13 December. I  will also place a copy of this letter in the libraries of both Houses.  
 
I would like to thank you for your thoughtful contributions  and hope you will be pleased to note 
that we published 14 new records on the Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard 
(ATRS) online Hub  on Tuesday 17 December.  More should follow in the coming weeks . As I 
stated during the debate, we are confident that the ATRS policy mandate, delivered from the 
new digital centre of government, is sufficient to deliver meaningful transparency in government  
algorithmic tools which affect members of the public.  
 
You asked what consideration will be given to ensure that public authorities can remain agile 
and responsive given the rapid rate of technological change,  a challenge which the government 
takes very seriously. You also referenced  the principles -based approach set out in the AI White 
Paper , and suggested that they provide a flexible means for achieving the  goals of Lord 
Clement -Jones' Bill ( that is, transparent and trustworthy uses of algorithmic  and automated 
tools  in the public sector).  Finally, you asked what  measures will be considered to build public 
trust in AI systems, ensuring that the public understand both the decisions made and the 
safeguards in place around them . 
 
Supporting the public  sector  
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is at the heart of the UK Government’s plan to kickstart an era of 
economic growth, transform how we deliver public services, and boost living standards for 
working people across the country.     
 
Where public bodies are concerned, we are guiding the responsible development, deployment, 
and use of these technologies through a range of policies, frameworks and standards. This 
includes the Generative AI Framework, the Data Ethics Framework, the Model for Responsible 
Innovation, and the Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard (ATRS), all of which reflect 
principles set out in the AI regulation whitepaper.  
 

   
 
2 
 The Central Digital & Data Office  (CDDO),  published the Generative AI Framework at the 
beginning of 2024 to support both decision makers and implementation teams as they examine 
AI and conduct their proof of concepts , potentially leading to scaled adoption in a safe, secure 
and ethical manner . CDDO also worked with Treasury to develop assessment criteria for the 
spending review that help ed departments  to create bids that meet their AI adoption strategies.  
Its AI and Automation team has continued to work with i.AI (the government’s AI incubator) and 
departmental colleagues across government to manage the community of practice and help 
draft a future update of the Generative AI Framework.  
 
The government will soon publish its plan to support  further the effective, safe and ethical 
adoption of AI that will dramatically increase the efficiency of public service delivery and 
contribute to the government’s  five missions in the new year.  
 
Building public trust  
 
Transparency is a key driver of responsible innovation and improved public trust in 
governments’ use of data and algorithms . It is also one of the core  data protection principle s, 
along with  other principles such as  fairness  and accountability  which apply  to all processing of 
personal data, including in AI systems, and must be adhered to by public and private sector 
organisations.  
  
The Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard ( ATRS ) delivers this transparency  by 
establishing a standardised way for public sector organisations to publish information about 
how and why they are using algorithmic tools in decision -making with impact on members of 
the public . It enables these organisations to proactively publish details about the algorithmic 
tools they use , including  the associated  risks that have been identified and how these have 
been mitigated , and the governance mechanisms and safeguards that have  been  put in place . 
This information  is made freely accessible  to the public on GOV .UK together with contact 
details to get in touch with the team responsible  for the tool . 
 
The ATRS is mandatory for government departments and ALBs, for algorithmic tools which 
have a significant influence on a decision -making process with public effect  or directly interact 
with the public . This policy mandate is currently being implemented , and we have just added 14 
new records to the online repository. M any m ore records will be added over the coming 
months.  
 
There ar e also specific safeguards set out in the UK’s data protection framework where 
individuals have been subject to solely automated decision -making (ADM) with a legal or 
similarly significant effect on individuals , to ensure that they are aware of, understand, and can 
challenge  such decisions  if needed. T hese rules apply to public and private sector 
organisations alike . 
 
UK GDPR already require s organisations to provide data subjects with privacy information 
about the existence of solely automated decision -making, including profiling, meaningful 
information about the logic involved, and the significance and envisaged consequences of such 
automate d processing for the individual  
   
 
3 
  
Following a significant decision based solely on automated processing, the safeguards in  
Article 22 of the  UK GDPR apply. These safeguards include notifying data subjects of 
decisions and providing information on the solely ADM that has been carried out, and the right 
to contest those decisions and to obtain human intervention.  Human intervention should be 
carried out competently and by a person with the authority to correct a wrongful outcome . This 
would ensure that under such circumstances, organisations  can review the decisions in 
question and  take suitable measures to correct them if they have produced a wrongful 
outcome.  Existing guidance by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) seeks to assist 
individuals with exercising their rights in relation to solely automated processing .  
As you are  aware, the government has introduced reforms to this provision under the Data 
(Use and Access) Bill to allow for the responsible deployment of solely automated decision -
making, and I look forward to continuing our discussions on this topic during the upcoming 
Report stage.  
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
 
 
Baroness Jones  of Whitchurch  
Minister for the Future Digital Economy and Online Safety



Public  Procurement  (British  Goods  and Services) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of the Public  Services  (Social  Value)  Act 2012:  British  goods  and 
services 
2 Amendment  of the Procurement  Act 2023:  contract  award  notices 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 153 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  public  procurement  in respect  of British  goods  and 
services;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of the Public  Services  (Social  Value)  Act 2012:  British  goods 
and services 
(1) The Public  Services  (Social  Value)  Act 2012  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  1— 
5 (a) after  subsection  (3)(b),  insert— 
“(c) how  the procurement  of British  goods  and services, 
including  from  small  and medium-sized  enterprises, 
might— 
(i) secure  that improvement,  or 
10 (ii) improve  the economic,  social  and environmental 
well-being  of one or more  other  areas  in the 
United  Kingdom; 
(d) how,  in procuring  British  goods  and services,  the 
15authority  might  act to support  good  employment 
standards  and working  practices. ”; 
(b) in subsection  (15),  in the appropriate  place  insert— 
““British  goods  and services”  means  goods  or services  originating 
in the United  Kingdom; ”; 
(c) in subsection  (15),  in the appropriate  places  insert— 
20 ““good  employment  standards  and working  practices”  include, 
but are not limited  to, compliance  with  national  and 
international  obligations  in the fields  of environmental,  social 
and labour  law, and collective  agreements; 
25“collective  agreement”  has the meaning  given  in section  178 of 
the Trade  Union  and Labour  Relations  (Consolidation)  Act 
1992; ”. 
59/1 Bill 153 1 Public  Procurement  (British  Goods  and Services)  Bill 
(d) in subsection  (15),  in the appropriate  place  insert— 
““small  or medium-sized  enterprise”  has the meaning  given  by 
section  1119  of the Corporation  Tax Act 2009; ”. 
2 Amendment  of the Procurement  Act 2023:  contract  award  notices 
5 (1) Section  95 of the Procurement  Act 2023  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  subsection  (3), insert— 
“(3A) Regulations  made  under  subsection  (1) about  the form  and content  of 
contract  award  notices  must  require  a contracting  authority  to include 
in such  a notice— 
10 (a) reasonable  detail  about  how  it has complied  with  its obligations 
under  sections  1(3)(c)  and (d) of the Public  Services  (Social 
Value)  Act 2012; 
(b) where  the notice  relates  to the procurement  of food,  what 
15proportion  of the food  procured  originates  in the United 
Kingdom, 
(c) an assessment  of the impact  that the threshold  amounts  set out 
in Schedule  1 of the Procurement  Act 2023  have  had on— 
(i) suppliers  of British  goods  and services,  and 
(ii) 
20suppliers  of British  goods  and services  which  are small 
and medium  sized  enterprises 
in the procurement  process. ” 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) Section  1 extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) 
25Section  2 and this section  extend  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern 
Ireland. 
(3) This  Act comes  into force  on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may  by 
regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
(4) This  Act may  be cited  as the Public  Procurement  (British  Goods  and Services) 
Act 2025. Public  Procurement  (British  Goods  and Services)  Bill 2 
Public  Procurement  (British  Goods  and Services) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  public  procurement  in respect  of British  goods  and services;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sarah  Champion 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   18th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 153



Bill 28–EN 57/1 
 PUBLIC SECTOR EXIT P AYMENTS 
(LIMITATION)  BILL   
EXPLANATOR Y NOTES  
What these notes do   
These Explanatory Notes re late to the  Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation)  Bill as introduced in the 
House of Commons  on 5 September 2017  (Bill 28).  
• These Explanatory Notes have been prepared by Sir Christopher Chope MP, Member in 
charge of the Bill,  in order to assist the reader of the Bill and to help inform debate on it . They 
do not form part of the  Bill and have not been endorsed by Parliament.  
• These Explanatory Notes explain what each part of the Bill will mean in practice; provide 
background information on the development of policy; and provide additional information on 
how the Bill will affect existing legislation in this area.  
• These Explanatory Notes might best be read alongside the Bill. They a re not, and are not 
intended to be, a comprehensive description of the Bill. 
• The “English Votes for English Laws” (EVEL) provisions of the Standing Orders of the House 
of Commons related to public business do not apply to Private Members’ Bills. Therefor e, 
these notes do not discuss the application of those Standing Orders.  
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation)  Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons  on 5 September 2017  (Bill 28)  
1 
1 Table of C ontents  
Subject  Page of these Notes  
Overview of the Bill  2 
Policy background  2 
Territorial extent and application  3 
Commentary on provisio ns of Bill  3 
Clause 1: duty of Treasury to make regulations  3 
Clause 2: application of regulation to payments already made  3 
Commencement  3 
Financial implications of the Bill  3 
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation)  Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons  on 5 September 2017  (Bill 28)  
2 
2 Overview of the Bill 
 
1  The Bill seeks to limit exit payments made by public sector organisations to employees .  
2  The Treasury  has powers to  bring forward  regulations to limit such payments under Section 
153A of the Small Business Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 (as amended by Section  41 
of the Enterprise Act 2016). This Bill would require the Treasury  to lay draft regulations before 
Parliament on  or before 1st April 2019. The Bill makes provisi on to enable any restrictions 
introduced under the first such regulations to apply retrospectively to exit payments made on 
or after  1 April 2018.  
Policy background  
3  The 2015  Conservative Party manifesto proposed a  limit on exit paym ents for public sector  
workers.  On 23  May 2015 the Treasury issued a p ress release in support of the inclusion in the 
Enterprise Bill of a measure to implement that policy . The then Chief Secretary to the Treasury  
said “ We are delivering our manifesto commitment to end six figure pay offs for the best paid 
public sector workers ” and that “These reforms will ensure fairness and value for  money 
across the public sector” .  
4  Section 41 of the Enterprise Act inserted into the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment 
Act 2015 new sections 153A to 153C and gave effect to Schedule 6 of the Enterprise Act 2016 
which contained consequential and supplementary provisions.  This Bill is being brought 
forward to require the Government to introduce draft r egulations to limit public sector ex it 
payments, which it has the power to make  but has not yet done so.  
5  On 27 June 2017 , Sir Christopher Chope MP  asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer “ When the 
Government plans to bring forward secondary legislation to implement the policy of 
prohibiting ex it payments for public sector employees in England exceeding £95,000; and 
what steps he is taking to discoura ge such payments in the interim” (Question 1447) . The 
answer from the new Chief Secretary  to the Treasury,  of 6th July 2017 , was “The Government 
announced in 2015 that it intended to end six figure exit payments for public sector workers.  
We legislated for a £95,000 cap in the Enterprise Act 2016 and are currently in the process of 
drafting the necessary regulations.  In the interim the Government exp ects every part of the 
public sector to demonstrate that it is using public money efficiently and responsibly and to 
ensure that pay and terms are always proportionate, justifiable and deliver value f or money 
for tax payers” .  
6  This Bill was presented to the House of Commons on 5 September 2017 in order to help 
maintain pressure on the Government to implement exit payment limits . In a further question 
on 29 November 2017 to the Treasury (Question 116646) Sir Christopher Chope MP  enquired 
about the time table  to bring forward the secondary legislation.  In a response dated 4 
December 2017 , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury said that before laying the necessary 
regulations and to ensure the successful i mplementation of these changes “ We will bring 
forward a co nsultation in the first quarter of 2018 which will run for twelve weeks” .  
7  On 26 February 2018 the Sir Christopher Chope MP  asked , in Question 129888 , about the 
plans for the launch of the consultation . The response from the Chief Secretary to the 
Treasury , dated 1 March 2018 , was “ To ensure the successful implementation of these changes 
a consultation will be brought  forward in the next few months” . 
8  On 23 May 2018, Sir Christopher Chope MP  asked further questions regarding  when the 
process of drafting the regulations began and when the drafting was forecast to be completed.  
 
These Explanatory Notes relate to the Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation)  Bill as introduced in the House of 
Commons  on 5 September 2017  (Bill 28)  
3 
3 He also enquired as to the reasons why the consultation was not carried out in the first 
quarter of 2018.  In a response dated 4 June 2018 , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury said “ The 
Government remains committed to ending six figure pay outs in the public sector.  The 
regulations to implement the exit payment cap were drafted as part of the passage of the 
Enterprise Act 2016.  Since that time, they have undergone further iteration and wil l be 
completed following the outcome of the consultation and then laid in Parliament.  It is not 
possible to forecast the hours required to reflect the degree of changes which may be made to 
the draft regulations following the outcome of the consultation, w hich will necessarily depend 
on consultees’ views and the Government’s response to that consultation.  The consultation 
will seek views on the terms of the draft secondary legislation, including the detailed design 
of the exit payment cap and the list of bo dies to which the cap will apply” .  
Territorial extent and application  
9  This Bill applies to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.   
Commentary on provisions of Bill  
Clause 1 : duty of Treasury to make regulations  
10  Clause 1 requires the Trea sury to lay before Parliament draft regulations to limit public sector 
exit payments on or before 1 April 2019.  
Clause 2: application of regulation to payments already made  
11  Clause 2 enables the first regulations to limit exit payments to apply retrospectively to 
payments made on or after 1 April 2018.  
Commencement  
12  Clause 3 of the Bill states that its provisions would come into force on the day it is passed.  
Financial implications of the Bill  
13  In a Parliamentary answer on 4 June 2018 (Question 1 47306) the Chief Secretary to the 
Treasury said that from April 2015 to March 2016 there were 1,787 public sector exit payments 
of over £100,000 and 5,439 between £50,000 and £100,000.   
14  The Government’s impact assessment for the Enterprise Bill 2015 stated  that “Trends in exit 
payments over recent years suggest the cap could result in savings in the low hundreds of 
millions of pounds over the course of this Parliament. This is about ensuring tax payers get a 
fair deal”.   
 
 
 
Bill 28–EN 57/1 
 PUBLIC SECTOR EXIT P AYMENTS 
(LIMITATION) BILL   
EXPLANATORY NOTES  
These Explanatory Notes relate to the Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation)  Bill as introduced in 
the House of Commons  on 5 September 2017  (Bill 28).  
 
__________________________________________________________  
Ordered by the House of Commons  to be p rinted, 5 July 2018  
__________________________________________________________  
 
© Parliamentary copyright 2018  
 
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence which is 
published at www.parliament.uk/site -information/copyright  
 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORI TY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS



Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
PART 1 
MINISTERIAL STANDARDS 
1 Appointment  of the Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests 
2 The Ministerial  Code 
3 Functions  of the Independent  Adviser:  advice  on recording  relevant  interests 
under  the Ministerial  Code 
4 Functions  of the Independent  Adviser:  investigations 
5 Reports  of the Independent  Adviser 
PART 2 
PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
6 Appointment  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
7 Public  Appointments  Code 
8 Functions  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
9 Reports  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
PART 3 
STANDARDS IN PUBLIC LIFE 
10 Appointment  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
11 Functions  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
12 Reports  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
PART 4 
APPOINTMENTS TO THE HOUSE OF LORDS 
13 Appointment  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
14 Functions  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
15 Selection  of future  crossbenchers 
16 Advice  on the propriety  of nominations 
17 Reports  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
59/1 HL Bill 62 
PART 5 
BUSINESS APPOINTMENTS 
18 Appointment  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
19 Business  Appointment  Rules 
20 Functions  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
21 Specific  powers  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
22 Offences 
23 Bodies  corporate  and Scottish  partnerships 
24 Civil  penalties 
25 Notice  of intention  to impose  civil  penalty 
26 Imposition  of penalty 
27 Right  to appeal  against  imposition  of civil  penalty 
28 Civil  penalties  and criminal  proceedings 
29 Enforcement 
30 Further  provision  about  civil  penalties 
31 Guidance 
32 Charges 
33 Reports  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
PART 6 
FINAL PROVISIONS 
34 Interpretation 
35 Commencement 
36 Extent 
37 Short  title 
The Independent  Adviser  and the Commissioner  for Public 
Appointments Schedule  1 —  
Information  Powers  of the Independent  Adviser  and the 
Commissioner  for Public  Appointments Schedule  2 —  
Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public 
Appointments Schedule  3 —  
Specified  Employee  posts  which  are to be Public  Appointments Schedule  4 —  
The Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life,  House  of Lords 
Appointments  Commission,  and Commission  on Business 
Appointments Schedule  5 —  Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] ii 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  mechanisms  for promoting  and protecting  standards 
of integrity  and ethics  in the public  service;  to make  provision  about 
appointments  to the House  of Lords  and the House  of Lords  Appointments 
Commission;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
PART 1 
MINISTERIAL STANDARDS 
1 Appointment  of the Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests 
(1) 
5There  is to be an Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests 
(“the  Independent  Adviser”). 
(2) The Independent  Adviser  is to be appointed  by the Prime  Minister. 
(3) The Prime  Minister  must  make  the appointment  following  a selection  process 
as set out in Schedule  1. 
(4) Schedule  1 (which  is about  the Independent  Adviser)  has effect. 
10 2 The Ministerial  Code 
(1) The Prime  Minister  must  publish  the Ministerial  Code,  which  must  set out 
the standards  of conduct  expected  of Ministers  based  on the Principles  of 
Public  Life. 
(2) 
15The Prime  Minister  must  keep  the Ministerial  Code  under  review  and revise 
it from  time  to time. 
(3) In preparing  or revising  the Ministerial  Code,  the Prime  Minister  must  publish 
a draft  of the Code. 
59/1 HL Bill 62 1 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 1—Ministerial  standards 
(4) The Prime  Minister  must  consult  the Independent  Adviser,  and the appropriate 
committee  of the House  of Commons,  about  the draft  Code  or revisions  to 
the Code. 
(5) 
5The Prime  Minister  must  lay the Ministerial  Code,  and any revised  versions 
of the Code,  before  Parliament. 
(6) Compliance  with  the Ministerial  Code  must  be monitored,  audited  and 
reported  on by the Independent  Adviser. 
3 Functions  of the Independent  Adviser:  advice  on recording  relevant  interests 
under  the Ministerial  Code 
10 (1) The Independent  Adviser  must  prepare  and publish  a list recording  the 
relevant  interests  of Ministers  at least  twice  a year. 
(2) Relevant  interests  include  all those  interests  which  might  conflict,  or might 
appear  to conflict,  with  a Minister’s  public  duties. 
(3) 
15Such  interests  may  include  financial  interests,  shareholdings,  directorships, 
pensions,  property,  affiliations  with  charities  and non-profit  organisations, 
and recent  previous  employment. 
(4) Relevant  interests  may  include  the interests  of a spouse  or partner,  and of 
the parents,  children,  grandchildren  or siblings  of a Minister. 
(5) 
20A Minister  must,  within  14 days  of appointment  to each  new  office,  provide 
to the Independent  Adviser  a full list of interests  which  might  give  rise to a 
conflict  with  the Minister’s  public  duties. 
(6) A Minister  must  provide  the Independent  Adviser  with  any other  information 
which  the Independent  Adviser  reasonably  requires. 
(7) 
25The Independent  Adviser  must  review  any information  provided  by a Minister 
and may,  in confidence,  provide  advice  to that Minister  on any action  that 
should  be taken  by the Minister  in order  to avoid  a conflict,  or the appearance 
of a conflict  of interest. 
(8) A Minister  must  provide  the Independent  Adviser  with  a record  of what 
action  has been  taken  in response  to the advice. 
30 (9) The Independent  Adviser  may  require  a Minister  to publish  information 
relating  to adherence  to the Ministerial  Code. 
(10) Schedule  2 (about  the powers  of the Independent  Adviser  to require 
information)  has effect. 
4 Functions  of the Independent  Adviser:  investigations 
35 (1) If requested  to do so by the Prime  Minister,  the Independent  Adviser  must 
investigate  conduct  that is potentially  contrary  to the Ministerial  Code. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 2 
Part 1—Ministerial  standards 
(2) In any other  case,  the Independent  Adviser  may  investigate  conduct  where 
it appears  to the Adviser  that a Minister  may  have  acted  contrary  to the 
Ministerial  Code. 
(3) 
5The Independent  Adviser  must  report  the result  of an investigation  to the 
Prime  Minister,  and may  advise  whether  there  has been  a breach  of the 
Ministerial  Code. 
(4) If the Prime  Minister  determines  that there  has been  a breach  of the Ministerial 
Code,  the Independent  Adviser  may  recommend  in confidence  to the Prime 
Minister  what  sanction  should  be considered  as a result. 
10 (5) The decision  on whether  a Minister  remains  in office  is for the Prime  Minister, 
as the ultimate  judge  of the standards  of behaviour  expected  of a Minister 
and the appropriate  consequences  of a breach  of those  standards. 
(6) Following  an investigation,  the Independent  Adviser  may  require  that any 
15advice  provided  to the Prime  Minister  on the result  of the investigation  is 
published  in a timely  manner. 
5 Reports  of the Independent  Adviser 
(1) The Independent  Adviser  must  prepare  an annual  report  on the performance 
of their  functions,  which  must— 
(a) 
20set out information  about  the work  carried  out by the Independent 
Adviser  during  the year,  and 
(b) include  observations  on matters  relating  to the role of the Independent 
Adviser. 
(2) The Independent  Adviser  must  publish  the annual  report  on their  website, 
25and give  a copy  of the report  to the Prime  Minister,  who  must  lay the report 
before  Parliament. 
PART 2 
PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
6 Appointment  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
(1) There  is to be a Commissioner  for Public  Appointments  (“the  Commissioner”). 
30 (2) His Majesty  may  appoint  a person  as the Commissioner  on the 
recommendation  of the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office. 
(3) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  make  a recommendation  following 
a selection  process  as set out in Schedule  1. 
7 Public  Appointments  Code 
35 (1) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  publish  the Public  Appointments 
Code  (“the  Code”),  which  must  set out the Principles  of Public  Appointments 1 
and the process  for public  appointments  made  to bodies  listed  in Schedules 3 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 2—Public  appointments 
3 (bodies  and offices  regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments) 
and 4 (specified  employee  posts  which  are to be public  appointments). 
(2) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  keep  the Code  under  review  and 
revise  it from  time  to time. 
5 (3) In preparing  or revising  the Code,  the Minister  must  publish  a draft  of the 
Code. 
(4) The Minister  must  consult  the Commissioner,  and the appropriate  committee 
of the House  of Commons,  about  the draft  Code  or revisions  to the Code. 
(5) 
10The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  lay the Code,  and any revised 
versions  of the Code,  before  Parliament. 
(6) Compliance  with  the Code  must  be monitored,  audited  and reported  on by 
the Commissioner. 
(7) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  may  by regulations  amend  Schedule  3 
15(bodies  and offices  regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments) 
or Schedule  4 (specified  employee  posts  which  are to be public  appointments) 
to add a reference  to any body  or the holder  of any office  which  (in either 
case)  is not for the time  being  listed  in the Schedule. 
(8) A statutory  instrument  containing  an order  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
20 (9) Schedule  3 and Schedule  4 have  effect. 
8 Functions  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
(1) The Commissioner  must  exercise  their  functions  under  this Act with  the object 
of ensuring  that appointing  authorities  act in accordance  with  the Code, 
including  the Principles  of Public  Appointments. 
25 (2) The Commissioner  must,  in any manner  they  think  fit, carry  out an audit  of 
the procedures  and practices  followed  in connection  with  making  public 
appointments,  including  the interpretation  and application  of the Code,  and 
the Principles  of Public  Appointments. 
(3) 
30Procedures  and practices  include  those  followed  by the appointing  authority 
or by any panel  or other  person  appointed  to advise  the appointing  authority 
in relation  to the public  appointment. 
(4) The Commissioner  may  conduct  an investigation  into any aspect  of public 
appointments  with  the object  of improving  their  quality. 
(5) 
35The Commissioner  may  conduct  an inquiry  into the procedures  and practices 
followed  by an appointing  authority  in relation  to any public  appointment 
whether  in response  to a complaint  or otherwise. 
(6) The Commissioner  may  require  appointing  authorities  to publish  specified 
summary  information  relating  to public  appointments. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 4 
Part 2—Public  appointments 
(7) Appointing  authorities  must  provide  the Commissioner  with  any information 
the Commissioner  reasonably  requires. 
(8) The Commissioner  must  report  the result  of an audit,  investigation  or inquiry 
to the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office. 
5 (9) The Commissioner  may  publish  the report  of an audit,  investigation  or inquiry 
after  it has been  submitted  to the Minister. 
(10) Schedule  2 makes  provision  about  the Commissioner’s  powers  to require 
information. 
9 Reports  of the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
10 (1) The Commissioner  must,  as soon  as practicable  after  the end of each  financial 
year,  prepare  an annual  report  on public  appointments. 
(2) The Commissioner  must  publish  the annual  report  on their  website,  and give 
a copy  of the report  to the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office,  who  must  lay the 
report  before  Parliament. 
15 PART 3 
STANDARDS IN PUBLIC LIFE 
10 Appointment  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
(1) There  is to be a Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life (“the  CSPL”). 
(2) The CSPL  is to consist  of eight  members. 
20 (3) One of those  is to be the Chair  of the Commission,  appointed  under  Schedule 
5. 
(4) Four  Commissioners  (“the  independent  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
(5) 
25Three  Commissioners  (“the  political  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
(6) Schedule  5 (which  is about  the CSPL)  has effect. 
11 Functions  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
(1) The CSPL  has the following  functions— 
(a) 
30to keep  under  review  the standards  of conduct  of all those  working 
in public  service,  and make  recommendations  as to any changes  which 
might  be required  to ensure  the highest  standards  in public  life, 
(b) to ensure  that the system  for regulating  conduct  in public  life is 
transparent  and comprehensible,  including  by providing  a website 
35portal  that explains  what  the different  ethical  regulators  do and how 
they  relate  to each  other, 5 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 3—Standards  in public  life 
(c) to convene  regular  meetings  of the other  ethical  regulators  at least 
four  times  a year,  to share  best practice,  identify  common  problems, 
and listen  to their  concerns,  and 
(d) 
5to be a collective  voice  for the other  ethical  regulators,  as part of its 
wider  role in upholding  standards  in public  life. 
(2) “Ethical  regulators”  are defined  in section  34. 
(3) Those  working  in public  service  includes  all elected  and appointed  officials, 
the civil service,  local  government,  the armed  forces,  the health  service,  judges 
and court  officials,  the police  and all other  public  bodies. 
10 (4) The CSPL  may  not investigate  individual  complaints,  or inquire  into concerns 
about  an individual  person’s  conduct. 
12 Reports  of the Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life 
(1) The CSPL  must  prepare  an annual  report  on its activities,  and publish  the 
report  on its website. 
15 (2) The CSPL  must  give  a copy  of the report  to the Minister  for the Cabinet 
Office,  who  must  lay the report  before  Parliament. 
PART 4 
APPOINTMENTS TO THE HOUSE OF LORDS 
13 Appointment  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
20 (1) There  is to be a House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  (“HOLAC”). 
(2) HOLAC  is to consist  of seven  members. 
(3) One of those  is to be the Chair  of HOLAC  appointed  under  Schedule  5. 
(4) Three  Commissioners  (“the  independent  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
25 (5) Three  Commissioners  (“the  political  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
(6) Schedule  5 makes  further  provision  about  HOLAC. 
14 Functions  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
(1) HOLAC  has two main  functions— 
30 (a) to select  and nominate  suitable  people  to sit on the crossbenches  in 
the House  of Lords,  and 
(b) to advise  the Prime  Minister  about  the probity  and suitability  of all 
people  nominated  to sit in the House  of Lords,  including  those 
nominated  by the political  parties. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 6 
Part 4—Appointments  to the House  of Lords 
(2) In selecting  people  to sit on the crossbenches,  and in advising  the Prime 
Minister  about  the suitability  of people  nominated  to sit in the House  of 
Lords,  HOLAC  must  have  regard  to increasing  the diversity  of the House  of 
Lords,  as defined  in section  17(2)(b). 
5 15 Selection  of future  crossbenchers 
(1) HOLAC  must— 
(a) at least  once  a year,  invite  applications  from  and nominations  of people 
to be considered  as candidates  to sit on the crossbenches  in the House 
of Lords, 
10 (b) maintain  a list of suitable  candidates,  following  competition  based  on 
merit  and their  ability  to make  a significant  contribution  to the work 
of the House,  and 
(c) submit  such  number  of suitable  names  to the Prime  Minister  each 
calendar  year  and at such  timing  as the Prime  Minister  may  determine. 
15 (2) The Prime  Minister  must  appoint  a minimum  of two candidates  in each 
calendar  year  from  the list of suitable  candidates  submitted  to the Prime 
Minister  by HOLAC  under  subsection  (1)(c). 
(3) In addition  to appointments  under  subsection  (2), the Prime  Minister  may  in 
20any one Parliament  nominate  up to ten former  public  servants  to sit on the 
crossbenches. 
16 Advice  on the propriety  of nominations 
(1) HOLAC  must— 
(a) make  inquiries  about  the probity  of all people  nominated  for peerages, 
25based  on their  standing  in the community  and with  the regulatory 
authorities,  and the risk that their  past conduct  might  bring  the House 
of Lords  into disrepute, 
(b) require  those  nominating  candidates  for peerages  to submit  a written 
statement  in support  of the nomination, 
(c) 
30require  the nominee  to submit  a written  statement  about  their  potential 
contribution  to the work  of the House  of Lords,  and 
(d) advise  the Prime  Minister  about  the probity  and suitability  of each 
nominee. 
(2) If HOLAC  advises  against  an appointment,  the Prime  Minister  may  not 
proceed  with  recommending  that appointment  to His Majesty. 
35 17 Reports  of the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission 
(1) HOLAC  must  prepare  an annual  report  on its activities,  and publish  the 
report  on its website. 
(2) The annual  report  must  include— 7 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 4—Appointments  to the House  of Lords 
(a) information  about  nominations  to the crossbenches,  and inquiries  made 
and advice  submitted  about  the propriety  and suitability  of other 
nominees,  and 
(b) 
5an analysis  of diversity  in the House  of Lords,  to include  diversity  of 
professional  experience,  geographic  diversity,  and gender  and ethnic 
diversity. 
(3) HOLAC  must  give  a copy  of the report  to the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office, 
who  must  lay the report  before  Parliament. 
PART 5 
10 BUSINESS APPOINTMENTS 
18 Appointment  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
(1) There  is to be a Commission  on Business  Appointments  (“COBA”). 
(2) COBA  is to consist  of nine  members. 
(3) One of those  is to be the Chair  of COBA  appointed  under  Schedule  5. 
15 (4) Five  Commissioners  (“the  independent  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
(5) Three  Commissioners  (“the  political  members”)  are to be appointed  under 
Schedule  5. 
(6) Schedule  5 makes  further  provision  about  COBA. 
20 19 Business  Appointment  Rules 
(1) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  publish  the Business  Appointment 
Rules  (“the  Rules”),  which  may  impose  restrictions  on the future  employment 
of ministers,  civil  servants  and Crown  servants  to ensure  no conflicts  of 
interest  arise. 
25 (2) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  keep  the Rules  under  review  and 
revise  them  from  time  to time. 
(3) In preparing  or revising  the Rules,  the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must 
consult  COBA,  and the appropriate  committee  of the House  of Commons. 
(4) The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  lay the Rules  before  Parliament. 
30 (5) COBA  must  ensure  compliance  with  the Rules. 
20 Functions  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
COBA  has the following  functions— 
(a) to consider  requests  from  former  ministers,  senior  civil  servants  and 
35Crown  servants  at the level  of SCS3  and above  (“applicants”)  to take 
up appointments  after  leaving  government  service, Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 8 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
(b) to monitor  and audit  the implementation  of the Rules  by government 
departments  to civil  servants  below  the level  of SCS3,  and 
(c) to provide  training  to government  departments  about  the Rules  and 
their  application. 
5 21 Specific  powers  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
(1) COBA  may— 
(a) require  applicants  not to take up an appointment, 
(b) impose  conditions  to reduce  the risk of conflicts  of interest, 
(c) impose  penalties  in the event  of non-compliance,  and 
10 (d) seek  injunctions  to prevent  or to terminate  an appointment,  or to 
ensure  compliance  with  conditions. 
(2) COBA  may  exercise  these  powers  in relation  to the applicants,  or their 
prospective  or actual  employers. 
22 Offences 
15 (1) If a person  fails to comply  with  any prohibition  on an appointment,  or 
conditions  imposed  by COBA  in relation  to an appointment,  an offence  is 
committed  by— 
(a) the person,  and 
(b) 
20any person,  partnership  or body  corporate  employing  that person,  or 
offering  to employ  that person. 
(2) It is a defence  for a person  charged  under  subsection  (1) to show  that the 
person  exercised  all due diligence  to avoid  committing  the offence. 
(3) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  subsection  (1) is liable— 
(a) 
25on summary  conviction  in Scotland  or Northern  Ireland,  to a fine not 
exceeding  the statutory  maximum; 
(b) on summary  conviction  in England  and Wales,  or on conviction  on 
indictment,  to a fine. 
(4) Proceedings  for an offence  under  this Part may  be instituted— 
(a) 
30in England  and Wales,  only  by or with  the consent  of the Director  of 
Public  Prosecutions; 
(b) in Northern  Ireland,  only  by or with  the consent  of the Director  of 
Public  Prosecutions  for Northern  Ireland. 
23 Bodies  corporate  and Scottish  partnerships 
(1) 
35Where  an offence  under  this Part is committed  by a body  corporate  and is 
proved— 
(a) to have  been  committed  with  the consent  or connivance  of a director, 
manager,  secretary  or other  similar  officer,  or 
(b) to be attributable  to any neglect  on the part of any such  individual, 9 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
the individual  as well  as the body  corporate  is guilty  of the offence  and is 
liable  to be proceeded  against  and punished  accordingly. 
(2) Where  the affairs  of a body  corporate  are managed  by its members,  subsection 
5(1) applies  in relation  to the acts and omissions  of a member  in connection 
with  that management  as if the member  were  a director  of the body  corporate. 
(3) Where  an offence  under  this Part is committed  by a partnership  constituted 
under  the law of Scotland  and is proved— 
(a) to have  been  committed  with  the consent  or connivance  of a partner, 
or 
10 (b) to be attributable  to any neglect  on the part of any such  individual, 
the individual  as well  as the partnership  is guilty  of the offence  and is liable 
to be proceeded  against  and punished  accordingly. 
24 Civil  penalties 
(1) 
15COBA  may  impose  a civil  penalty  on a person  (in accordance  with  sections 
25 and 26) if COBA  is satisfied  that the person’s  conduct  amounts  to an 
offence  under  subsection  (1) of section  22. 
(2) For this purpose— 
(a) section  22(2) (defence  of due diligence)  is to be ignored,  and 
(b) a person’s  conduct  includes  a failure  to act. 
20 25 Notice  of intention  to impose  civil  penalty 
(1) Before  imposing  a civil  penalty  on a person,  COBA  must  serve  on that person 
a notice  stating  that COBA  proposes  to impose  the penalty. 
(2) The notice  must— 
(a) 
25set out the conduct  on which  the proposal  to impose  the penalty  is 
based, 
(b) set out the reasons  why  COBA  is satisfied  that the person  has engaged 
in that conduct, 
(c) state  the amount  of the proposed  penalty,  and 
(d) 
30inform  the person  that the person  may,  within  a period  specified  in 
the notice,  make  written  representations  in relation  to the proposal. 
(3) COBA  must  not impose  the penalty  before  the end of the period  specified 
under  subsection  (2)(d). 
(4) COBA  must  consider  any written  representations  received  before  the end of 
that period. 
35 26 Imposition  of penalty 
(1) If COBA  decides  to impose  a civil  penalty,  COBA  must  serve  on the person 
a notice  to that effect  (a “penalty  notice”). 
(2) The notice  must— Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 10 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
(a) set out the conduct  on which  the decision  to impose  the penalty  is 
based, 
(b) set out the reasons  why  COBA  is satisfied  that the person  has engaged 
in that conduct, 
5 (c) state  the amount  of the penalty, 
(d) specify  the period  within  which  and the form  in which  the penalty 
must  be paid,  and 
(e) contain  particulars  of the right  to appeal  under  section  27. 
(3) The amount  specified  in a penalty  notice  must  not exceed  £7,500. 
10 (4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument 
amend  subsection  (3) by substituting  a different  maximum  figure. 
(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
(6) 
15The period  specified  under  subsection  (2)(d) must  not end before  the end of 
the period  within  which  an appeal  under  section  27 can be brought. 
(7) The person  must  pay the amount  before  the end of that period  (but this is 
subject  to section  27(2)). 
(8) Where  a penalty  notice  has been  served  on a person,  COBA  may  vary  or 
cancel  it by serving  written  notice  to that effect  on the person. 
20 27 Right  to appeal  against  imposition  of civil  penalty 
(1) A person  on whom  a penalty  notice  has been  served  under  this Act may 
appeal  to the Tribunal  against— 
(a) the decision  to impose  the penalty; 
(b) if the penalty  notice  has been  varied,  the decision  to vary  it; 
25 (c) the amount  of the penalty. 
(2) If an appeal  is brought  under  this section , the person  is not required  to pay 
the penalty  until  the date  on which  the appeal  is finally  determined  or 
withdrawn. 
(3) 
30The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
provision  for and in connection  with  the determination  of appeals  under  this 
section . 
(4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
28 Civil  penalties  and criminal  proceedings 
35 (1) COBA  may  not impose  a civil penalty  on a person  in respect  of any conduct— 
(a) at any time  after  criminal  proceedings  for an offence  under  this Part 
have  been  instituted  against  the person  in respect  of that conduct  and 
before  those  proceedings  have  been  concluded,  or 11 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
(b) after  the person  has been  convicted  of an offence  under  this Part in 
respect  of that conduct. 
(2) If COBA  has imposed  a civil  penalty  on a person  in respect  of any conduct, 
5the person  may  not be convicted  of an offence  under  this Part in respect  of 
that conduct. 
29 Enforcement 
(1) An amount  payable  to COBA  as a civil  penalty  may  be recovered  by COBA 
as a debt. 
(2) 
10In proceedings  for the enforcement  of a civil  penalty  no question  may  be 
raised  as to— 
(a) liability  to the imposition  of the penalty,  or 
(b) the amount  of the penalty. 
(3) COBA  must  pay into the Consolidated  Fund  any sums  received  by virtue  of 
a penalty  notice. 
15 30 Further  provision  about  civil  penalties 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  make 
further  provision  about  civil  penalties;  and in particular  may— 
(a) specify  circumstances  in which  a penalty  may  not be imposed; 
(b) specify  steps  that COBA  must  take before  imposing  a penalty; 
20 (c) set a minimum  for the period  which  must  be specified  under  section 
25(2)(d) or 26(2)(d); 
(d) require  other  matters  to be specified  in a notice  under  either  of those 
sections; 
(e) 
25specify  a maximum  period  that may  elapse  between  the service  of a 
notice  under  section  25 and the service  of a penalty  notice  under 
section  26; 
(f) provide  for the reviewing  of a decision  to impose  a penalty; 
(g) make  provision  about  the variation  or cancellation  under  section  26(8) 
of penalty  notices; 
30 (h) impose  duties  on COBA  about  the keeping  of accounts  and other 
records  in relation  to penalties; 
(i) allow  for the charging  of interest,  or an additional  penalty,  if a penalty 
is paid  late. 
(2) 
35A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
31 Guidance 
(1) COBA  may  give guidance  about  how  COBA  proposes  to exercise  the functions 
under  this Part. 
(2) COBA  may  do so, in particular,  by publishing  guidance— Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 12 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
(a) as to cases  which  COBA  would,  or would  not, regard  as falling  within 
any of the restrictions  in the Business  Appointment  Rules; 
(b) as to the circumstances  in which  COBA  would  consider  it appropriate 
to impose  a civil  penalty; 
5 (c) about  how  the amount  of a civil  penalty  will be determined. 
(3) COBA  may  publish— 
(a) revisions  to any guidance  published  under  this section ; 
(b) replacement  guidance. 
(4) Publication  under  this section  is to be— 
10 (a) on a website,  and 
(b) in such  other  form  or forms  as COBA  considers  appropriate. 
32 Charges 
(1) COBA  may  impose  charges  for or in connection  with  the making  of 
applications  to COBA. 
15 (2) The charges  are to be determined  by or in accordance  with  regulations  made 
by the Secretary  of State  by statutory  instrument. 
(3) In making  the regulations,  the Secretary  of State  must  seek  to ensure  that the 
total  paid  to COBA  in charges  is sufficient  to offset  the total  of the costs 
20incurred  by COBA  in exercising  the functions  under  this Part (whether  or 
not those  costs  are directly  connected  with  considering  applications). 
(4) If a charge  imposed  for making  an application  to COBA  is not paid,  COBA 
may  treat  the application  as not having  been  made. 
(5) COBA  must  pay into the Consolidated  Fund  any sums  received  in respect  of 
charges  under  this section . 
25 (6) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this section  is subject  to 
annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
33 Reports  of the Commission  on Business  Appointments 
(1) COBA  must  prepare  an annual  report  on its activities. 
(2) The annual  report  must  include— 
30 (a) information  about  the applications  received  by COBA,  and their 
outcome; 
(b) an audit  of the implementation  of the Rules  by government 
departments. 
(3) 
35COBA  must  publish  the report  on their  website,  and give  a copy  of the report 
to the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office,  who  must  lay a copy  of the report 
before  Parliament. 13 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Part 5—Business  appointments 
PART 6 
FINAL PROVISIONS 
34 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
5 “Appointing  authority”  means  the person  with  the power  to make  a 
public  appointment  listed  in Schedule  3 or Schedule  4, or where  the 
appointment  is made  by His Majesty,  the person  with  power  to make 
the recommendation  to His Majesty; 
10“Appropriate  committee  of the House  of Commons”  means  the select 
committee  which  for the time  being  scrutinises  the work  of the Cabinet 
Office; 
“Ethical  regulators”  means  the Commission  on Business  Appointments, 
Civil  Service  Commission,  Commissioner  for Public  Appointments, 
15Comptroller  and Auditor  General,  Electoral  Commission,  Equality  and 
Human  Rights  Commission,  House  of Lords  Appointments 
Commission,  Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests, 
Information  Commissioner,  Independent  Parliamentary  Standards 
Authority,  Lords  Commissioner  for Standards,  Parliamentary  and 
20Health  Service  Ombudsman,  Parliamentary  Standards  Commissioner, 
Registrar  of Consultant  Lobbyists,  UK Statistics  Authority; 
“The  Principles  of Public  Appointments”  are ministerial  responsibility, 
selflessness,  integrity,  merit,  openness,  diversity,  assurance  and fairness, 
as detailed  in section  2 of the Governance  Code  on Public 
Appointments  published  on 8 February  2024; 
25 “The  Principles  of Public  Life”  are those  first published  by the Committee 
on Standards  in Public  Life on 31 May  1995,  and any subsequent 
revisions  of the Principles. 
35 Commencement 
(1) This  section  come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
30 (2) The remaining  provisions  of this Act come  into force  at the end of the period 
of three  months  beginning  with  the day on which  it is passed. 
36 Extent 
This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
37 Short  title 
35 This  Act may  be cited  as the Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and 
Independence)  Act 2025. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 14 
Part 6—Final  provisions 
SCHEDULES 
SCHEDULE  1 
THE INDEPENDENT ADVISER AND THE COMMISSIONER FOR PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
Application  to Independent  Adviser  and Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
5 1 The provisions  of this Schedule  apply  equally  to the Independent  Adviser 
and the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments,  except  where  stated 
otherwise.  In this Schedule  they  are referred  to as “the office  holder”. 
2 In this Schedule , “the office  holder”  means— 
(a) 
10as this Schedule  applies  to the Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’ 
Conduct  and Interests,  that Adviser,  and 
(b) as it applies  to the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments,  that 
Commissioner. 
Appointment  process 
3 
15A person’s  selection  for recommendation  as the office  holder  must  be on 
merit  on the basis  of fair and open  competition. (1) 
(2) A person’s  selection  as the office  holder  must  be in accordance  with  the 
process  for significant  appointments  as set out in the Public  Appointments 
Code,  with  a majority  of independent  members  on the assessment  panel 
and a senior  independent  panel  member. 
20 Terms  and conditions  of appointment 
4 A person  appointed  as the office  holder  holds  office— 
(a) for a single  non-renewable  term  of five years  from  the date  of 
appointment,  and 
(b) 
25in accordance  with  terms  and conditions  (including  as to 
remuneration  and pension)  specified  by the Minister  for the Cabinet 
Office. 
5 The office  holder  may  resign  from  office  by giving  written  notice  to the 
Prime  Minister. (1) 
(2) 
30The office  holder  may  be removed  from  office  by the Prime  Minister  in 
pursuance  of an Address  from  the House  of Commons,  pursuant  to a report 
of the appropriate  committee  of the House  of Commons  as defined  in its 
Standing  Orders  presented  to the House  of Commons  stating  that the 
committee  is satisfied  that one or more  of the following  grounds  is made 
out— 
35 (a) the office  holder  has failed  to discharge  the functions  of their  office 
for a continuous  period  of at least  three  months; 15 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  1—The  Independent  Adviser  and the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
(b) the office  holder  has failed  to comply  with  the terms  of their 
appointment; 
(c) the office  holder  has been  convicted  of a criminal  offence;  (d) the 
5office  holder  is otherwise  unfit  to hold  their  office  or unable  to carry 
out its functions. 
Additional  functions  of the office  holder 
6 The Prime  Minister  and the office  holder  may  agree  that the office  holder 
is to carry  out functions  in addition  to those  under  the other  provisions  of 
this Schedule . (1) 
10 (2) The office  holder  is to carry  out those  additional  functions  accordingly. 
General  powers  of the office  holder 
7 The office  holder  may  do anything  calculated  to facilitate,  or incidental  or 
conducive  to, the Powers  of delegation  carrying  out of any of their  functions. 
Powers  of delegation 
15 8 The office  holder  may  delegate  functions,  powers  and duties  to— (1) 
(a) a member  of the office  holder’s  staff,  or 
(b) any other  person. 
(2) A delegation  does  not prevent  the office  holder  from  doing  anything 
personally. 
20 (3) A delegation  does  not prevent  the office  holder’s  functions,  powers  and 
duties  from  remaining  the responsibility  of the office  holder. 
Financial  provision  for the office  holders 
9 The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  pay to the office  holder  the sums 
25determined  by the Minister  as appropriate  for, or in connection  with,  the 
carrying  out of the office  holder’s  functions. 
Arrangements  for assistance  to the officer  holders 
10 The office  holder  may  make  arrangements  with  other  persons  for the 
provision  of assistance  to the office  holders. (1) 
(2) 
30In particular,  arrangements  may  be made  with  the Minister  for the Cabinet 
Office  for civil  servants  to provide  assistance. 
Status  of the office  holder 
11 The office  holder  is a corporation  sole. (1) 
(2) The office  holder  is not to be regarded— 
(a) as the servant  or agent  of the Crown,  or 
35 (b) as enjoying  any status,  immunity  or privilege  of the Crown. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 16 
Schedule  1—The  Independent  Adviser  and the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Documentary  evidence 
12 The application  of the office  holder's  seal is to be authenticated  by the 
signature  of any of the following— (1) 
(a) the office  holder; 
5 (b) a member  of the office  holder’s  staff; 
(c) any person  authorised  (whether  generally  or specifically)  for the 
purpose  by the office  holder. 
(2) A document  purporting  to be duly  executed  under  the office  holder's  seal 
or signed  on their  behalf— 
10 (a) is to be received  in evidence,  and 
(b) is to be taken  to be executed  or signed  in that way,  unless  the 
contrary  is proved. 
(3) This  paragraph  does  not extend  to Scotland. 
Amendment  of other  enactments 
15 13 In Part VI of Schedule  1 to the Freedom  of Information  Act 2000  (other 
public  bodies  and offices  which  are public  authorities),  at the appropriate 
place  insert  “The Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests ”. 
14 In Schedule  2 to the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967  (departments 
20and authorities  subject  to investigation),  at the appropriate  places  insert 
“The Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests”  and “The 
Commissioner  for Public  Appointments ”. 
15 In Schedule  1 to the Public  Records  Act 1958  (definition  of public  records) 
at the appropriate  places  in Part 2 (other  establishments  and organisations) 
25insert  “The Independent  Adviser  on Ministers’  Conduct  and Interests”  and 
“The  Commissioner  for Public  Appointments ”. 
SCHEDULE  2 
INFORMATION POWERS OF THE INDEPENDENT ADVISER AND THE COMMISSIONER FOR 
PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
1 
30The Independent  Adviser  and the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
may  require  a person— (1) 
(a) to provide  documents  in the person’s  possession  or control; 
(b) to provide  other  information  in the person’s  possession  or control. 
(2) A requirement  is imposed  by giving  a written  notice  specifying— 
(a) to whom  the information  is to be provided; 
35 (b) where  it is to be provided; 
(c) when,  or the time  by which,  it is to be provided; 
(d) the form  and manner  in which  it is to be provided. 17 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  2—Information  Powers  of the Independent  Adviser  and the Commissioner  for Public 
Appointments 
(3) A notice  must  also explain  the possible  consequences  of failing  to comply. 
(4) A person  may  not be required  under  this paragraph  to do anything  that 
the person  could  not be compelled  to do in civil  proceedings  before— 
(a) the High  Court  in England  and Wales  or Northern  Ireland,  or 
5 (b) the Court  of Session  in Scotland. 
2 It is an offence  for a person  intentionally  to fail to comply  with  a 
requirement  under  this Schedule . (1) 
(2) It is a defence  for a person  charged  with  that offence  to prove  that there 
was a reasonable  excuse  for the person’s  failure. 
10 3 It is an offence  for a person  knowingly  to provide  false  information  in 
response  to a requirement  under  this Schedule . 
4 A person  guilty  of an offence  under  this Schedule  is liable— 
(a) on summary  conviction,  to a fine not exceeding  the statutory 
maximum; 
15 (b) on conviction  on indictment,  to a fine. 
SCHEDULE  3 
BODIES AND OFFICES REGULATED BY THE COMMISSIONER FOR PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
Attorney  General’s  Office 
Her Majesty’s  Crown  Prosecution  Service  Inspectorate 
20 Department  for Business,  Energy  and Industrial  Strategy 
Advisory,  Conciliation  and Arbitration  Service 
British  Business  Bank,  Chair  only 
British  Hallmarking  Council 
Central  Arbitration  Committee 
25 Certification  Officer 
Civil  Nuclear  Police  Authority 
Coal  Authority 
Committee  on Climate  Change 
Committee  on Fuel  Poverty 
30 Committee  on Radioactive  Waste  Management 
Competition  and Markets  Authority  Board 
Competition  Appeal  Tribunal 
Competition  Service  Electricity  Settlements  Company  Ltd, Chair  and Senior 
Independent  Director  only Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 18 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Financial  Reporting  Council 
Gas and Electricity  Markets  Authority 
Groceries  Code  Adjudicator 
Labour  Market  Enforcement  Director 
5 Land  Registry 
Low  Carbon  Contracts  Company  Ltd, Chair  and Senior  Independent  Director 
only 
Low  Pay Commission 
National  Nuclear  Laboratory 
10 National  Physical  Laboratory  (NPL)  Management  Ltd, Chair  only 
Nuclear  Decommissioning  Authority 
Nuclear  Liabilities  Fund 
Oil and Gas Authority,  Chair  only 
Ordnance  Survey,  Chair  only 
15 Post  Office  Ltd, Chair  only 
Pubs  Code  Adjudicator  and Deputy  Pubs  Code  Adjudicator 
Regulatory  Policy  Committee 
Small  Business  Commissioner 
UK Atomic  Energy  Authority 
20 UK Research  and Innovation 
Cabinet  Office 
Advisory  Committee  on Business  Appointments,  excluding  political  members 
Boundary  Commission  for England 
Boundary  Commission  for Wales 
25 Civil  Service  Pensions  Board 
Committee  on Standards  in Public  Life,  excluding  political  appointments 
Equality  and Human  Rights  Commission 
House  of Lords  Appointment  Commission,  excluding  political  members 
Office  of the Registrar  of Consultant  Lobbyists 
30 Security  Vetting  Appeals  Panel 
Senior  Salaries  Review  Body 
UK Statistics  Authority  Board 
Department  for Digital,  Culture,  Media  and Sport 
The Advisory  Council  on National  Records  and Archives 19 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Arts  Council  England 
Big Lottery  Fund  (The  National  Lottery  Community  Fund) 
Birmingham  Organising  Committee  for the 2022  Commonwealth  Games  Ltd 
British  Broadcasting  Corporation 
5 British  Film  Institute 
British  Library 
British  Museum 
Charity  Commission  for England  and Wales 
Gambling  Commission 
10 Geffrye  Museum 
Historic  Buildings  and Monuments  Commission  for England 
Historic  Royal  Palaces 
Horniman  Public  Museum  and Public  Park  Trust 
Horserace  Betting  Levy  Board 
15 Imperial  War  Museum 
Information  Commissioner 
National  Citizen  Service  Trust 
National  Gallery 
20National  Heritage  Memorial  Fund/Heritage  Lottery  Fund  (The  National  Lottery 
Heritage  Fund) 
National  Museums  Liverpool 
National  Portrait  Gallery 
Natural  History  Museum 
Office  of Communications  (OFCOM) 
25 Reviewing  Committee  on the Export  of Works  of Art and Objects  of Cultural 
Interest 
Royal  Armouries 
Royal  Museums  Greenwich 
Science  Museum  Group 
30 Sianel  Pedwar  Cymru  (S4C) 
Sport  England 
Sports  Grounds  Safety  Authority 
Tate 
The Royal  Parks Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 20 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Theatres  Trust 
Treasure  Valuation  Committee 
UK Sport 
United  Kingdom  Anti-Doping  Ltd 
5 Victoria  and Albert  Museum 
VisitBritain 
VisitEngland 
Wallace  Collection 
Department  for Education 
10 Adoption  and Special  Guardianship  Leadership  Board,  Chair  only 
Child  Safeguarding  Practice  Review  Panel 
Children’s  Commissioner  for England 
Construction  Industry  Training  Board 
Engineering  Construction  Industry  Training  Board 
15 Film  Industry  Training  Board 
Further  Education  Commissioner’s  Office,  Further  Education  Commissioner 
and Deputy  Further 
Education  Commissioner  only 
His Majesty’s  Chief  Inspector  of Education,  Children’s  Services  and Skills 
20 Independent  Assessors  for Student  Finance,  Appeals  and Complaints 
Institute  for Apprenticeships  and Technical  Education 
LocatEd 
Office  for Standards  in Education,  Children’s  Services  and Skills  (Ofsted) 
Office  for Students 
25 Office  of Qualifications  and Examinations  Regulation  (Ofqual) 
Residential  Care  Leadership  Board,  Chair  only 
School  Teachers’  Review  Body 
Social  Mobility  Commission 
Social  Work  England 
30 Student  Loans  Company  Ltd 
Department  for Environment,  Food  and Rural  Affairs 
Advisory  Committee  on Releases  to the Environment 
Agriculture  and Horticulture  Development 
Board  British  Wool  Marketing  Board 21 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Broads  Authority 
Conservation  Board  for the Chilterns  Area  of Outstanding  Natural  Beauty,  with 
the exception  of parish  members 
5Conservation  Board  for the Cotswolds  Area  of Outstanding  Natural  Beauty, 
with  the exception  of parish  members 
Consumer  Council  for Water 
Covent  Garden  Market  Authority 
Environment  Agency 
Forestry  Commission 
10 Joint  Nature  Conservation  Committee 
Marine  Management  Organisation 
National  Park  Authorities,  with  the exception  of parish  members 
Natural  England 
Regional  Flood  and Coastal  Committees,  Chair  only 
15 Royal  Botanic  Gardens,  Kew 
Science  Advisory  Council 
Sea Fish Industry  Authority 
Water  Services  Regulation  Authority  (OFWAT) 
Department  for Transport 
20 British  Transport  Police  Authority 
Civil  Aviation  Authority 
Disabled  Persons  Transport  Advisory  Committee 
Dover  Harbour  Board,  Chair  only 
East West  Rail Company 
25 Harwich  Haven  Authority,  Chair  only 
Highways  England,  Chair  only 
HS2 Ltd 
Independent  Commission  on Civil  Aviation  Noise 
London  and Continental  Railways  Ltd 
30 Milford  Haven  Port Authority,  Chair  only 
Network  Rail,  Chair  only 
Office  of Rail and Road 
Port of London  Authority,  Chair  only  Port of Tyne  Authority,  Chair  only 
Traffic  Commissioners Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 22 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Transport  Focus 
Department  for Work  and Pensions 
BPDTS  Ltd 
Health  and Safety  Executive 
5 Industrial  Injuries  Advisory  Council 
Money  and Pensions  Service 
National  Employment  Savings  Trust 
Office  for Nuclear  Regulation 
Pension  Protection  Fund,  Chair  only 
10 Pension  Protection  Fund  Ombudsman 
Pensions  Ombudsman 
Pensions  Regulator 
Social  Security  Advisory  Committee 
Department  of Health  and Social  Care 
15 Advisory  Committee  on Clinical  Excellence  Awards,  Chair  and Medical  Director 
only 
Advisory  Committee  on Resource  Allocation,  Chair  only 
British  Pharmacopoeia  Commission 
Care  Quality  Commission 
20 Commission  on Human  Medicines 
Committee  on Mutagenicity  of Chemicals  in Food,  Consumer  Products  and the 
Environment 
Food  Standards  Agency 
Health  and Social  Care  Information  Centre  (NHS  Digital) 
25 Health  Education  England 
Health  Research  Authority 
Human  Fertilisation  and Embryology  Authority 
Human  Tissue  Authority 
Independent  Reconfiguration  Panel 
30 Monitor  (part  of the operating  body  known  as NHS  Improvement) 
National  Data  Guardian 
National  Institute  for Health  and Care  Excellence 
NHS  Blood  and Transplant 
NHS  Business  Services  Authority 23 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
NHS  Commissioning  Board  (NHS  England) 
NHS  Counter  Fraud  Authority 
NHS  Litigation  Authority  (NHS  Resolution) 
NHS  Pay Review  Body 
5 NHS  Trust  Development  Authority  (part  of the operating  body  known  as NHS 
Improvement) 
NHS  Trusts 
Office  for Strategic  Coordination  of Health  Research,  Chair  only 
Review  Body  on Doctors’  and Dentists’  Remuneration 
10 Export  Credits  Guarantee  Department  (UK Export  Finance) 
Export  Guarantee  Advisory  Council 
Foreign  and Commonwealth  and Development  Office 
CDC  Group  Plc 
Commonwealth  Scholarship  Commission 
15 Great  Britain-China  Centre 
Independent  Commission  for Aid Impact 
Marshall  Aid Commemoration  Commission 
Westminster  Foundation  for Democracy 
HM Treasury 
20 Court  of Directors  of the Bank  of England,  with  the exception  of the Governor 
and Deputy 
Governors 
Crown  Estate  Commissioners 
Financial  Conduct  Authority 
25 National  Savings  and Investments 
Royal  Mint  Advisory  Committee  on the Design  of Coins,  Medals,  Seals  and 
Decorations 
UK Government  Investments 
Home  Office 
30 Advisory  Council  on the Misuse  of Drugs 
Animals  in Science  Committee 
Appointed  Person  under  the Proceeds  of Crime  Act 2002 
Biometric  and Forensics  Ethics  Group 
College  of Policing  Board  of Directors Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 24 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Commissioner  for the Retention  and Use of Biometric  Material 
Disclosure  and Barring  Service 
Forensic  Science  Regulator 
Gangmasters  and Labour  Abuse  Authority 
5 Her Majesty’s  Inspectorate  of Constabulary  and Fire & Rescue  Services 
Independent  Anti-Slavery  Commissioner 
Independent  Chief  Inspector  of Borders  and Immigration 
Independent  Family  Returns  Panel 
Independent  Monitor  of the Disclosure  and Barring  Service 
10 Independent  Office  for Police  Conduct 
Independent  Reviewer  of Terrorism  Legislation 
Members  of the Visiting  Committee  of any immigration  removal  centre  or 
short-term  holding  facility 
Migration  Advisory  Committee 
15 National  Crime  Agency  Remuneration  Review  Body 
Office  of the Immigration  Services  Commissioner 
Police  Advisory  Board  for England  and Wales 
Police  Remuneration  Review  Body 
Security  Industry  Authority 
20 Surveillance  Camera  Commissioner 
Technical  Advisory  Board  (for the Regulation  of Investigatory  Powers  Act 2000), 
with  the exception  of Agency  Members 
Ministry  of Defence 
Armed  Forces  Pay Review  Body 
25 Defence  Nuclear  Safety  Committee 
Independent  Medical  Expert  Group 
Independent  Monitoring  Board  for the Military  Corrective  Training  Centre 
Nuclear  Research  Advisory  Council 
Oil and Pipelines  Agency 
30 Royal  Air Force  Museum 
Science  Advisory  Committee  on the Medical  Implications  of Less-Lethal 
Weapons 
Service  Complaints  Ombudsman 
Single  Source  Regulations  Office 25 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Veterans  Advisory  and Pensions  Committees 
Ministry  of Housing,  Communities  and Local  Government 
Architects  Registration  Board 
5Building  Regulation  Advisory  Committee  Commission  for Local  Administration 
in England(Local  Government  and Social  Care  Ombudsman) 
Ebbsfleet  Development  Corporation 
Homes  England 
Leasehold  Advisory  Service  (LEASE) 
Regulator  of Social  Housing 
10 The Housing  Ombudsman 
Valuation  Tribunal  Service 
Ministry  of Justice 
Advisory  Committees  on Justices  of the Peace 
Advisory  Council  on Conscientious  Objectors 
15 Chair  of the National  Council  of Prisoner  Escort  and Custody  Services  Lay 
Observers 
Children  and Family  Court  Advisory  and Support  Service 
Civil  Justice  Council 
Civil  Procedure  Rule  Committee 
20 Commissioner  for Victims  and Witnesses  (Victims’  Commissioner) 
Court  Examiners 
Court  of Protection  Visitors 
Criminal  Cases  Review  Commission 
Criminal  Procedure  Rule  Committee 
25 Family  Procedure  Rule  Committee 
His Majesty’s  Chief  Inspector  of Prisons 
His Majesty’s  Chief  Inspector  of Probation 
Independent  Advisory  Panel  on Deaths  in Custody 
Independent  Monitoring  Board  of any prison  or young  offender  institution 
30 Insolvency  Rules  Committee 
Judicial  Appointments  and Conduct  Ombudsman 
Judicial  Appointments  Commission 
Judicial  Pension  Board,  independent  Chair  and independent  members  only 
Law  Commission,  with  the exception  of the Chair Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 26 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Legal  Services  Board 
Multi-Agency  Public  Protection  Arrangements  Lay Advisers 
National  Chair  of the Independent  Monitoring  Boards 
National  Mental  Capacity  Forum,  Chair  only 
5 Non-Judicial  Members  of Disciplinary  Panels  of the Judicial  Conduct 
Investigations  Office 
Parole  Board,  with  the exception  of judicial  members 
Persons  appointed  by the Lord  Chancellor  under  section  2 of the Legal  Aid, 
Sentencing  and Punishment  of Offenders  Act 2012 
10 Prisoner  Escort  and Custody  Services  Lay Observers 
Prisons  and Probation  Ombudsman 
Prison  Service  Pay Review  Body 
Sentencing  Council  for England  and Wales 
Tribunal  Procedure  Committee 
15 Youth  Justice  Board  for England  and Wales 
Northern  Ireland  Office 
Boundary  Commission  for Northern  Ireland 
Chief  Electoral  Officer  for Northern  Ireland 
Equality  Commission  for Northern  Ireland 
20 Northern  Ireland  Human  Rights  Commission 
Parades  Commission  for Northern  Ireland 
Scotland  Office 
Boundary  Commission  for Scotland 
Welsh  Government 
25 Advisory  Panel  to the Welsh  Language  Commissioner 
Agricultural  Advisory  Panel  for Wales 
All Wales  Medicines  Strategy  Group 
All Wales  Programme  Monitoring  Committee  for the European  Structural  Funds 
Amgueddfa  Cymru  - National  Museum  of Wales 
30 Aneurin  Bevan  Community  Health  Council 
Aneurin  Bevan  University  Local  Health  Board 
Animal  Health  and Welfare  Framework  Group 
Arts  Council  of Wales 
Betsi  Cadwaladr  Community  Health  Council 27 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Betsi  Cadwaladr  University  Health  Board 
Board  of Community  Health  Councils 
Brecon  Beacons  National  Park  Authority 
Cardiff  & Vale  Community  Health  Council 
5 Cardiff  & Vale  University  Health  Board 
Career  Choices  Dewis  Gyrfa 
Children’s  Commissioner  for Wales 
Commissioner  for Older  People  in Wales 
Cwm  Taf Morgannwg  Community  Health  Council 
10 Cwm  Taf Morgannwg  University  Local  Health  Board 
Design  Commission  for Wales 
Education  & Skills  Ministerial  Advisory  Group 
Education  Workforce  Council 
Future  Generations  Commissioner 
15 Health  Education  Improvement  Wales 
Higher  Education  Funding  Council  for Wales 
Hybu  Cig Cymru 
Hywel  Dda  Community  Health  Council 
Hywel  Dda  University  Health  Board 
20 Independent  Remuneration  Panel  for Wales 
Industry  Wales 
Life Sciences  Hub  Wales  Board 
Local  Government  Boundary  Commission  for Wales 
National  Academy  for Educational  Leadership 
25 National  Adviser  for Violence  against  Women  and other  forms  of Gender-based 
Violence 
Domestic  Abuse  and Sexual  Violence 
National  Library  of Wales 
Natural  Resources  Wales 
30 Pembrokeshire  Coast  National  Park  Authority 
Powys  Community  Health  Council 
Powys  Teaching  Health  Board 
Public  Health  Wales  NHS  Trust 
Qualifications  Wales Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 28 
Schedule  3—Bodies  and Offices  Regulated  by the Commissioner  for Public  Appointments 
Regulatory  Board  for Wales 
Royal  Commission  on the Ancient  and Historical  Monuments  of Wales 
Snowdonia  National  Park  Authority 
Social  Care  Wales 
5 Sports  Council  for Wales 
Swansea  Bay Community  Health  Council 
Swansea  Bay University  Local  Health  Board 
Velindre  National  Health  Services  Trust 
Welsh  Ambulance  Services  National  Health  Service  Trust 
10 Welsh  Industrial  Development  Advisory  Board 
Welsh  Language  Commissioner 
Welsh  Revenue  Authority 
SCHEDULE  4 
SPECIFIED EMPLOYEE POSTS WHICH ARE TO BE PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS 
15 Arts  and Humanities  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Biotechnology  and Biological  Sciences  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Economic  and Social  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Engineering  and Physical  Sciences  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Innovate  UK, Executive  Chair  only 
20 Medical  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Natural  Environment  Research  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
Research  England,  Executive  Chair  only 
Science  and Technology  Facilities  Council,  Executive  Chair  only 
SCHEDULE  5 
25 THE COMMISSION ON STANDARDS IN PUBLIC LIFE, HOUSE OF LORDS APPOINTMENTS 
COMMISSION, AND COMMISSION ON BUSINESS APPOINTMENTS 
Application  of this Schedule 
1 This  Schedule  applies  equally  to the Commission  on Standards  in Public 
30Life,  the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission  and the Commission 
on Business  Appointments;  and to the Chair  and members  of those  bodies. 29 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  4—Specified  Employee  posts  which  are to be Public  Appointments 
2 In this Schedule , the bodies  named  in paragraph  1 are referred  to as “the 
Commission”  and “Commissioners”. 
Appointment  of the Chair 
3 
5This  paragraph  is about  the appointment  of the Chair  of the Commission 
(“the  Chair”).  The Chair  is non-political,  as defined  in paragraph  7. (1) 
(2) The Chair  is appointed  by His Majesty  on the recommendation  of the Prime 
Minister. 
(3) A person's  selection  for recommendation  must  be on merit  on the basis  of 
fair and open  competition. 
10 (4) A person’s  selection  as the Chair  must  be in accordance  with  the process 
for significant  appointments  as set out in the Public  Appointments  Code, 
with  a majority  of independent  members  on the assessment  panel  and a 
senior  independent  panel  member. 
(5) 
15The terms  on which  the Chair  holds  office  are determined  by the Minister 
for the Civil  Service. 
(6) The period  of the appointment  is to be no more  than  five years. 
(7) A person  cannot  be appointed  as Chair  more  than  once. 
(8) If the office  of the Chair  is vacant,  the Prime  Minister  may  authorise  an 
20independent  member  to carry  out the functions  of the Chair  until  the 
vacancy  is filled. 
Appointment  of the independent  Commissioners 
4 This  paragraph  is about  the appointment  of independent  Commissioners 
other  than  the Chair.  Independent  Commissioners  are non-political,  as 
defined  in paragraph  7. (1) 
25 (2) An independent  Commissioner  is appointed  by the Prime  Minister. 
(3) A person's  selection  for recommendation  must  be on merit  on the basis  of 
fair and open  competition. 
(4) A person  must  not be selected  without  the agreement  of the Chair. 
(5) 
30The terms  on which  an independent  Commissioner  holds  office  are 
determined  by the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office. 
(6) The Minister  must  not make  a determination  under  sub-paragraph  (5) 
without  the agreement  of the Chair. 
(7) The period  of the appointment  is to be no more  than  five years. 
(8) 
35A person  cannot  be appointed  as an independent  Commissioner  more  than 
once. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 30 
Schedule  5—The  Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life, House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission, 
and Commission  on Business  Appointments 
Three  Commissioners  to be persons  nominated  by political  parties 
5 Three  of the Commissioners  shall  each  be a person  whom  the registered 
leader  of a qualifying  party  put forward  to be considered  for appointment 
as a Commissioner  (a “political  Commissioner”). (1) 
5 (2) “Registered  leader”  and “qualifying  party”  are defined  in paragraph  7. 
(3) The political  Commissioners  shall  each  be a person  put forward  by the 
registered  leader  of one of the three  largest  nominating  parties  at the time 
of the person's  appointment. 
(4) 
10No appointment  may  be made  that would  result  in two or more  political 
Commissioners  being  persons  put forward  by the leader  of the same  party 
(and  nothing  in this section  has effect  so as to require  that result). 
(5) The terms  on which  a political  Commissioner  holds  office  are determined 
by the Minister  for the Cabinet  Office. 
(6) 
15The Minister  must  not make  a determination  under  sub-paragraph  (5) 
without  the agreement  of the Chair. 
(7) The period  of appointment  for a political  Commissioner  is to be no more 
than  three  years. 
(8) A political  Commissioner  can be appointed  for a second  term. 
(9) 
20A political  Commissioner  may  not be appointed  as the Chair  of the 
Commission. 
Terms  and conditions  of service 
6 The terms  mentioned  in paragraph  3(5) or 4(5) or 5(5) may  provide  for the 
Cabinet  Office— (1) 
(a) to pay remuneration  and allowances  to the person  appointed; 
25 (b) to make  provision  for a pension  in relation  to that person. 
(2) The Cabinet  Office  must  make  the payments  or provision  accordingly. 
Independent  Commissioners:  definition  of non-political 
7 A person  may  be appointed  as Chair  or as an independent  Commissioner 
only  if the person  is non-political.  A person  is non-political  if the person— 
30 (a) is not a member  of a registered  party; 
(b) is not an officer  or employee  of a registered  party  or of any 
accounting  unit of such  a party; 
(c) does  not hold  a relevant  elective  office  (within  the meaning  of 
35Schedule  7 of the Political  Parties,  Elections  and Referendums  Act 
2000  (“the 2000  Act”));  or (d) has not at any time  within  the last 
five years— 
(i) been  such  an officer  or employee  as is mentioned  in 
sub-paragraph  (b), or 
(ii) held  such  an office  as is mentioned  in sub-paragraph  (c), or 31 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  5—The  Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life, House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission, 
and Commission  on Business  Appointments 
(iii) been  named  as a donor  in the register  of donations  reported 
under  Chapter  III or V of Part IV of the 2000  Act, or 
(iv) been  named  as a participant  in the register  of recordable 
transactions  reported  under  Part 4A of the 2000  Act. 
5 Definition  of qualifying  party 
8 “Qualifying  party”  means  a registered  party  with  two or more  Members 
of the House  of Commons  at the time  of the person's  appointment. (1) 
(2) The relative  size of any two or more  registered  parties  shall  be determined 
10according  to the number  of Members  of the House  of Commons  belonging 
to each  party  at the time  in question  (or, in the case of two parties  with 
the same  number  of Members,  according  to the total  number  of votes  cast 
for persons  standing  for election  in the name  of each  of those  parties  at 
the most  recent  parliamentary  general  election). 
(3) 
15A Member  of the House  of Commons  does  not include  any Member  of 
that House  who  at the time  in question— 
(a) has not made  and subscribed  the oath  required  by the Parliamentary 
Oaths  Act 1866  (or the corresponding  affirmation),  or 
(b) is disqualified  from  sitting  and voting  in that House. 
Resignation  or removal  from  office 
20 9 This  paragraph  is about  resignation  or removal  from  office  of the Chair  or 
a Commissioner. (1) 
(2) A person  may  resign  from  office  by giving  written  notice  to the Minister 
for the Civil  Service. 
(3) 
25His Majesty  may,  on the recommendation  of the Minister  for the Civil 
Service,  remove  a person  from  office  if a condition  in sub-paragraph  (5) is 
met. 
(4) The Minister  for the Civil  Service  may  remove  a Commissioner  from  office 
if a condition  in sub-paragraph  (5) is met. 
(5) The conditions  are that— 
30 (a) the person  is absent  from  three  successive  meetings  of the 
Commission  without  the Commission's  approval; 
(b) the person  is convicted  of a criminal  offence; 
(c) the person  is unfit  or unable  to carry  out the functions  of the office. 
Financial  provision  for the Commission 
35 10 The Minister  for the Cabinet  Office  must  pay to the Commission  the sums 
determined  by the Minister  as appropriate  for, or in connection  with,  the 
carrying  out of the Commission’s  functions. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 32 
Schedule  5—The  Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life, House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission, 
and Commission  on Business  Appointments 
Arrangements  for assistance  to the Commission 
11 The Commission  may  make  arrangements  with  other  persons  for the 
provision  of assistance  to the Commission. (1) 
(2) 
5In particular,  arrangements  may  be made  with  the Minister  for the Civil 
Service  for civil  servants  to provide  assistance. 
Status  of the Commission 
12 The Commission  is a body  corporate. (1) 
(2) It is not to be regarded— 
(a) as the servant  or agent  of the Crown,  or 
10 (b) as enjoying  any status,  immunity  or privilege  of the Crown. 
Procedure 
13 The Commission  may  establish  committees. (1) 
(2) A committee  of the Commission  may  establish  sub-committees. 
(3) 
15Members  of a committee  or sub-committee  may  include  persons  who  are 
not members  of the Commission. 
(4) The Commission  may  regulate  its own  procedure,  and the procedure  of 
its committees  and sub-committees,  including  quorum. 
(5) The validity  of proceedings  of the Commission  or a committee  or 
sub-committee  is not affected  by— 
20 (a) a vacancy  among  the members,  or 
(b) a defect  in the appointment  of a member. 
Additional  functions  of the Commission 
14 The Prime  Minister  and the Commission  may  agree  that the Commission 
25is to carry  out functions  in addition  to those  under  the other  provisions  of 
Parts  3, 4 and 5 of this Act. (1) 
(2) The Commission  is to carry  out those  additional  functions  accordingly. 
General  powers  of the Commission 
15 The Commission  may  do anything  calculated  to facilitate,  or incidental  or 
conducive  to, the carrying  out of any of their  functions. 
30 Amendment  of other  enactments 
16 In Schedule  2 to the Parliamentary  Commissioner  Act 1967  (departments 
and authorities  subject  to investigation),  at the appropriate  places  insert (1) 
“The  House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission”,  “The  Commission  on 
35Business  Appointments”  and “The  Commission  on Standards  in Public 
Life”. 33 Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 
Schedule  5—The  Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life, House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission, 
and Commission  on Business  Appointments 
(2) In Schedule  1 to the Public  Records  Act 1958  (definition  of public  records), 
at the appropriate  places  in Part 2 (other  establishments  and organisations) 
insert  “The Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life”,  and “the House  of 
5Lords  Appointments  Commission”,  and “the Commission  on Business 
Appointments ”. Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence)  Bill [HL] 34 
Schedule  5—The  Commission  on Standards  in Public  Life, House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission, 
and Commission  on Business  Appointments 
Public  Service  (Ethics,  Integrity  and Independence) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  mechanisms  for promoting  and protecting  standards  of integrity 
and ethics  in the public  service;  to make  provision  about  appointments  to the House 
of Lords  and the House  of Lords  Appointments  Commission;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Lord  Anderson  of Ipswich 
Ordered  to be Printed,   22nd  January  2025 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 62



Refugees  (Family  Reunion)  Bill [HL] 
AMENDMENT 
TO BE MOVED 
IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
[Supplementary  to the Marshalled  List] 
Clause  1 
BARONESS  ANELAY  OF ST JOHNS 
_ Clause  1, page  2, line 13, leave  out sub-paragraph  (iii) 
59/1 HL Bill 13—I (a) 
Refugees  (Family  Reunion)  Bill [HL] 
AMENDMENT 
TO BE MOVED 
IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
[Supplementary  to the Marshalled  List] 
21 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 13—I (a)



Ordered to be printed 8 January 2025 and published 14 January 2025
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 64  11th Report of Session 2024–25
  Regulated and Other Activities 
(Mandatory Reporting of Child 
Sexual Abuse) Bill [HL]
  Crown Estate (Wales) Bill [HL]
  National Insurance Contributions 
(Secondary Class 1 Contributions) 
Bill
  Financial Assistance  to Ukraine 
Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power,
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree ofparliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
(b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or(c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
(b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,(c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,(d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or(e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 h
ttp://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 h
ldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Eleventh Report
   PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS: INTRODUCTORY NOTE
1.   This report sets out the Committee’s observations in relation to two private 
members’ Bills. It has long been, and remains, the Committee’s approach to 
apply the same exacting standards of scrutiny to all bills, whether a government 
bill or a private member’s bill. We acknowledge however that those members 
of the House who sponsor private members’ bills, unlike ministers, do not 
have the support of departmental officials and Parliamentary Counsel in 
the preparation of their bills. Our comments on private members’ bills are 
framed in the light of that understanding.
2
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
   REGULATED AND OTHER ACTIVITIES (MANDATORY 
REPORTING OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE) BILL [HL]
2.   This private member’s Bill, which is expected to have its second reading on 
17 January, imposes a duty (subject to criminal sanction) on the providers 
of a range of education, healthcare and other settings to report to the local 
authority where they know or reasonably suspect a child in their care to be 
subject to sexual abuse. The activities which are the subject of the reporting 
duty are listed in the Schedule to the Bill. Clause 2(9) confers a power on 
the Secretary of State by regulations to amend the Schedule by adding to 
the activities, or varying or deleting an activity set out in the Schedule. 
Despite being a Henry VIII power,1  the Bill does not make provision for the 
regulations to be made by statutory instrument. There is also no parliamentary 
scrutiny attached to the power. Accordingly, we recommend that, if 
the Bill proceeds to its further stages, it should be amended so that 
regulations under clause 2(9) are required to be made by statutory 
instrument subject to the draft affirmative resolution procedure.
1 A Henry VIII power is a power that allows amendment, repeal or other alteration of the effect of 
primary legislation.
3
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    CROWN ESTATE (WALES) BILL [HL]
3.   This private member’s Bill makes provision for the transfer to the 
Welsh Ministers, or a person nominated by them, of the Crown Estate 
Commissioners’ functions in Wales.
4.   Clause 1 of the Bill inserts a new section 52A into the Wales Act 2017 which 
confers a power on the Treasury to make a scheme transferring all the 
existing Welsh functions of the Crown Estate Commissioners to the Welsh 
Ministers or a person nominated by the Welsh Ministers. The Treasury may 
only make a transfer scheme with the agreement of the Welsh Ministers.
5.   The provisions of section 52A are based on section 90B of the Scotland 
Act 1998 which they to a very large extent replicate, although in the latter 
case the power relates to the transfer of the Crown Estate Commissioners’ 
existing Scottish functions to the Scottish Ministers. In both cases, the 
power to make a transfer scheme is subject to parliamentary scrutiny, with 
the draft affirmative resolution procedure applying. There is however one 
significant difference in the scrutiny provisions: whereas section 90B of the 
Scotland Act 1998 provides for scrutiny only by both Houses of Parliament, 
section 52A provides for scrutiny by both Houses and Senedd Cymru.
6.   We do not consider that scrutiny of the power by Senedd Cymru is 
appropriate. The purpose of the transfer scheme is to set out the terms 
on which a reserved matter, namely management of the Crown Estate in 
Wales, should be devolved. In this context, the Bill enables the Treasury to 
include in the transfer scheme such provision as they consider necessary or 
expedient in the interests of defence or national security, and also to include 
such provision as they consider necessary to ensure that the management 
of the Crown Estate in Wales does not conflict with other reserved maters, 
namely the exploitation of oil or gas resources. Decisions relating to reserved 
matters, and the terms on which they should be devolved, are in our view 
appropriately for the UK Government to make subject to scrutiny by the 
UK Parliament, and this is reflected in the fact that the power to make the 
scheme is conferred on the Treasury. It does not seem to us appropriate (or 
consistent with previous practice) to make powers exercisable solely by UK 
Ministers subject to scrutiny by a devolved legislature.
7.    Accordingly, we consider that, consistently with the approach for 
Scotland under section 90B of the Scotland Act 1998, the powers 
conferred by section 52A of the Wales Act 2017 should be subject to 
scrutiny solely by both Houses of Parliament.
4
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
    NATIONAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS (SECONDARY 
CLASS 1 CONTRIBUTIONS) BILL
8.   This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO UKRAINE BILL
9.   
This Money Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
5
 DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
AP PENDIX  1:    MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
   Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
  For the business taken at the meeting on 08 January 2025, Members declared no 
interests. 
  Attendance
  The meeting was attended by Lord McLoughlin, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, 
Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville, Lord Carlile or Berriew, The Earl of Lindsay, Lord Rooker and Baroness Finlay of Llandaff.



Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to publish  regulatory  impact  assessments 
2 Sanction 
3 Interpretation 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/2 Bill 99 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  a Regulatory  Impact  Assessment  to be published  for all primary  and 
secondary  legislation  introduced  by the Government;  to make  provision  for 
associated  sanctions;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to publish  regulatory  impact  assessments 
Her Majesty’s  Government  must,  on or before  the appointed  day,  lay before 
Parliament  a qualifying  regulatory  impact  assessment  for— 
(a) any Bill introduced  to Parliament  by a Minister; 
5 (b) any draft  statutory  instrument  laid before  Parliament  by a Minister 
that may  not be made  unless  it is laid before  and approved  by a 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament;  and 
(c) any statutory  instrument  made  by a Minister  and subject  to annulment 
in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
10 2 Sanction 
(1) If Her Majesty’s  Government  fails to comply  with  the duty  under  section  1, 
subsection  (2) applies. 
(2) The Minister  responsible  for the Bill or statutory  instrument  in question  must 
make  a statement  to the relevant  House— 
15 (a) as soon  as reasonably  practicable,  and 
(b) on every  third  sitting  day until  a qualifying  regulatory  impact 
assessment  has been  laid before  Parliament. 
3 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
20 “the appointed  day”  means— 
(a) in the case of a Bill, the day it is introduced  to Parliament,  and 
(b) in the case of a statutory  instrument,  the day it is laid before 
Parliament; 
58/2 Bill 99 1 Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  Bill 
a “qualifying  regulatory  impact  assessment”is  a document  which— 
(a) assesses  the extent  to which  the negative  effects  any regulatory 
burden  of the Bill or statutory  instrument  are outweighed  by 
the benefits,  and 
5 (b) conforms  with  guidance  as may  be published  by the 
independent  body  appointed  under  section  25 of the Small 
Business,  Enterprise  and Employment  Act 2015  (appointment 
of body  to verify  assessments  and lists in reports); 
the “relevant  House”  means— 
10 (a) for a Bill introduced  to the House  of Commons  or a statutory 
instrument,  the House  of Commons,  and 
(b) for a Bill introduced  to the House  of Lords,  the House  of Lords. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Bill extents  to the whole  of the United  Kingdom. 
15 (2) This  Bill comes  into force  at the end of the period  of 40 days  beginning  on 
the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  Act 2022. Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  Bill 2 
Regulatory  Impact  Assessments  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  a Regulatory  Impact  Assessment  to be published  for all primary  and secondary 
legislation  introduced  by the Government;  to make  provision  for associated  sanctions; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  21st June  2021 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2022 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/2 Bill 99



1 
 RENTERS’ RIGHTS BILL 2024  
EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS MEMORANDUM  
Introduction  
1. The Renters’ Rights Bill (“the Bill”) was introduced in the House of Commons 
on W ednesday 11th September 2024. It was introduced in the House of Lords 
on Wednesday 15th January, hav ing been amended at both Committee and 
Report stage in the House of Commons.  
2. The Bill gives effect to commitments made by the government in the  Labour  
manifesto published on 13th June 2024. The Bill’s objective is to reform the 
private rented sector (PRS ) by abolishing no -fault evictions, strengthening 
tenant protections, preventing tenants  from being exploited and discriminated 
against, empowering tenants to challenge unreasonable rent increases and 
raising standards, including extending ‘Awaab’s Law’ to the PRS.   
3. This memorandum addresses issues arising under the European Convention 
on Human Rights (ECHR) in relation to the Bill. It has been prepared by the 
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government  (MHCLG) . This 
ECHR memorandum was first published following the Bill’s introduction in the 
House of Commons. It has been subsequently updated  to flag any new/notable 
ECHR points arising as a result of amendments made during the Bill’s passage 
in the House of Commons.   
Summary of the Bill  
4. The Bill consists of 5 Parts:  
Part 1  
5. Part 1 reforms the assured and assured shorthold tenancy framework . 
Currently the assured shorthold tenancy (AST) is the default tenancy in the PRS 
– its defining feature being that a landlord can evict a tenant at the end of a 
 
2 
 fixed term by serving a “section 21 notice”. This does not require the landlord 
to provide a reason  for the eviction . Part 1 (via amendment to the Housing Act 
1988 – HA 1988)  abolishes section 21 notices, and in so doing, the AST  model . 
The default type of tenancy for the PRS will become the Assured Tenancy (AT).  
6. Part 1 then makes a number of amendments to the AT framework . These 
include:  
a. Removing fixed terms, making assured tenancies periodic only , with rent 
periods not exceeding one month (Chapter 1);  
b. Various changes to the grounds of possession in Schedule 2 to the HA 
1988, including what those grounds are, when they can be used, and 
how much notice must be provided in each case (Chapter 1);  
c. Changes to the procedure around increasing rent in the tenancy . This 
provides the only way a landlord will be able to increase the rent is via 
the statutory process in section 13 to the HA 1988 (C hapter 1);  
d. Regulating and limiting the circumstances in which a landlord can require 
rent in advance from the tenant (Chapter 1);  
e. Requiring landlords t o provide a statement of terms and other 
information to the tenant at the beginning of the tenancy (Chapter 1);  
f. Inserting an implied term into AT agreements which provides that where 
a tenant requests to keep a pet in accordance with the procedure set 
out, the landlord cannot unreasonably refuse the request. The landlord 
can require the tenant to take out pet insurance (Chapter 1);  
g. Making provision for financial penalties where a landlord acts in breach 
of the requirements/prohibitions. Local authorities can impose a civil 
financial penalty of up to £7,000 for initial breaches/specified more minor 
breaches. More serious breaches are punishable by a criminal offence 
or, as an alternative, a civil penalty of up to £40,000 (Chapter 1);  
 
3 
 h. Providing  that any clause in a guarantor agreement  is unenforceable 
insofar as it would hold the guarantor liable for rent accruing after the 
death of the tenant  (Chapter 1) .  
i. Amending Schedule 1 to the HA 1988 to ensure fixed term leases of over 
21 years in length cannot be assured tenancies (Chapter 2);  
j. New measures to tackle rental discrimination in the PRS, which extend 
to Wales and Scotland (Chapters 3 to 5);  
k. New measures to prohibit the practice of rental bidding (Chapter 6);   
l. Amending the Protection from Eviction Act 1977 to allow Local Housing 
Authorities (LHAs) to impose financial penalties for offences under 
section 1 of that Act  (Chapter 7) ; and  
m. Extend ing Awaab’s Law to the PRS . Awaab’s Law has been introduced 
in the social rented sector (“SRS”) (see section 42 of the Social Housing 
(Regulation) Act 2023 (“SHRA 2023”)) in response  to the tragic death of 
two-year-old Awaab Ishak from a respiratory illness caused by mould in 
his rented home which the social landlord failed to address in a timely 
fashion. The intention is to take the same approach in the PRS by 
amending the Landlord an d Tenant Act 1985 to imply a covenant into 
leases that the landlord must comply with requirements re lating to 
serious hazards as set out in regulations made by the Secretary of State. 
The requirements involve taking specified action in relation to the hazard 
within a specified period (Chapter 7).  
Part 2  
7. Part 2 of the Bill provides for new obligations for landlords under assured or 
regulated tenancies. The new obligations relate to (a) the creation of a PRS 
redress scheme(s) to resolve disputes between landlords and tenants out of 
court; and (b) a new Priv ate Rented Sector Database (“ the database ”) allowing 
tenants to access information about their landlords, for PRS landlords to better 
 
4 
 understand their responsibilities and for local councils to have access to better 
data to assist with enforcement action.  
8. Chapter 2 of Part 2 gives a power to the Secretary of State to make regulations 
which require residential landlords to be members of a PRS landlord redress 
scheme approved or designated by the Secretary of State. This will allow 
prospective, current and fo rmer tenants of that landlord to make a complaint to 
the scheme to be investigated and determined by an independent person. In 
addition:  
a. Regulations may require a prospective landlord to be a member of such 
a scheme before the tenancy is marketed, and require a person to 
remain a member of a scheme for a specified period after ceasing to be 
a residential landlord . A scheme must meet certain requirements set out 
in regulations to be approved or designated . 
b. LHAs will be responsible for enforcing  the requirement to be a member 
of a landlord redress scheme. For an initial breach of the regulations, a 
fine of up to £7,000 may be imposed. In the worst cases, where a 
landlord or letting agent persists in breachin g the regulations or does so 
repeatedly, they will be guilty of an offence, punishable by a fine or a 
financial penalty in lieu of up to £40,000.  
c. Decisions under a landlord redress scheme may be made enforceable 
as a court order by regulations following consultation (cf. Schedule 2 
paragraph 7D Housing Act 1996 – “HA 1996”).  
9. Chapter 3 of Part 2 provides for the establishment and operation of a PRS 
database on which residential landlords will be required to register themselves 
and their rental properties and pay a registration fee before tenancies are 
marketed and created. A pe rson will be prohibited from marketing a dwelling for 
the purposes of creating a residential tenancy unless there is an active landlord 
and dwelling entry in the database . LHAs will be required to make entries on 
the database relating to relevant banning o rders, banning order offences and 
 
5 
 financial penalties for banning order offences1. The Secretary of State  will also 
be able to make regulations which authorise or require LHAs to make an entry 
in the database in respect of a person who is convicted of an offence, has had 
a financial penalty imposed or is subject to regulatory action of a description to 
be prescribed by the regu lations, provided that the relevant event occurred at 
a time when the person was a residential landlord, or marketed the property for 
the purposes of creating a residential tenancy. Please note that:  
a. Not all of the information on the database will be public, with powers for 
the Secretary of State to adjust what is public and what is restricted to 
ensure that the accessibility of information about criminal offences such 
as banning order offences is neces sary and proportionate. Regulations 
will also specify requirements to link banning order and banning order 
offence information with landlord and dwelling entries and the time 
period for which such information should be made publicly available.  
b. Mayoral combined authorities (“MCAs”), the GLA, lead enforcement 
authorities, LHAs and local weights and measures authorities will have 
access to the information in the database to assist with the performance 
of their functions relating to housing and enfo rcement.  
c. There are powers to make regulations authorising the disclosure of 
restricted information (information which will not otherwise be publicly 
available and which relate s to and identif ies a particular person) for the 
purposes of enabling or facilitating compliance with statutory 
requirements, rules of law and the exercise of statutory functions set out 
in such regulations. Regulations may also specify the manner and form 
in which the infor mation is to be disclosed and may also impose 
restrictions on the use a nd onward disclosure of the information. There 
is also provision that disclosure in accordance with the regulations  will 
 
1 A banning order is an order by the First Tier Tribunal which , among other things, ban s a person from 
letting housing in England.  A banning order offence is an offence listed in regulations made under 
section 14(3) of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 or described in section 12 of the Tenant Fees Act 
2019.  If a person has been convicted of a banning order offence, a local housing authority may apply 
for a banning order against that person. For further information , see Chapter 2 , Part 2 of the 2016 
Act.  
 
 
6 
 not breach any obligations of confidentiality owed by the database 
operator, or any other restrictions on disclosure that may apply. However, 
any disclosure that would breach data protection legislation is not 
authorised. Disclosure of unauthorised restricted information or onward 
disclosure of such information is to be a summary offence punishable by 
way of a fine.  
10. Provision is made for entries to be kept up to date and for verification, correction 
and deletion of the information in the database. Provision is made for the 
publication of advice and information in respect of landlord and tenant rights. 
Provision is mad e for enforcement of the requirements of Part 2 Chapter 3 of 
the Bill by LHAs. This includes provision for fines of up to £7,000 for certain 
breaches,  and up to £40,000 where a  criminal offence  has been committed . 
Part 3  
11. Part 3 introduces the Decent Homes Standard (DHS) into the PRS by making 
amendments to Part 1 of the Housing Act 2004 (“HA 2004”). It creates a power 
for the Secretary of State to set requirements  in regulations  for the minimum 
standards that properties in the PRS must meet. The amendments adopt and 
add to the enforcement mechanisms in the HA 2004 where properties fail to 
meet the new requirements.  
Part 4  
12. Part 4 creates a power for the Secretary of State to make arrangements for a 
lead enforcement authority in relation to measures in the Bill  and the AT 
framework.  The role of the lead enforcement authority will include monitoring 
the operation of the legislation, providing guidance and support to local 
authorities and the public and, where necessary, stepping into the shoes of 
LHAs to take enforcement action itself .  
13. Part 4 also makes further provision about the enforcement of measures in the 
Bill. In particular it makes provision to ensure that where appropriate  superior 
landlord s and officers of corporat e bodies  can be made subject to a rent 
 
7 
 repayment order (RRO) (see Chapter 4, Part 2 of the Housing and Planning Act 
2016) , including by ensuring that superior landlords can be held liable for 
certain RRO offences .   
14. Part 4 also  provides  a number of investigatory powers to LHAs to ensure they 
can enforce measures effectively and robustly.  
Part 5  
15. Part 5 deals with consequential amendments, territorial extent, commencement 
and tra nsitional provision .  
Summary of the government’s ECHR analysis  
16. The provisions of the Bill engage the following Convention rights:  
a. Article 1 Protocol 1  – this right provides that persons (both natural and legal) 
have the right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions. A1P1 is 
engaged by Parts 1 -5 of the Bill.  
b. Article 8  – this right provides that persons have the right to respect for their 
home and private life. Article 8 is engaged by Part s 2 and 4 of the Bill.  
c. Article 6  – this right provides that in the determination of a person’s civil 
rights and obligations everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within 
a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by 
law. Article 6 is engaged by Part 2 and  by Part 4 of the Bill.  
17. As set out on page 167 of the explanatory notes to the Bill, the Secretary of 
State for Housing, Communities and Local Government is of the view that the 
provisions of the Bill are compatible with Convention Rights.  As such she has 
made a statement under section 19(1)(a) of the H uman Rights Act 1998.  
 
8 
 18.  All enabling powers in this Bill are capable of being exercised in a way that is 
compatible with Convention rights and the Secretary of State is required to act 
compatibly with Convention rights when making secondary legislation.  
ECHR analysis by measure  
19. References to clauses in this memorandum are to the Bill as introduced.  
The general legitimate aim underlying the measures  
20. There is a broad legitimate aim which underlies most of the measures in the Bill  
(this is referred back to in this ECHR memo as the “ general legitimate aim”) . 
This relates to the current state of the PRS and the critical need for urgent 
reform. As th e general  legitimate aim is frequently referred to for a number of 
measures in the Bill, the government has set it out here in detail. Where there 
are particular nuances in the legitimate aim for a particular measure, this is set 
out separately below.  
Size of the PRS  
21. The PRS has doubled in size since 2002  and is now the second largest housing 
tenure. 4.6 million households rent privately, which is equivalent to 11 million 
people and 19% of the housing market, This compares to 65% of households 
in the owner -occupied sector and 16% in social housing.i  Whilst the PRS is still 
an important home for young professionals  and students seeking flexibility, over 
30% of the households in the sector have children present and a significant 
number of older people (aged 65 -75) live in the PRS.  
The problem with security  
22. Compared to other forms of housing (home ownership and social housing) the 
private rented sector offers the lowest amount of security to the tenant. This is 
due to the landlord’s ability to issue a section 21 notice at the end of the fixed 
term (or in acco rdance with a break clause in the tenancy agreement). This 
allows the landlord to evict the tenant with no reason and with only 2 months’ 
 
9 
 notice.  In 2022 -2023 30% of renters who moved in the past three years did not 
end their previous tenancy by choice2. Furthermore, the threat of a section 21 
notice is also a reason many households put up with poor conditions or poor 
landlord behaviour. Research by Citizens Advice in 2018 showed that those 
who receive a section 21 notice are five times more likely to have recently made 
a complaint to their council than those who have not3. Further, half of tenants 
who live in poor quality housing do not complain to their landlord because they 
are scared of eviction. 4 
23. The use of section 21 notices is also a major cause of homelessness. Between 
January and March 2024, 6630 households were threatened with 
homelessness due to a section 21 notice. As well as the impact this has for 
tenants, this also places significant pressures on local councils who have legal 
duties to act where a person is under threat of homelessness. The tenancy 
reform measures in Part 1 of the Bill (the repeal of section 21 of the 1988 
Act and the corresponding reform of the Schedule 2 grounds for 
posse ssion) are chiefly concerned with addressing this problem of 
security for tenants.  
The problem with rent/affordability  
24. The last two years have seen unprecedented levels of growth in rental 
prices . Whilst the annual growth rate in rents have usually been around 2%, in 
March 2024 the yearly increase in the average rent of the stock of private 
tenancies reached 9%,5 the highest level since records began in 2015. Where 
demand has outstripped supply, market rents have increased, which has driven 
practices such as tenants being pitted against each other in bidding wars.  The 
affordability of rent problem has been a major issue flagged with  MHCLG , 
particularly from families and single people who are increasingly having 
difficulty keeping up with their rent payments.  The amendments the Bill is 
 
2 MHCLG analysis of the English Housing Survey 2022 -23. 
3 Touch and go: How to protect private renters from retaliatory eviction in England’, Citizens Advice 
2018.  
4 Damp, cold and full of mould: The reality of housing in the private rented sector, Citizens Advice 
report, February 2023  
5 ONS 2024, Private rent and house prices, UK - Office for National Statistics (ons.gov.uk) .  
 
10 
 making around the process by which landlords can raise the rent during 
a tenancy is chiefly concerned with addressing this affordability problem.  
25. In addition to this, 44% of landlords are reportedly unwilling to let to tenants 
who receive housing support or Universal credit. 15% are also unwilling to let 
to families with children6. This again compounds the affordability crisis as it 
creates a supply and demand problem in the market often for more vulnerable 
tenants. The rental discrimination measures in  Part 1 of  the Bill are aimed 
at addressing these practices.  
The problem with quality and standards  
26. Housing quality in the PRS is the lowest across all the tenures. In 2022 -2023, 
21% of PRS homes fail to meet the decent homes standard as applied in the 
social housing sector7. This situation has led to 70% of PRS tenants having 
experienced cold, damp or mould8, and 1.6 million children are reportedly 
struggling with damp, mould or excessive cold in their home9. The Decent 
Homes Standard is currently enforceable in the social housing sector and 
provisions in the Bill seek to make it enforceable in the PRS, where at the 
moment it takes the form of non -statutory guidance.  
27. As well as the serious (sometimes lethal) consequences of this for tenants, 
MHCLG figures estimate a total cost of £ 340 million a year to the NHS due to 
hazardous conditions in the PRS10. The measure s in Part 1 and Part 3 of the 
Bill applying the Decent Homes Sta ndard in the PRS  and Awaab’s law are 
both designed to combat this issue.  
The problem with unequal bargaining power for tenants  
 
6 English Private Landlord Survey 2021 and English Housing Survey.   
7 English Housing Survey 2022 to 2023  
8 Citizens Advice  
9 Coley, Rebekah Levine, et al. “Poor quality housing is tied to children’s emotional and behavioural 
problems.” Policy Research Brief, MacArthur foundation, September 2013.  
10 House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts: Regulation of private renting, April 2022.  
 
 
11 
 28. The situation set out above, particularly the ability of a landlord to evict a tenant 
by issuing a section 21 notice, all combine to create a situation where tenants 
have very little bargaining power in relation to their tenancy agreement. At the 
moment th e main route for PRS tenants to seek relief in the event a landlord 
fails to meet his obligations under the tenancy agreement or regulatory 
obligations is by recourse to the courts. This process can often prove to be 
stressful, lengthy and costly to tenant s and acts as a barrier (particularly for the 
most vulnerable) in getting their dispute resolved.  The PRS is falling behind 
other housing tenures and consumer sectors, such as finance, legal, energy 
and the communications industry, where redress is the norm. The requirement 
for landlords to become members of a redress scheme  in Part 2  is 
designed to address this issue.  
The problem of enforcement  
29. Variation in enforcement of existing standards across England can also leave 
tenants and landlords frustrated and allow criminal operators to thrive. 
Research by Sheffield Hallam University found that most councils operate a 
largely reactive service with significant variation in the extent to which 
enforcement tools and powers are used. Reasons for this include low political 
backing, lack of data, and levels of capacity and capability.11  
30. Backing this, a National Audit Office (NAO) report in 2021 found that there was 
a wide range of approaches across the country, with some councils inspecting 
almost no properties, while others inspected a large proportion. The same 
report found low use of s ome regulatory tools such as Banning Orders and 
penalty notices, with only 10 landlords and letting agents banned since new 
powers were introduced in 2016. Similarly, in 2024, the N ational Residential 
Landlords Association  reported that just over half of councils had used new Civil 
Penalties introduced in 2017 between 2021 and 2023 with over 60% of all civil 
penalties issued by only 20 ‘super -user’ councils.12 Councils sought to tackle 
 
11 Council enforcement in the Private Rented Sector: headline report, June 2022.  
12 The Enforcement Lottery: Local authority enforcement 2021 -2023, NRLA Research Observatory, 
2024.  
 
12 
 the most serious Category 1 hazards in only approximately 2.5% of properties 
estimated to contain those in 2019.  
31. Councils’ ability to target rogue landlords is also hampered by a lack of robust 
data and information on the sector. Unlike in Scotland and Wales, there is no 
national database of PRS landlords. Instead, there is a ‘patchwork of schemes’ . 
A 2021 report by the Centre for Public Data found that just 7.4% of the PRS in 
England are covered by registration or licensing requirements.13 As a result, the 
majority of councils underestimate the size of their area’s PRS. In the absence 
of a national database, trying to identify PRS properties and pursue criminal 
landlords can take councils a considerable amount of time.  
32. The measures in Part 2 of the Bill which provide for a new landlord 
Database, alongside the investigatory powers in the Bill (Part 4 ), are 
designed to better enable local housing authorities to investigate and 
enforce regulatory requirements against landlords.  
Part 1 , Chapter 1  of the Bill  - Tenancy Reform   
ECHR right engaged: A1P1  
33. The following tenancy reform provisions engage A1P1:  
a. Abolition of s.21 notices, ASTs  and fixed -term tenancies and the introduction 
of monthly rent periods.  
b. Amendments to the Schedule 2 possession grounds in the HA 1988;  
c. Amendments to the statutory procedure for increasing rent;  
d. A new duty on landlords to provide tenants with a written statement of terms 
and  
 
13 A national  landlord register for England: how to make it work, The Centre for Public Data, October 
2021.  
 
13 
 e. A new right for a tenant to request to keep a pet in their rented property.  
f. A provision that renders unenforceable a clause in a guarantor agreement 
insofar as it would hold the guarantor liable for rent accruing after the death 
of the tenant.  
Interference  
34. The government’s view is  that the tenancy reform measures engage and 
constitute an interference with a landlord’s A1P1 rights as they regulate the way 
in which the landlord manages a tenancy and how they can bring it to an end. 
For example, t he abolition of the landlord’s ability to evict a tenant without 
cause, alongside the general repeal of ASTs , will to a certain extent make it 
more difficult for a landlord to evict a tenant as they will now have to establish 
a particular possession ground . Similarly, the removal of fixed terms  and move 
to periodic rent periods of no more than 1 month constitute an interference in 
how the landlord manages their property. The way in which a landlord can raise 
the rent during a tenan cy is also changing , limiting the landlord’s ability to raise 
the rent to the formal statutory process in section  13 of the HA 1988 .Landlords 
will no longer be able to use rent review clauses in tenancy agreements , nor 
will they be able to require rent in advance save for the first month’s rent which 
they will still be allowed to require/accept between the tenancy being entered 
into and the tenant taking possession ). The Bill places more duties on landlords 
to provide tenants with a written statement of terms and new duties when faced 
with a request f rom a tenant for a pet.  The provision which renders a clause in 
a guarantor agreement unenforceable insofar as it holds a guarantor liable for 
rent accruing after the death of the tenant will make it more difficult for a landlord 
to recover rent accruing after the death  of the tenant.  All of these constitute an 
interference in how a landlord manages their property.   
Justification  
35. The government considers  all of  these  interferences with A1P1 rights to 
constitute a “control of use” rather than depriving a landlord of their property 
rights or asset. There is existing analogous caselaw which has found other 
 
14 
 regulatory action in relation to housing to amount to control of use  (Immobiliare 
Saffi v Italy  – concerned legal limitations on level of rent property owners could 
demand ; Lindheim and Others v Norway – concerned the loss of certain 
exclusive rights over land; Democracy and Human Rights Resource Centre and 
Mustafayev v Azerbaijan  – imposed positive obligations on landowner ). 
36. All of the interferences set out above are in pursuit of the general legitimate aim 
set out in detail above, in particular dealing with the problem of security and the 
problem of rent/affordability for tenants renting in the private rented sector. The 
removal of fixed terms in particular also address es the risk of tenants being 
locked in to propertie s even in circumstances where, for example , those 
properties  fail to meet quality standards . The measures  also address  the point 
that due to the growth in size of the PRS, for many tenants, the private rented 
sector is their permanent home and a person’s home should support their 
wellbeing.  The legitimate aim underlying the pets measure in particular is that 
owning a pet is critical to many people ’s well-being  – both mental and physical. 
There are a growing number of single people and older people living in the PRS 
who may depend on a pet for companionship. The provision relating to 
guarantor agreements has the legitimate aim of  preventing unscrupulous 
landlords from deliberately not ending a tenancy following the tenant’s death, 
instead seeking to pursue a grieving guarantor for , what could be, months of 
accruing rent.  
37.  The government considers all of the tenancy reform measures to be 
proportionate in meeting the general legitimate aim. The Bill reforms the 
possession grounds in Schedule 2 to the HA 1988  to ensure they are fit for 
purpose  and carefully balance the interests of landlords and tenants, enabl ing 
the landlord to regain possession in various circumstances  where appropriate . 
This includes social landlords and charities to ensure they can regain 
possession to manag e their housing stock  effectively  and to pursue their 
charitable aims.   Moving to a system in which a landlord must establish a reason 
for eviction , in conjunction with the reforms to the possession grounds,  does 
not create a disproportionate or excessive burden on landlords. Similarly , the 
removal of fixed terms has been balanced with an increase in the notice period 
a tenant must provide to the landlord where they wish to serve a notice to quit. 
 
15 
 A landlord will still be able to raise the rent during the tenancy but now must do 
so using the formal statutory process set out in section 13 of the HA 1988 .  The 
government considers the Bill achieves the general legitimate aim of regulating 
the rent increase process in a proportionate way which protects the interests of 
tenant whilst ensur ing landlords can continue to derive value from their asset. 
In relation to pets, it will still be possible for a landlord to refuse a tenant’s 
request for a pet where it is reasonable to do so , and where  a landlord  does 
consent, the Bill allows the landlord to require the tenant to obtain insurance 
against pet damag e or pay the reasonable costs of the landlord procuring such 
insurance.  Finally, the removal of a guarantor’s liability for rent accruing after 
a tenant’s death is proportionate to its ai m;  there are alternative ways in which 
a landlord can mitigate their losses in this scenario. Further, the provision is 
clear it only applies to guarantors wh o are individuals (not corporate guarantors) 
and, in the case of a joint tenancy in which a tenant has died, the guarantor 
must be related to the dead tenant to be absolved of liability for rent accruing 
after the tenant’s death.  
Part 1 , Chapter s 3-5: Rental Discrimination  
ECHR Right engaged: A1P1  
Interference   
38. Prohibiting landlords and letting agents from discriminating against individuals 
with children or those in receipt of benefits engages landlords’ A1P1 rights. The 
measure  regulate s how a landlord goes about letting the dwelling and  
therefore, it could be argued,  amount s to a control of use of the property.  
Justification  
39. The rental discrimination measure is in pursuit of the general legitimate aim set 
out above, in particular in addressing the affordability issues persisting in the 
private rented sector explained in paragraph 23 above.   The government  is of 
the view that it is unacceptable for landlords to refuse to consider someone as 
a prospective tenant, or refuse to let to them , simply because  they are in receipt 
 
16 
 of benefits or have children. The government  believes that everyone should 
have access to safe and secure housing, regardless of whether they are in 
receipt of benefits or their family circumstances.  
40. The government’ s view is that the interference is proportionate given the 
importance of these objectives. The proposals strike a fair balance between 
ensuring low -income tenants and tenants with children are able to secure 
accommodation in the PRS whilst mitigating any potential burden or  adverse 
impact on landlords. Whilst the Bill generally prohibit s a landlord from apply ing 
a provision, criterion or practice that makes a person who would have a child 
live with or visit them less likely to enter into a te nancy compared with someone 
who would not , this is still permitted if  provided it is a proportionate means of 
achieving a legitimate aim – this acts as a defence to a proposed breach  . For 
example the property may not be safe for occupation by a child or the letting 
may be for the purpose of a retirement community.  
41. It is necessary to extend the protections to terms in mortgages, insurance 
contracts, tenancy agreements and terms in superior leases – by making any 
terms requiring a rental discriminatory practices ineffective. Otherwise the 
important protections being introduced could be significantly undermined. 
Clause 43 allows a landlord to take income into account when considering 
whether that person would be able to afford to pay the rent under the tenancy 
– the intention behind this clause is to address one of the key reasons landlords 
may be reluctant to rent to thos e in receipt of benefits – namely affordability 
concerns . 
Part 1 , Chapter 6 : Rental Bidding  
ECHR right engaged: A1P1  
Interference  
42. The rental bidding measure first requires a landlord (or a letting agent acting on 
their behalf) to state the specific amount of rent requested in any written 
advertisement or offer for the tenancy. The provision then prohibits a landlord 
 
17 
 or letting agent from accepting, encouraging or inviting higher bids for rent from 
prospective tenants. Breach of either of these requirements is punishable by 
way of a civil penalty administered by the local housing authority or local 
weights and measures authority. This measure engages a landlord’s A1P1 
rights as it concerns the way in which they advertise the availability of a tenancy 
in relation to their dwelling. Further, it constitutes an interference as it prevents 
them from taking certain actions wh ich might lead to a higher rent return . This 
amounts to a control of use of the property.   
Justification  
43. The objective behind the rental bidding measure is to end an exploitative 
practice in which tenants are pitted against one another with the consequence 
of driving up rents  – see the general legitimate aim, in particular the problem of 
affordability in the PRS and tacking social injustice . The government  consider s 
it to be proportionate to achieve the aim of outlawing the practice of rental 
bidding. It does not interfere with the rental price stated by the landlord at the 
point the property is advertised . Further, a landlord will be able to raise the rent 
during the tenancy using the statutory procedure under  section 13  of the HA 
1988 .  
Part 1 , Chapter 7 : Awaab ’s Law  
ECHR Right engaged: A1P1  
Interference  
44. The application of Awaab’s Law to the PRS engages A1P1. Depending on how 
the regulation -making power is exercised , which will be informed by  prior 
consultation,  the following aspects of the application of Awaab’s Law to the PRS 
would arguably interfere with a PRS landlord’s peaceful enjoyment of their 
property by controlling the landlord’s use of it:  
a. Landlords having to investigate a potential hazard within a specified period ; 
 
18 
 b. Landlords having to initiate remedial works within a specified period of the 
hazard being confirmed ; 
c. Landlords having to complete the remedial works within a reasonable time ; 
d. Landlords having to carry out emergency remedial works within a specified 
period ; 
e. Landlords having to rehouse or compensate tenants where works cannot 
be carried out within the specified period.  
45. If landlords fail to comply with requirements such as those above, they will be 
exposed to legal claims by their tenants for injunctive relief and/or damages on 
the basis of breach of contact. This strengthens the tenant’s position under the 
existing law b y giving greater certainty as to what should be considered a 
reasonable period of time for landlords to take specified action in order to 
address serious hazards in rented property . 
Justification  
46. It is the  government ’s view that any interference with landlords’ A1P1 rights is 
in pursuit of the general l egitimate aim  set out above – in particular  to promote 
tenants’ safety and wellbeing and to ensure that another tragedy like that 
suffered by Awaab Ishak  and his family  does not happen again.  
47. The power to make regulations setting out requirements that a landlord will be 
obliged to meet is capable of being exercised in a way that introduces a 
statutory implied landlord covenant  which is  proportionate  relative to the policy 
aim, given the  government ’s wide margin of appreciation in implementing 
economic and social policies .  
Part 2 , Chapter 2 : Landlord Redress Scheme  
ECHR right engaged: A1P1 and Article 8 
 
19 
 48. The provision for a landlord redress scheme in Part 2 of the Bill is likely to 
constitute an interference with a landlord’s A1P1 rights . It will control the 
landlord’s ability to let or market the property by requiring the landlord to first be 
a member of the landlord redress scheme. A landlord will also have to pay 
membership fees and may be required to comply with awards of redress . 
Ultimately a landlord may be expelled from a landlord redress scheme if they 
fail to comply with scheme requirements which could then result in the landlord 
being unable to let their property. The government consider s any interference 
to constitute a control of use of the landlord’s property.  
49. The government’s  view is that any interference with A1P1 rights is in pursuit of 
the general legitimate aim set out above, namely addressing the current 
disparity in bargaining power between landlords and tenants. A tenant should, 
in line with other types of consumer, be able to seek relief in the event a landlord 
fails to meet their obligations without being forced into a stressful and costly 
court process.  The measure is also proportionate  – it is standard practice for 
redress schemes to be funded by way  of membership fees and the forms of 
redress that a scheme will award will be subject to the Secretary of State’s 
approval and will be compensatory, not punitive.  
50.  It is possible the landlord redress measure will also engage and constitute an 
interference with a landlord’s Article 8 rights. The Bill requires the redress 
scheme rules to make provision for landlord information (which could include 
personal information) to be shared with other redress, regulatory and 
enforcement  bodies, as well as the Secretary of State. In addition, the 
requirement for PRS landlords to be members of a landlord redress scheme 
means that such landlords will be obliged to provide personal information to the 
scheme.  The government considers this interference to be justified as it is in 
pursuit of a legitimate aim of  monitoring and ensuring the efficacy of the redress 
scheme and to provide the Secretary of State with insight into the PRS. The 
information will not be in the public domain and there will be procedural 
safeguards in place to protect personal data . The data protection principles will 
be applied which  include  prevent ing data from being held for any purpose other 
than those provided for by law and in an appropriate  manner.  
 
20 
 Part 2, Chapter 3 – the PRS Database  
ECHR right  engaged: Article 8  
51. The PRS database  measure  will engage and interfere in a landlord’s Article 8 
rights as  it will  requir e landlords to register their personal details and details 
relating to their property on a public database . In time , this will result in certain 
criminal offence data  pertaining to a landlord  (relevant banning orders and 
relevant banning order offences, related financial penalties and possibly other 
relevant criminal offences) being publicly accessible on the database .  
Justification  
52. The policy pursues the legitimate aim of providing tenants access to essential 
information relating to the landlord and property that they are renting or 
considering renting , prior to entering into a binding tenancy agreement. This is 
to enable them to make an informed decision about whether  to rent from a 
particular landlord. The objectives of the PRS reform programme are to 
contribute to a  tenant’s physical health and safety, and also their sense of 
security and feeling comfortable in their home. Part of this is ensuring a tenant 
knows who their landlord/proposed landlord is and if they are subject to an 
unspent criminal conviction . Similarly, a tenant should be able to find out that 
the landlord of a property the tenant  rents or is proposing to rent has been 
issued with a banning order and therefore is not permitted to let the property or 
has committed a banning order offence relevant to the landlord/tenant 
relationship.  The committal of housing specific offences has a clear link to the 
decision to enter i nto a tenancy agreement . 
53. The policy  will also significantly support LHAs to target enforcement action  (as 
referred to above in the general legitimate aim)  across the PRS in England and 
to cross -reference landlords who operate across multiple local authorit y areas .  
54. The government’s position is that the PRS Database measure and powers 
within Part 2 are proportionate in meeting these  legitimate aim s, for reasons 
that include : 
 
21 
 - The relevant  banning order offences must have been committed in relation to 
letting property in order to fall into scope.  
- Banning order offences will only be publicly accessible where the offence has 
been committed after the commencement of  Bill’s PRS database  provisions. 
Residential landlords will therefore be on notice that, subject to the exercise of 
regulation -making powers in the Bill, their relevant criminal offence data is likely 
to be disclosed for a period of time on a public database. This may act as a 
deterrent for landlords who otherwise would go on to commit banning order 
offences.  
- It is intended that a person will be able to search the database using search 
terms like the landlord’s name, the landlord’s unique registration number, the 
property address or the dwelling’s unique ID number. It will not be possible for 
tenants to view a landlord ’s entire rental portfolio or personal contact details. 
The aim of these limited search capabilities is to promote proportionality.   
- In practice, it is envisaged that the PRS  datab ase will operate on a self -serve 
basis, meaning that landlords will have the opportunity to register all relevant 
details about themselves and their rental properties directly. Subject to 
regulations made via the Bill, landlords will also be able to demonstra te legal 
compliance with PRS standards by providing information or documents directly 
to the Operator. Landlords will be able to access the database and update their 
registration record at any time. This wi ll enable landlords to directly control the 
content of their residential landlord and dwelling entries, provided the entries 
are compliant with the PRS  database  measures  generally. The information 
contained on the PRS  database  will be limited to what is necessary to achieve 
the aims pursued by the Renters’ Rights Bill.  
- The Operator must ensure LHAs are able to edit the database for the purpose 
of making entries relating to banning orders, meaning inaccurate, duplicate or 
incorrect entries about residential landlords and/or their dwellings entered by 
LHAs can be easily re ctified. The database operator will also have a power to 
edit the database, which will facilitate the correction of inaccurate and/or 
duplicate landlord and dwelling records.  
 
22 
 - The scope of landlord personal information contained in a database entry and 
the extent to which the information is available to the public will be limited  by 
regulations made under the Bill.  
- Only relevant offences which are reasonably likely to have a bearing on a 
person’s decision to enter into a tenancy agreement will be made public.  
- The government  intend s that the regulations will  confer a function on the 
database operator to provide landlords with a reasonable notice period before 
a banning order database entry is made. During the notice period, landlords will 
have the opportunity to inform the LHA and Operator of any mistakes bef ore 
the entry goes live on the database.    
- The Bill provides limits the period for which landlord criminal offence data can 
be recorded on the database. . The database operator must remove an entry 
made under clause 90 after 10 years from the day on which the entry was made.  
Part 3 – Decent Homes Standard  
ECHR right engaged: A1P1  
55. The proposed amendments to Part 1 of the Housing Act 2004 which will 
facilitate the introduction of minimum requirements that rented properties must 
meet constitute an interference with landlords’ right to the peaceful enjoyment 
of their possessions .  This  is likely to amount to a control of use.  
56. Normally it is the immediate landlord of the occupier of the property concerned 
whose A1P1 rights will be subject to interference as a result of the proposed 
amendments to Part 1 of the HA 2004. This is because the immediate landlord 
will, in most cases, b e subject to enforcement action by the LHA if the relevant 
requirements are not met, and the immediate landlord will be responsible for 
the costs of complying with those requirements. However, there may be some 
circumstances in which a superior landlord wo uld be responsible for ensuring 
compliance with those requirements (e.g. where the common parts of a block 
of flats fail to meet the requirements or a “rent-to-rent" arrangement is in place).  
 
23 
 Justification  
57. The interference with landlords’ A1P1 rights necessitated by the introduction of 
the D ecent Homes Standard  into the PRS is in pursuit of the general  legitimate  
interest  outlined above – in particular the need to ensure tenants live in a decent 
home and to protect the health and safety of tenants. Requiring landlords to 
comply with the DHS is proportionate relative to that aim. Arguably, landlords 
should already be ensuring that their properties meet a minimum decency 
standard and meeting the associated costs.  
58. Moreover, the enforcement action to which landlords will be exposed if their 
property fails to meet the requirements will be subject to procedural safeguards. 
In addition to being able to request revocation or variation of the enforcement 
notice or order , there is a right of appeal to the First -tier Tribunal in respect of 
every type of enforcement action (apart from the service of a hazard awareness 
notice ). If a hazard awareness notice is served it must set out the authority’s 
reasons for deciding to serve  the notice, including their reasons for deciding 
that serving the notice is the most appropriate course of action. Judicial review 
will therefore be an option for a landlord who believes that a hazard awareness 
notice has been served illegally, irrational ly or unfairly.   
59. The revised standard will be subject to a public consultation before it is finalised, 
which will consider the views of those impacted, including landlords and 
tenants, and will review what proportionate costs to landlords will entail.  
Part 4, Chapter 1: Rent Repayment Orders  
ECHR Rights engaged: Article 6 and A1P1  
60. The provisions which bring superior landlords within scope of the licensing 
offences (and , by amendment of the provisions governing service of 
improvement notices,  the offence of non -compliance with an improvement 
notice ) in the Housing Act 2004  will engage  the Article  6 rights of superior 
landlords.  This is because  these are strict  liability offences and the onus will be 
 
24 
 on superior landlord s to establish one of the statutory defences to avoid 
conviction or a rent repayment order  (RRO)  being made against them.  
61. The provisions are also likely to engage the A1P1 rights of superior landlords 
who may be made subject to a rent repayment order as a result of being brought 
in scope of the licensing offences in the Housing Act 2004.  
Justification  
62. The Housing Act 2004 RRO offences are designed to regulate conduct in the 
public interest . There is a strong public interest in ensuring that the responsible 
person complies with enforcement notices served under Part 1 and the 
licensing regimes under Parts 2 and 3 to support proper management of 
housing for the health and safety of occupiers and others. The changes made 
by the Bill aim to achieve  that by ensuring that enforcement is not circumvented 
by artificial arrangements and that action  may be taken against superior 
landlords where appropriate.  
63. The changes made by the Bill do not alter the offences  themselves,  which are 
and will remain strict liability,  and additional statutory defences are provided as 
a safeguard for superior landlords who have  a reasonable excuse for not 
knowing that the property was one that should be licensed, or took all 
reasonably practicable steps to ensure it was  licensed , or had some other 
reasonable excuse for failing to ensure  that the property was licensed as 
required . This helps to strike the right balance between the public interest and 
the protection of the rights of the individual landlord.  
64. To the extent the provisions also engage and constitute an interference with the 
A1P1 rights of superior landlord s and corporate officers  (due to the possibility 
of them being made subject to a rent repayment orde r), this  interference would 
be provided for by law. It would serve the legitimate public purpose of deterring 
superior landlords and corporate officers from committing RRO offences and 
the penalty would be proportionate given the wide margin of appreciation 
enjoyed  by States in relation to question s of economic and social policy.  
 
25 
 Part 4 Chapter 3 Investigatory Powers of Entry  
ECHR Rights engaged: Article 8, A1P1 and Article 6 (if legally privileged documents 
are discovered during search of premises)   
Interference  
65. Investigatory Powers provisions are included in the Bill to bolster the 
enforcement powers of local authorities and to enable investigat ion of  a wider 
range of regulatory breaches and offences in the PRS.  
66. The powers to enter domestic premises are modelled on sections 239 (powers 
of entry) and 240 (warrant to authorise entry) of the HA 2004. The powers of 
entry in relation to business premises are modelled on paragraph 23 (Power to 
enter premises without war rant) of Schedule 5 (investigatory powers) of the 
Consumer Rights Act 2015.  Both powers can be exercised with or without a 
warrant.  
67. In the case of routine inspections, the powers to enter both domestic and 
business premises require 24 hours’ notice to be given to an occupier. Notice 
is not required, however, for non -routine inspections (where giving notice would 
defeat the purpose of t he entry or notice is not reasonably practicable). Notice 
also need not be given if an occupier has waived the right to notice.  
Domestic premises  
68. The power of entry into domestic premises, where it is suspected that the 
premises is subject to a residential tenancy, will be an interference with an 
individual’s home and potentially private and family life for the purposes of 
Article 8. It will also be  an interference with the peaceful enjoyment of property 
for the purposes of A1P1. Where a power of entry is exercised with the informed 
consent of the occupier they may be taken to have waived their rights under 
Article 8 or Article 1 First Protocol.  
 
26 
 69. Article 6 could be engaged if legally privileged documents are found during a 
search of premises.  
Business premises  
70. Entering and searching business premises can be considered interference with 
the right to a home under Article 8 ECHR (see Niemietz v Germany 13710/88 ). 
Where items are seized during or following the search this will engage A1P1 
amounting to a control of property.  
Justification  
71.  The investigatory powers set out in the Bill are in pursuit of the general 
legitimate aim set out above of improving the enforcement capabilities of local 
housing authorities.  
72. The power of entry in relation to domestic premises is limited to investigating 
two matters: whether there has been an offence under the Protection from 
Eviction Act 1977 , or a breach or offence under the PRS Database  
73. Under existing legislation , local councils do not have the power to enter 
residential premises to ascertain whether an offence under section 1 Protection 
from Eviction Act 1977 has taken place. Th is signifi cantly impacts the ability of 
LHAs  to effectively enforce the legislation.   
74. The powers to enter domestic premises pursues the legitimate aim of the proper 
investigation and enforcement of unlawful eviction and harassment, preventing 
and detecting serious crime. The effective enforcement of unlawful eviction is 
also necessary to pr otect the rights of tenants to quiet enjoyment of their 
homes. The power of entry into residential premises also pursues the legitimate 
aim of protection of health. This is because is some cases harassment can take 
the form of cutting off essential service s, such as gas and electricity, which can 
have serious impacts on a tenant’s health. Entry into domestic property 
provides a means by which local authorities can gather evidence that unlawful 
eviction or harassment has occurred. Often such evidence will be  inside 
 
27 
 premises, therefore the inability to enter premises significantly weakens 
enforcement.  
75. The power to enter domestic premises can also be exercised in order to 
investigate suspected breaches and offences of the Database provisions in the 
Bill. In order for the  PRS Database to achieve its objectives it is crucial that a 
landlord cannot avoid registering on the Database, simply by not registering or 
falsely stating that a property is not rented out. The strongest evidence to 
determine whether a property is rented out  is obtained by effecting entry. In 
doing so a local housing authority will be able to see evidence such as notices 
left by landlords and locks on individual bedroom doors. The power of entry 
pursues the legitimate aim of prevention of crime, protection of  health and the 
protection of the rights and freedoms of others. With an awareness of which 
properties are rented out , the LHA can also enforce against poor housing 
standards and enforce tenants ’ rights, especially in respect of those tenants 
who are vulnerable and may not know their rights or be unable to voice them. 
The power is a proportionate means of achieving the legitimate aim because it 
supports making PRS properties safe and protecting th e rights of tenants.  
Additionally, entry will be either with  the co -operation of the occupier or with 
judicial scrutiny through a warrant.  
76. The Bill will also introduce the Decent Homes Standard (DHS) into Part 1 of the 
HA 2004. Section 239 of the HA 2004 already grants a LHA a power of entry to 
determine whether any functions under Part 1 should be exercised in relation 
to the premises in que stion. A power of entry will therefore attach to the 
enforcement of the DHS  and therefore the legitimate aims underlying t he DHS 
(protecting the health and safety of tenants by ensuring they live in a decent 
home) also underpins the connected investigatory  powers.



Rivers,  Streams  and Lakes  (Protected  Status)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Designation  of rivers,  streams  and lakes  as having  protected  status 
2 Regulations 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 150 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the designation  of rivers,  streams  and lakes  as having 
protected  status;  to specify  criteria  for minimum  standards  that a site must 
meet  where  it has been  designated  as a river,  stream  or lake with  protected 
status;  to set minimum  standards  of water  quality,  safety,  environmental 
management  and provision  of information  in relation  to such  sites;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Designation  of rivers,  streams  and lakes  as having  protected  status 
(1) The Secretary  of State  may  designate  a river,  stream  or lake in England  as 
having  protected  status. 
(2) Where  a site has been  designated  under  subsection  (1)— 
5 (a) it must  meet  such  standards  for— 
(i) water  quality, 
(ii) safety,  and 
(iii) environmental  management 
as the Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  prescribe,  and 
10 (b) information  about  compliance  with  the requirements  of paragraph  (a) 
must  be made  available  to the public. 
(3) Regulations  under  subsection  (2) must  set standards  which  ensure  that a 
designated  site offers— 
(a) water  suitable  for bathing,  and 
15 (b) conditions  which  are conducive  to maintaining  and increasing 
biodiversity. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations— 
(a) set priorities  for public  authorities;  and 
(b) confer  responsibilities  and powers  on public  authorities 
20 in relation  to sites  designated  under  subsection  (1). 
59/1 Bill 150 1 Rivers,  Streams  and Lakes  (Protected  Status)  Bill 
2 Regulations 
(1) Regulations  under  this Act— 
(a) are to be made  by statutory  instrument; 
(b) may  make  different  provision  for different  purposes; 
5 (c) may  make  transitional  and saving  provision; 
(d) may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before 
and approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
(2) Before  laying  draft  regulations  under  this Act before  Parliament  the Secretary 
of State  must  consult— 
10 (a) the Environment  Agency, 
(b) Natural  England, 
(c) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
15 (2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Rivers,  Streams  and Lakes  (Protected  Status) 
Act 2025. Rivers,  Streams  and Lakes  (Protected  Status)  Bill 2 
Rivers,  Streams  and Lakes  (Protected  Status)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for the designation  of rivers,  streams  and lakes  as having  protected 
status;  to specify  criteria  for minimum  standards  that a site must  meet  where  it has 
been  designated  as a river,  stream  or lake with  protected  status;  to set minimum 
standards  of water  quality,  safety,  environmental  management  and provision  of 
information  in relation  to such  sites;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Victoria  Collins 
supported  by Jess Brown-Fuller , 
Dr Danny  Chambers , Edward  Morello , 
Tom Gordon , Alex  Brewer , Calum  Miller , 
Tessa  Munt  and Manuela  Perteghella . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   10th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 150



Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Causing  death  or serious  injury  by dangerous,  careless  or inconsiderate  cycling 
2 Compulsory  insurance  for cycles 
3 Penalties 
4 Review:  misuse  of electric  scooters 
5 Annual  report:  cycling  offences 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 HL Bill 55 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Road  Traffic  Act 1988  and the Road  Traffic  Offenders  Act 1988  to 
create  criminal  offences  relating  to dangerous,  careless  or inconsiderate  cycling 
and cycling  without  compulsory  insurance,  in particular  applying  to pedal 
cycles,  electrically  assisted  pedal  cycles  and electric  scooters;  to publish  an 
annual  report  on cycling  offences;  and to require  a review  of the impact  of 
the dangerous  use of electric  scooters  on other  road  users. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Causing  death  or serious  injury  by dangerous,  careless  or inconsiderate 
cycling 
(1) The Road  Traffic  Act 1988  is amended  as follows. 
(2) Before  section  28 (dangerous  cycling)  insert— 
5 “27A Causing  death  by dangerous  cycling 
A person  who  causes  the death  of another  person  by riding  a cycle 
dangerously  (as defined  in section  28) on a road  or other  public  place 
is guilty  of an offence. 
27B Causing  serious  injury  by dangerous  cycling 
10 (1) A person  who  causes  serious  injury  to another  person  by riding  a 
cycle  dangerously  (as defined  in section  28) on a road  or other  public 
place  is guilty  of an offence. 
(2) In this section  “serious  injury”  means— 
(a) 
15in England  and Wales,  physical  harm  which  amounts  to 
grievous  bodily  harm  for the purposes  of the Offences  against 
the Person  Act 1861,  and 
(b) in Scotland,  severe  physical  injury. 
59/1 HL Bill 55 1 Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 
27C Causing  death  by careless,  or inconsiderate,  cycling 
A person  who  causes  the death  of another  person  by riding  a cycle 
on a road  or other  public  place  without  due care and attention,  or 
5without  reasonable  consideration  for other  persons  using  the road  or 
place,  is guilty  of an offence. ” 
(3) In section  28 (dangerous  cycling),  after  subsection  (3) insert— 
“(4) For the purposes  of subsection  (2), what  would  be expected  of a 
competent  and careful  cyclist  includes  that their  cycle  is equipped  and 
10maintained  in accordance  with  regulations  made  under  section  81 of 
this Act.” 
(4) After  section  32 (electrically  assisted  pedal  cycles),  insert— 
“32A Interpretation  of sections  27A to 32 
(1) For the purposes  of sections  27A to 32 of this Act, “a cycle”  includes 
but is not limited  to— 
15 (a) a pedal  cycle, 
(b) an electrically  assisted  pedal  cycle,  and 
(c) a mechanically  propelled  personal  transporter,  including— 
(i) an electric  scooter, 
(ii) 
20a self-balancing  personal  transporter  (including  a 
self-balancing  scooter,  self-balancing  board  or electric 
unicycle),  and 
(iii) any other  mechanically  propelled  personal  transporter 
provided  for by the Secretary  of State  in regulations 
made  under  this section. 
25 (2) For the purposes  of subsection  (1)(c), mechanically  propelled  personal 
transporters  are to be defined  in regulations  made  by the Secretary  of 
State  under  this section. ” 
2 Compulsory  insurance  for cycles 
(1) The Road  Traffic  Act 1988  is amended  as follows. 
30 (2) After  section  143 (users  of motor  vehicles  to be insured),  insert— 
“143A Users  of cycles  to be insured 
(1) Subject  to the provisions  of this Part of this Act— 
(a) a person  must  not use a cycle  on a road  or other  public  place 
35unless  there  is in force  in relation  to the use of the cycle  by 
that person  such  a policy  of insurance  as complies  with  the 
requirements  of this Part of this Act, and 
(b) a person  must  not cause  or permit  any other  person  to use a 
cycle  on a road  or other  public  place  unless  there  is in force 
40in relation  to the use of the cycle  by that other  person  such  a 
policy  of insurance  as complies  with  the requirements  of this 
Part of this Act. Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 2 
(2) If a person  acts in contravention  of subsection  (1) above  they  are guilty 
of an offence. 
(3) A person  charged  with  using  a cycle  in contravention  of this section 
shall  not be convicted  if they  prove— 
5 (a) that the cycle  did not belong  to them  and was not in their 
possession  under  a contract  of hiring  or of loan, 
(b) that they  were  using  the vehicle  in the course  of his 
employment,  and 
(c) 
10that they  neither  knew  nor had reason  to believe  that there 
was not in force  in relation  to the vehicle  such  a policy  of 
insurance  as is mentioned  in subsection  (1) above. 
(4) For the purposes  of this section,  “a cycle”  has the meaning  set out in 
section  32A. 
(5) This  Part of this Act does  not apply  to invalid  carriages. ” 
15 3 Penalties 
(1) The table  in Part 1 of Schedule  2 to the Road  Traffic  Offenders  Act 1988  is 
amended  as follows. 
(2) After  the row beginning  “RTA  section  27” insert  in columns  1 to 4— 
14 years. 19 On indictment. 19 
20Causing  death  by 
dangerous  cycling. 19 
20 “RTA 
Section  27A 
(a) 12 months  or the 
statutory  maximum  or 
both. 21 (a) Summarily. 
22 
23 (b) On 
indictment. 21 
22 Causing  serious 
23 injury  by 
dangerous  cycling. 21 
22 RTA 
Section  27B 
25(b) 5 years  or a fine or 
both. 
(a) 12 months  (in 
England  and Wales)  or 6 26 (a) Summarily. 
27 
28 (b) On 
indictment. 26 
27 Causing  death  by 
28 careless  or 
inconsiderate 
cycling. 26 
27 RTA 
Section  27C 
29 months  (in Scotland)  or 
30the statutory  maximum 
or both. 
(b) 5 years  or a fine or 
both.” 
(3) After  the row beginning  “RTA  section  143”  insert  in columns  1 to 4— 
35Level  5 on the 
standard  scale.” 34 Summarily. 34 
35 Using  cycle  while 
uninsured 34 
35 “RTA  section 
143A 3 Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 
4 Review:  misuse  of electric  scooters 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  undertake  a review  of the misuse  of electric 
scooters,  including  but not limited  to— 
(a) 
5conclusions  from  the use of e-scooters  in permitted  trials  in Great 
Britain, 
(b) the likely  impact  of dangerous  use of electric  scooters  on the safety 
of drivers  and pedestrians  on public  roads, 
(c) the ways  in which  privately-owned  electric  scooters  may  pose  different 
risks  to road  users  in comparison  to rental  electric  scooters,  and 
10 (d) an assessment  of whether  it would  be appropriate  to legalise  the use 
of privately-owned  electric  scooters  in public  spaces  in order  to regulate 
their  safe use and introduce  compulsory  insurance. 
(2) In preparing  the review  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult  such  persons  they  think  appropriate. 
15 (3) The review  under  subsection  (1) must  be laid before  Parliament  within  12 
months  of the passing  of this Act. 
5 Annual  report:  cycling  offences 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  an annual  report  on the number  of people 
20charged  with  offences  related  to dangerous,  careless  or inconsiderate  cycling 
and cycling  without  compulsory  insurance  in the previous  twelve  months. 
(2) “Cycling”  in subsection  (1) has the same  meaning  as “a cycle”  in section  32A 
of the Road  Traffic  Act 1988. 
(3) The report  under  subsection  (1) must  set out the proportion  of offences  which 
went  on to be heard  in court. 
25 (4) The report  under  subsection  (1) must  be published  within  18 months  of the 
day on which  this Act is passed,  and annually  thereafter. 
(5) The report  under  subsection  (1) must  be laid before  Parliament. 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
30 (2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of six months  beginning 
on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Act 2025. Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 4 
Road  Traffic  Offences  (Cycling)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the Road  Traffic  Act 1988  and the Road  Traffic  Offenders  Act 1988  to create 
criminal  offences  relating  to dangerous,  careless  or inconsiderate  cycling  and cycling 
without  compulsory  insurance,  in particular  applying  to pedal  cycles,  electrically 
assisted  pedal  cycles  and electric  scooters;  to publish  an annual  report  on cycling 
offences;  and to require  a review  of the impact  of the dangerous  use of electric  scooters 
on other  road  users. 
Baroness  McIntosh  of Pickering 
Ordered  to be Printed,   17th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 55



Roadworks  (Regulation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Power  to refuse  permits  for street  works 
2 Duty  of street  authority  to co-ordinate  works 
3 Charges  for overrunning  street  works 
4 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
58/3 Bill 203 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the regulation  of roadworks;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Power  to refuse  permits  for street  works 
(1) The Traffic  Management  Act 2004  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In section  32 (Meaning  of “permit  scheme”),  subsection  (2)(b),  after  “permit”, 
insert  “, provision  for cases  where  a permit  may  be refused”. 
5 (3) In section  37 (Permit  regulations),  after  subsection  (3A),  insert— 
“(3B) Permit  regulations  must  enable  a local  highway  authority,  a strategic 
highways  company  or (as the case may  be) the Secretary  of State  (“the 
authority”)  to refuse  the grant  of a permit  where,  in the opinion  of 
10the authority,  the works  in respect  of which  a permit  has been  applied 
for would  cause  unacceptable  disruption  to traffic.” 
2 Duty  of street  authority  to co-ordinate  works 
(1) Section  59 of the New  Roads  and Street  Works  Act 1991  is amended  as follows. 
(2) In subsection  (1), leave  out “shall  use their  best endeavours”  and insert  “must 
take all practicable  steps”. 
15 3 Charges  for overrunning  street  works 
(1) Section  74 of the New  Roads  and Street  Works  Act 1991  is amended  by the 
insertion  after  subsection  (2A)  of the following— 
“(2B) The regulations  may  provide  for an undertaker  who  has incurred 
20charges  on multiple  occasions,  or payable  to more  than  one highway 
authority,  to incur  penalty  charges  of up to 10% of the annual  turnover 
of the undertaker,  and for those  charges  to be distributed  to the 
authority,  or amongst  the authorities,  concerned.” 
(2) Regulation  9 of the Street  Works  (Charges  for Unreasonably  Prolonged 1 
Occupation  of the Highway)  (England)  Regulations  2009  (SI 2009/303),  as 
58/3 Bill 203 1 Roadworks  (Regulation)  Bill 
amended  by the Street  Works  (Charges  for Unreasonably  Prolonged 
Occupation  of the Highway)  (England)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2012  (SI 
2012/2272),  is amended  as follows. 
(3) For Table  1, in paragraph  (4), substitute— 
5 Table  1 
Charges  in relation  to works  occupying  the carriageway  during  period  of 
overrun 
(4) Amount  (£) 
10(each 
subsequent 
day) 8 
9 (3) Amount 
10 (£)(each  of first 
three  days) 8 (2) Description  of street 8 (1) Item 
12500 12 6250 12 Traffic-sensitive  street  or 
protected  street  not in road 
category  2, 3 or 4. 12 1. 
15 3125 15 3125 15 Other  street  not in road  category 
2, 3 or 4. 15 2. 
10000 17 3750 17 Traffic-sensitive  street  or 
protected  street  in road  category 
2. 17 3. 
20 2500 20 2500 20 Other  street  in road  category  2. 20 4. 
938 21 938 21 Traffic-sensitive  street  or 
protected  street  in road  category 
3 or 4. 21 5. 
313 24 313 24 
25Other  street  in road  category  3 or 
4. 24 6. 
(4) For Table  2, in paragraph  (5), substitute— 
Table  2 
Charges  in relation  to works  outside  the carriageway  during  period  of overrun. 
30(3) Amount  (£) (each 
day) 29 (2) Description  of Street 29 (1) Item 
3125 31 Street  not in road  category  2, 3 or 4. 31 1. 
2500 32 Street  in road  category  2. 32 2. 
313 33 Street  in road  category  3 or 4. 33 3. Roadworks  (Regulation)  Bill 2 
(5) After  paragraph  (5), insert— 
“(5A) The amounts  specified  in column  3 of Table  1 and column  3 of Table  2 
increase  or decrease  on 1 April  each  year  by a percentage  equal  to the 
5percentage  increase  or decrease  in the consumer  prices  index  calculated  by 
reference  to— 
(a) the index  for the month  of January  that year,  and 
(b) the index  for the month  of January  in the previous  year.” 
4 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
(1) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
10 (2) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Roadworks  (Regulation)  Act 2023. 3 Roadworks  (Regulation)  Bill 
Roadworks  (Regulation)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the regulation  of roadworks;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Mr Mark  Francois 
supported  by Sir James  Duddridge , 
Stephen  Metcalfe , Sir John Whittingdale , 
Vicky  Ford, Richard  Drax , Mrs Emma  Lewell-Buck , 
Mr Marcus  Fysh , Mr David  Jones , 
Mr Laurence  Robertson , Priti  Patel  and 
Craig  Mackinlay . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   30th  November  2022 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2023 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/3 Bill 203



Guidance  on petition ing against a private bill  
 
 
Private bill s and petitions  
 
A private bill is a piece of draft legislation which  is for the  interest or benefit of a particular person, 
group or organisation . Unlike public bills, which apply generally  and affect everyone , private bills 
only affect a particular section of the population.  Private bills are introduced by external 
bodies, such as organisations or local authorities, rather tha n by Members of Parliament , and 
are governed by the Private Business Standing Orders . Like public bills, private bills only 
become law once they have been passed by both Houses of Parliament.  
 
A petition against a private bill is a document submitted by an  individual or body who  believes 
they would be negatively affected by the provisions outlined in the bill and therefore opposes 
the bill’s introduction . A petition can object to the whole of a bill or only to certain parts of i t. 
 
Petitions can also be submitted against Additional Provisions, which are  amendments 
proposed by the promoter which affect further individuals or groups than were affected by 
the provisions of original bill . In this guidance, references to petitions against a bill apply 
equally to petitions against Additional Provisions unless otherwise stated.  
 
Petitions against private bills are separate from paper  petitions  or e-petitions . 
 
Petitioners  
 
While anybody can petition against a private bill, only petitioners who are “directly and 
specially affected” by the bill have the right to have their petitions considered  by the 
committee on the bill . Being “directly and specially affected ” means that the bill impacts upon 
the rights or interests of the individual or organisation in a way which is specific to that  
This note is designed to assist individuals wishing to petition agains t a private bill in the 
House of Commons. For more information about private bills, please see the guidance 
available on the Parliamentary website . 
 
The deadline for submitting a petition against the Royal Albert Hall  [HL]  Bill is 
5pm on Monday 10 February  2025 . 
 
Different rules and deadlines  apply to private bills in the House of Lords. Please contact 
hlprivatebills@parliament.uk  for guidance relating to private bills before that House.  
 
The Private Bill Office in the House of Commons can be contacted in the following ways:  
 
• By email – prbohoc@parliament.uk  
• By phone – 020 7219 3250  
• By post or in person – Private Bill Office, House of Commons, SW1A 0AA  
 
 
 
 
individual or organisation and different to the effect on people and bodies generally.  A 
petitioner can be an individual, a group  of individuals, an organisation, or a group of 
organisation s.  
 
If the promoter of the bill – the individual or organisation which introduced it to Parliament – 
believe s that a petitioner is not “directly and specially affected” by the bill , they can object to 
the petition being considered.  See ‘Right to be heard challenges ’ below.  
 
Petitions cannot be submitted in favour of a bill.  However, an individual  in favour of a bill in 
its original or current form can submit a petition against alteration  in response to any changes  
which are proposed to be made to the bill at committee  stage (which can come from 
amendments proposed by the promoter or those that have been or will be requested by 
petitioners or made by the committee ). For more information on petitions against alteration, 
please contact the Private Bill Office.  
 
Writing a petition  
 
Content  and structure  
 
A petition  against a private bill should:  
 
- Explain who the petitioner /s is and where they live (or what the affected business is 
and where its premises are located ); 
- Describe how the petitioner’s property or other interests are directly and specially 
affected  by the provisions of the bill ; 
- State what the petitioner  thinks should  be done to reduce  the adverse  effects  the bill 
may have on their property  or interests and how the bill should  be amended  to 
achieve this. 
 
A petition should not include:  
 
- Pictures, maps or photos. A submitted petition should only include text. Petitioners will 
have the opportunity to share evidence such as photos or maps during their 
appearance before the committee appointed to consider petitions against the bill.  
- Comprehensive evidence or explanations. The initial petition should outline the 
grounds upon which the petitioner is petitioning and summarise  the issues involved . 
Detailed explanations can be given during an appearance before the committee . 
 
The petition  will form the basis of the petitioner’s case to the committee  on the bill so it must 
include  all objections the petitioner wishes  to raise. Petitioners are not able to raise matters 
before  the committee if they are not referred to in the initial  petition.  
A petition  template , which should be used for all petitions, is available on the Parliamentary 
website ; linked here . 
 
When submitting a petition, petitioners will be required to give consent to certain terms and 
conditions, which include the sharing of the petition with the bill’s promoter and publication of 
the petition on the Parliament website. Petitions published on t he Parliament website will have 
the full address and contact details of the petitioners removed.  
 
 
 
Support  
 
Staff of the Private Bill Office can review petitions sent in draft in advance of formal 
submission. Feedback will only be given on form and structure ; House staff will not comment 
on the arguments or evidence contained in a petition , and cannot confirm  whether a petitioner 
does or does not have a right to be heard . 
 
Petitioners seeking views on a draft petition should ensure that it is made available to staff in 
the Private Bill Office in sufficient time before the end of the petitioning period. Staff cannot 
guarantee to be able to provide specific advice or guidance on a petition if insufficient time is 
given before the relevant deadline.  
 
Submitting a petition  
 
When to submit  
 
After a private bill is presented to Parliament, a petitioning period is arranged , during which  
time petitions can be submitted . Petitions can only be submitted during the appointed 
petitioning period.  The length of the petitioning period is determined by the Private Business 
Standing Orders, and usually lasts for between seven and ten days.  
 
The deadline for submitting a petition against the Royal Albert Hall  [HL] Bill is 
5pm on Monday 10 February  2025 . 
 
The introduction of an Additional Provision  trigger s a further petitioning period , the timing of 
which will be announced separately . 
 
How to submit  
 
During  the relevant petitioning  period,  petition s can be submitted  via an online  portal  on the 
Parliament ary website . A link to the portal will be published when the petitioning period opens. 
If a petitioner cannot use the portal, their petition  should be sent  as a Microsoft Word 
attachment to an email to prbohoc@parliament.uk  or by post to  the Private Bill Office, House of 
Commons, SW1A 0AA.  Letters postmarked on or before the deadline date will be accepted as 
submitted i n time.  
 
Payment  
 
There  is an administration  fee of £20 per petition  (not per petitioner ). Payments can be made:  
 
- By bank transfer, using sort code 60 -70-80 and account number 10022317 , with your 
name as the reference;  
- By cheque, payable to ‘HOC Administration 2’ ; or 
- By post or in person, to Private Bill Office, House of Commons, SW1A 0AA.  
 
A petition  will not be considered  by the committee  on the bill if the fee has not been received.  
 
Petition ers against a bill do not have to pay again should they wish to also petition against 
any Additional Provisions introduced in relation to the same bill. However, petitioners do need 
 
 
to pay a further £20 fee should they  wish to petition again when the bill is considered in the 
House of Lords.  
 
After submission  
 
Next stages  
 
Petitions submitted against a private bill will be sent to the bill’s promoter, who may contact 
petitioners to discuss their concerns with the bill.  Petitions will be assigned a petition number 
and an edited version (with sections 1, 5, 6 and 7 from the petition template and some 
petitioner address information removed)  will be published on the  Parliament  website . 
 
After the petitioning period closes, and subject to the bill receiving its second reading  in the 
House, the bill will be referred to a committee . If petitions have been submitted against the 
bill it will be referred to an opposed bill committee , which will hear from the promoter of the 
bill and any petitioners against the bill and decide whether the case for the bill has been 
proved or whether any amendments are needed.  If no petitions have been received, the bill 
will be referred to an unopposed bill committee , which will hear only from the bill’s promoters.   
 
Both forms of committee can approve the bill, approve it with amendments or with 
undertakings from the promoters, make a special report to the House, or decide that the need 
for the bill has not been proven . In this latter  case, the bill cannot  proceed any further . 
 
Appearing before the committee  
 
Petitioners against a bill may be invited to appear before the committee considering the bill. 
Petitioners wishing to speak to their petition before the committee can do so in person or can 
be represented by someone else. This may, but does not have to be , a qualified legal 
professional  – it can, for instance, be a friend or family member. There are professional 
Parliamentary Agents (solicitors accredited by Parliament who specialise in promoting and 
opposing private bills), known as “Roll A” Agents who can be employed to act on a petitioner’s 
behalf. A list of registered Roll A Agents is kept on the Parliamentary website . 
 
If a petition has been submitted on behalf of a group of individuals, one of the petitioners may 
act on behalf of their co -petitioners, as their representative, provided  all of the co-petitioners  
consent.  Alternatively,  the group  could ask someone  else to represent them (as above).  
Businesses or organisations should hold a  properly  constituted  meeting  and pass resolutions  
authorising  a named person (who can be a member of the organisation or an external 
individual hired to represent them) to act as a representative  before the committee . Local 
authorities must be represented by a nominated individual, who can be a councillor or 
someone else.  
 
Individuals nominated to represent a group or organisation can also petition as an individual 
if they are personally directly and specially affected by the bill.  However, petitions submitted 
in an individual capacity cannot be used to give evidence on behalf of the group or organisation 
the petitioner has separately been requested to represent, and vice versa.  
 
Petitioners appearing before private bill committees will have the opportunity to call witnesses 
in support of their petition, and to submit evidence for consideration by the committee.  
 
 
 
Right to be heard challenges  
 
If the promoter of a bill objects to  the right of a petitioner  to be heard by the committee on 
the bill , on the grounds that they do not believe th at the petitioner is  directly and specially 
affected by the bill, a ‘right to be heard’ hea ring will be arranged before  the Court of Referees  
(unless the petitioner does not wish to contest the promoter’s objection) .  
 
In such a hearing, a petitioner (or their representative) has the opportunity to speak in support 
of their right to be heard by the committee on their petition, and the promoter will speak in 
reply, challenging that right. The Court of Referees will then determine whether the petitioner 
will be heard.  
 
Withdrawal  
 
Petitioners can  withdraw a petition at any time  (or withdraw a name from a petition with 
multiple signatories)  by emailing or writing to the Private Bill Office . The fee paid upon 
submission will not be refunded.  
 
In the case of p etitions with multiple signatories, names can be withdrawn by individual 
signatories but the petition itself can only be withdrawn with the consent of all petitioners.



Rule  of Law  (Enforcement  by Public  Authorities) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duty  to exercise  statutory  powers 
2 Police  forces 
3 Redress 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/3 Bill 103 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  public  authorities  to exercise  their  statutory  powers  to investigate 
and take enforcement  action  for breaches  of the law; to make  provision  for 
sanctions  for failing  to take such  action;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  to exercise  statutory  powers 
(1) A public  authority  must  exercise  its statutory  powers  to investigate  and take 
enforcement  action  for breaches  of the law. 
(2) A public  authority  must  ensure  that— 
5 (a) its compliance  with  the duty  under  subsection  (1), and 
(b) the exercise  of its other  statutory  functions 
are conducted  in priority  to any other  activity  which  the authority  may  carry 
out. 
(3) 
10In this Act, “public  authority”  has the meaning  given  by section  6(3)(b)  of the 
Human  Rights  Act 1998. 
2 Police  forces 
A police  force  in England  or Wales  must  ensure  that it complies  with  the 
duty  under  section  1 before  conducting  any activity  relating  to conduct  which 
15is lawful,  whether  or not that conduct  is perceived  by the victim  or any other 
person  to be motivated  (wholly  or partially)  by hostility  or prejudice  against 
a person  because  of their  race,  religion,  disability,  sexual  orientation  or 
transgender  identity. 
3 Redress 
20A person  who  has suffered  material  or non-material  damage  (including 
distress)  as a result  of a failure  by a public  authority  to comply  with  a duty 
under  this Act shall  have  the right  to apply  to the court  for relief,  including 
damages. 
58/3 Bill 103 1 Rule  of Law (Enforcement  by Public  Authorities)  Bill 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
5This  Act may  be cited  as the Rule  of Law  (Enforcement  by Public  Authorities) 
Act 2023. Rule  of Law (Enforcement  by Public  Authorities)  Bill 2 
Rule  of Law  (Enforcement  by Public  Authorities) 
Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  public  authorities  to exercise  their  statutory  powers  to investigate  and take 
enforcement  action  for breaches  of the law; to make  provision  for sanctions  for failing 
to take such  action;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   20th  June  2022 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2023 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/3 Bill 103



Sale  of Tickets  (Sporting  and Cultural  Events)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Transparency  of information  on ticket  prices  and availability 
2 Sold  prices  to be printed  on tickets 
3 Offences 
4 Regulations 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 31 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  transparency  of ticket  prices  for sporting  and cultural 
events;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Transparency  of information  on ticket  prices  and availability 
A person  offering  for sale tickets  for sporting  or cultural  events  commits  an 
offence  if that person  fails to provide  any consumers  waiting  in an online 
queue  to purchase  tickets  with  information  on— 
5 (a) the price  of the tickets  that are available  for the consumer  to buy,  and 
(b) the number  of tickets  that are available  for purchase  at that price. 
2 Sold  prices  to be printed  on tickets 
A person  operating  a ticketing  business  for sporting  or cultural  events  commits 
10an offence  if they  do not print  the price  the ticket  was sold for on the face of 
the ticket  after  sale. 
3 Offences 
(1) A person  guilty  of an offence  under  this Act is liable  on summary  conviction 
to a fine in England  and Wales. 
(2) 
15A person  guilty  of an offence  under  this Act is liable  on summary  conviction 
to a fine not exceeding  level  5 on the standard  scale  in Scotland. 
4 Regulations 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations,  make  provision  for— 
(a) the definition  of the following  terms  for the purpose  of this Act— 
(i) a ticketing  business, 
20 (ii) a sporting  or cultural  event, 
(iii) an online  queue,  and 
59/1 Bill 31 1 Sale of Tickets  (Sporting  and Cultural  Events)  Bill 
(iv) any other  terms  the Secretary  of State  considers  it necessary  to 
define. 
(b) requirements  for information  provided  under  section  (1) including— 
(i) 
5the frequency  with  which  such  information  should  be provided 
to the consumer,  and 
(ii) the size or appearance  of the information. 
(2) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (1) the Secretary  of State  must 
consult  such  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(3) Regulations  under  this Act are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
10 (4) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
5 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  and Scotland. 
15 (2) This  Act shall  apply  in respect  of anything  done  whether  in the United 
Kingdom  or elsewhere. 
(3) Section  (4) of this Act comes  into force  on the day on which  this Act is passed. 
(4) Sections  (1) to (3) of this Act come  into force  at the end of six months 
beginning  with  the day on which  this Act is passed. 
20 (5) This  Act may  be cited  as the Sale of Tickets  (Sporting  and Cultural  Events) 
Act 2024. Sale of Tickets  (Sporting  and Cultural  Events)  Bill 2 
Sale  of Tickets  (Sporting  and Cultural  Events)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  transparency  of ticket  prices  for sporting  and cultural  events; 
and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Dr Rupa  Huq 
supported  by Jim Shannon , Rosie  Duffield , 
Lillian  Jones , Nadia  Whittome , Christine  Jardine , 
Wera  Hobhouse , Sarah  Champion , Dawn  Butler , 
Bambos  Charalambous , Martin  Vickers  and 
Kim Johnson . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 31



[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  to require  every  school  to have  access  to a qualified  mental 
health  professional;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  of school  governing  bodies  in England  in relation  to mental  health 
provision 
(1) The governing  body  of a state  funded  school  in England  has a duty  to make 
5arrangements  for provision  in the school  of an education  mental  health 
practitioner  or a school  counsellor. 
(2) In subsection  (1)— 
(a) “state  funded  school”  means  a school  funded  wholly  or mainly  from 
public  funds,  including,  but not limited  to— 
(i) 
10an Academy  school,  an alternative  provision  Academy  or a 16 
to 19 Academy  established  under  the Academies  Act 2010; 
(ii) community,  foundation  and voluntary  schools  (within  the 
meaning  of the School  Standards  and Framework  Act 1998); 
(b) “education  mental  health  practitioner”  means  a person  with  a 
15graduate-level  or postgraduate-level  qualification  of that name  earned 
through  a course  commissioned  by NHS  England;  and 
(c) for a school  with  100 or fewer  pupils,  the duty  may  be satisfied  by 
collaborative  provision  between  several  schools. 
2 Duty  of the Secretary  of State  in relation  to mental  health  provision  in 
schools  in England 
20 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  give,  or must  make  arrangements  for the giving 
of, financial  assistance  to any person  for or in connection  with  the duty  in 
section  1. 
(2) There  is to be paid  out of money  provided  by Parliament— 
(a) 
25any expenditure  incurred  under  or by virtue  of this Act by the 
Secretary  of State,  the Treasury  or a government  department,  and 
59/1 HL Bill 42 1 Schools  (Mental  Health  Professionals)  Bill [HL] 
(b) any increase  attributable  to this Act in the sums  payable  under  any 
other  Act out of money  so provided. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
5 (2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Schools  (Mental  Health  Professionals)  Act 2024. Schools  (Mental  Health  Professionals)  Bill [HL] 2 
Schools  (Mental  Health  Professionals)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  to require  every  school  to have  access  to a qualified  mental  health 
professional;  and for connected  purposes. 
Baroness  Tyler  of Enfield 
Ordered  to be Printed,   28th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 42



Ordered to be printed 23 May 2024 and published 23 May 2024
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 123  23rd Report of Session 2023–24
  Secure 16 to 19 Academies Bill 
  Dogs (Protection of Livestock) 
(Amendment) Bill
  Special Envoy for Freedom of Religion or 
Belief Bill
  Pensions (Special Rules for End of Life) Bill
  Space Industry (Indemnities) Bill
  School Attendance (Duties of Local 
Authorities and Proprietors of Schools) Bill
  Licensing Hours Extensions Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 8 November 
2023, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Twenty Third Report
  SECURE 16 TO 19 ACADEMIES BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  DOGS (PROTECTION OF LIVESTOCK) (AMENDMENT) BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  SPECIAL ENVOY FOR FREEDOM OF RELIGION OR BELIEF 
BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  PENSIONS (SPECIAL RULES FOR END OF LIFE) BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  SPACE INDUSTRY (INDEMNITIES) BILL
   There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
  SCHOOL ATTENDANCE (DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITY AND 
PROPRIETORS OF SCHOOLS) BILL
  There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
  LICENSING HOURS EXTENSIONS BILL
  There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:   MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament. uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.



Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation 
(Licensing)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Local  licensing  schemes  for short-term  and holiday  lets 
2 Requirements  on owners  of short-term  and holiday  lets under  local  licensing 
schemes 
3 Requirements  on local  housing  authorities  introducing  a local  licensing  scheme 
4 Powers  of local  housing  authorities  introducing  a local  licensing  scheme 
5 Enforcement 
6 Regulations 
7 Interpretation 
8 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
58/3 Bill 43 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Give  local  authorities  the power  to require  licences  for the conversion  of 
domestic  properties  into short-term  and holiday-let  accommodation;  to give 
local  authorities  the power  to issue  fines  and to remove  such  licences  when 
safety,  noise  and nuisance  conditions  have  not been  met;  to make  provision 
about  banning  the licensing  of such  properties  in defined  geographical  areas; 
to give  local  authorities  the power  to vary  the rates  of local  taxes  in relation 
to such  properties;  to give  local  authorities  the power  to restrict  the number 
of days  per year  for which  such  properties  can be let; and for connected 
purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Local  licensing  schemes  for short-term  and holiday  lets 
The Secretary  of State  must  make  regulations  to permit  each local housing  authority 
in England  to introduce  a local licensing  scheme  for short-term  and holiday  lets. 
2 
5Requirements  on owners  of short-term  and holiday  lets under  local  licensing 
schemes 
Regulations  made  under  section  1 must  provide  that each  local  licensing 
scheme  may  require  any owner  of a short-term  or holiday  let — 
(a) to apply  for and hold  a licence  to operate  for each  property  they  let 
prior  to trading; 
10 (b) to pay a licence  application  fee and annual  charge  for the licence; 
(c) to pay fines  for breaches  of a licence  provided  for in the local  licensing 
scheme; 
(d) to obtain  any fire, gas and electricity  safety  certificate  specified  by the 
scheme; 
15 (e) to obtain  an energy  performance  certificate; 
(f) to ensure  that each  property  they  let complies  with  any health  and 
safety  regulations  specified  by the scheme,  and that any risk 
assessments  required  by those  regulations  have  been  completed; 
58/3 Bill 43 1 Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation  (Licensing)  Bill 
(g) to renew  the licence  every  three  years,  when  the property  changes 
ownership,  or when  there  is a change  in the person  holding  day to 
day responsibility  for the property,  whichever  is the earlier; 
(h) 
5to provide  the licensing  authority  with  up to date  property  details 
including  details  of who  will hold  responsibility  for the day to day 
management  of the property;  and 
(i) not to let out a property  without  a valid  licence. 
3 Requirements  on local  housing  authorities  introducing  a local  licensing 
scheme 
10 Regulations  made  under  section  1 must  require  a local  authority  introducing 
a licensing  scheme— 
(a) to publish,  and to make  readily  available  in such  manner  as they  see 
fit— 
(i) 
15the standard  terms  and conditions  which  may  be expected  to 
be contained  in a licence, 
(ii) the application  process  for securing  the licence,  and 
(iii) the licence  renewal  process; 
(b) to determine  an annual  licence  fee for each  licensed  property; 
(c) to inspect  any property  prior  to issuing  a licence; 
20 (d) to maintain  an up to date  list of all licensed  short-term  and holiday 
let properties  within  the local  authority  area which  includes— 
(i) the address  of the property; 
(ii) whether  it is a shared  property  occupied  by the owner  or a 
separate  dwelling; 
25 (iii) how  many  people  the property  can accommodate;  and 
(iv) how  many  days  of the year  the property  will be advertised  for 
letting  and be let; 
(e) to inspect,  if the local  authority  sees fit, any property  following  a 
30report  from  the public  of an issue  of concern  relating  to the property 
or to any other  property  owned  by the same  person; 
(f) to monitor  compliance  with  the licensing  scheme; 
(g) to publish  an annual  report  on the number  and location  of licences, 
including— 
(i) the number  and location  of licences  in each  ward; 
35 (ii) an assessment  of the impact  on local  residential  housing  supply; 
and 
(iii) details  of any breaches  of licence  conditions  reported  and fines 
issued;  and 
(h) 
40to provide  residents  adjacent  to a licensed  short  term  or holiday  let 
contact  details  of the enforcement  officer  to whom  any issue 
experienced  at the property  may  be reported. 
4 Powers  of local  housing  authorities  introducing  a local  licensing  scheme 
Regulations  made  under  section  1 must  enable  the local  authority— Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation  (Licensing)  Bill 2 
(a) to prevent,  suspend  or limit  the granting  or renewal  of licences  in any 
area; 
(b) to set limits  or thresholds  on the number  of licences  which  may  be 
granted  in any area; 
5 (c) to set licence  conditions  limiting  the number  of days  per year  for 
which  a property  may  be let; 
(d) to impose  fines,  or remove  a licence  of a property,  if— 
(i) fire, health  and safety  conditions  are breached, 
(ii) criminal  activity  occurs  at the property, 
10 (iii) the registered  owner  has not obtained  an energy  performance 
certificate  for the property, 
(iv) licensing  conditions  relating  to noise,  nuisance  or anti-social 
behaviour  are repeatedly  breached,  or 
(v) 
15the registered  owner  or the person  listed  as holding 
responsibility  for the property  has had licences  on other 
properties  removed; 
(e) to impose  fines  on, or prevent  from  holding  a licence,  a person  who 
rents  a property  without  a licence;  and 
(f) 
20to vary  the rate of any local  tax imposed  on or in respect  of licensed 
properties. 
5 Enforcement 
Regulations  under  section  1 may  provide  for the enforcement  of licensing 
requirements,  including  civil  and criminal  penalties  for contravention. 
6 Regulations 
25 (1) This  section  applies  to regulations  under  this Act. 
(2) Regulations  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(3) Regulations  may  modify  legislation  including  primary  legislation. 
(4) The following  regulations  may  not be made  unless  a draft  of the statutory 
30instrument  containing  them  has been  laid before,  and approved  by resolution 
of, both  Houses  of Parliament— 
(a) regulations  making  first use of the power  to make  regulations  under 
this Act; 
(b) regulations  which  contain  provision  modifying  primary  legislation 
(with  or without  other  provision); 
35 (c) regulations  which  create  a criminal  offence. 
(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  other  regulations  is subject  to annulment 
in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
7 Interpretation 
In this Act— 
40 an “area”  may  be— 3 Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation  (Licensing)  Bill 
(a) a polling  district; 
(b) a ward;  or 
(c) the whole  local  authority  area; 
“holiday  let” means— 
5 (a) a dwelling-house  let for the purpose  of conferring  on the tenant 
the right  to occupy  the dwelling-house  for a holiday,  or 
(b) any part of a dwelling-house  let for the purpose  of conferring 
on the tenant  to occupy  that part of the house  for a holiday; 
10“local  housing  authority”  has the meaning  given  by section  261 of the 
Housing  Act 2004; 
“local  tax” means  council  tax and non-domestic  rates; 
“short-term  let” means— 
(a) a dwelling-house  let for the purpose  of conferring  on the tenant 
15the right  to occupy  the dwelling-house  for no more  than  28 
days,  or 
(b) any part of a dwelling-house  let for the purpose  of conferring 
on the tenant  to occupy  that part of the house  for no more 
than  28 days. 
8 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
20 (1) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(2) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation 
(Licensing)  Act 2023. Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation  (Licensing)  Bill 4 
Short-term  and Holiday-let  Accommodation 
(Licensing)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Give  local  authorities  the power  to require  licences  for the conversion  of domestic 
properties  into short-term  and holiday-let  accommodation;  to give  local  authorities  the 
power  to issue  fines  and to remove  such  licences  when  safety,  noise  and nuisance 
conditions  have  not been  met;  to make  provision  about  banning  the licensing  of such 
properties  in defined  geographical  areas;  to give  local  authorities  the power  to vary  the 
rates  of local  taxes  in relation  to such  properties;  to give  local  authorities  the power  to 
restrict  the number  of days  per year  for which  such  properties  can be let; and for 
connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Rachael  Maskell 
supported  by 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   20th  June  2022 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2022 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/3 Bill 43



Social  Media  (Access  to Accounts)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  for providers  to provide  access  to social  media  accounts 
2 Definitions 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 73 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  providers  of social  media  accounts  to grant  parents  access  to the social 
media  accounts  of their  child  in cases  where  the child  has died;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  for providers  to provide  access  to social  media  accounts 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulations,  require  and permit  social  media 
companies  to grant  access  to accounts  hosted  by them  without  the explicit 
5permission  of the account  holder  where  the conditions  in subsection  (2) are 
met. 
(2) The conditions  are— 
(a) the account  holder  has died, 
(b) the account  holder  was under  the age of 18 years  old on the day on 
which  they  died,  and 
10 (c) the request  for access  is made  by a parent  of the account  holder. 
(3) Regulations  under  this section  may  include  provision— 
(a) creating  criminal  offences  punishable  with  a fine in respect  of failures 
to comply  with  the regulations, 
(b) about  such  offences,  and 
15 (c) for, about  or connected  with  the imposition  of civil  sanctions. 
(4) Regulations  under  this section  are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(5) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
20 2 Definitions 
For the purposes  of this Act— 
“account  holder”  means  the person  who  opened  the social  media  account 
and is the primary  account  user; 
59/1 Bill 73 1 Social  Media  (Access  to Accounts)  Bill 
“parent”  has the meaning  given  by section  576 of the Education  Act 1996; 
“social  media  account”  means  a personal  account  with  an electronic 
medium  or service  through  which  users  may  create,  share,  or view 
5user-generated  content,  including,  without  limitation,  videos, 
photographs,  blogs,  podcasts,  messages,  emails,  or website  profiles  or 
locations. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
10 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Social  Media  (Access  to Accounts)  Act 2025. Social  Media  (Access  to Accounts)  Bill 2 
Social  Media  (Access  to Accounts)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  providers  of social  media  accounts  to grant  parents  access  to the social  media 
accounts  of their  child  in cases  where  the child  has died;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Max  Wilkinson 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 73



Ordered to be printed 23 May 2024 and published 23 May 2024
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  HL Paper 123  23rd Report of Session 2023–24
  Secure 16 to 19 Academies Bill 
  Dogs (Protection of Livestock) 
(Amendment) Bill
  Special Envoy for Freedom of Religion or 
Belief Bill
  Pensions (Special Rules for End of Life) Bill
  Space Industry (Indemnities) Bill
  School Attendance (Duties of Local 
Authorities and Proprietors of Schools) Bill
  Licensing Hours Extensions Bill
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 8 November 
2023, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Kiran Kaur (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
 Twenty Third Report
  SECURE 16 TO 19 ACADEMIES BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  DOGS (PROTECTION OF LIVESTOCK) (AMENDMENT) BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  SPECIAL ENVOY FOR FREEDOM OF RELIGION OR BELIEF 
BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  PENSIONS (SPECIAL RULES FOR END OF LIFE) BILL
  This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
  SPACE INDUSTRY (INDEMNITIES) BILL
   There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
  SCHOOL ATTENDANCE (DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITY AND 
PROPRIETORS OF SCHOOLS) BILL
  There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
  LICENSING HOURS EXTENSIONS BILL
  There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:   MEMBERS’ INTERESTS
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament. uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.



Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Prime  Minister’s  Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief 
2 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 41 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the continued  appointment  of a special  envoy  for freedom  of religion 
or belief  and make  provision  about  the special  envoy’s  functions. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Prime  Minister’s  Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief 
(1) There  continues  to be a special  envoy  called  the Prime  Minister’s  Special 
Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief. 
(2) 
5The special  envoy  is to be appointed  by and may  be removed  from  office  at 
any time  by the Prime  Minister. 
(3) The special  envoy  must  act with  a view  to— 
(a) promoting  freedom  of religion  or belief  abroad,  in particular  by 
working  with  the government  of the United  Kingdom,  with  other 
10governments  and their  representatives  (including  special  envoys),  and 
with  organisations  outside  government; 
(b) raising  awareness  of cases  in which  people  abroad  are persecuted  or 
discriminated  against  on the grounds  of religion  or belief  and 
advocating  for the rights  of such  people. 
(4) 
15The special  envoy  must  from  time  to time  give  a report  about  their  work  to 
the Prime  Minister  and to the Secretary  of State  for Foreign,  Commonwealth 
and Development  Affairs. 
(5) A Minister  of the Crown  may  give  the special  envoy  directions  about  the 
exercise  of their  functions. 
(6) A Minister  of the Crown— 
20 (a) must  provide  the special  envoy  with such staff,  accommodation,  equipment 
and other  facilities  as the Minister  considers  necessary  for the carrying  out 
of the special  envoy’s  functions; 
(b) may pay allowances  or other  payments  to or in respect  of the special  envoy. 
(7) The special  envoy’s  functions  are exercisable  on behalf  of the Crown. 
59/1 Bill 41 1 Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief  Bill 
2 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
(1) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(2) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(3) 
5This  Act may  be cited  as the Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief 
Act 2024. Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief  Bill 2 
Special  Envoy  for Freedom  of Religion  or Belief  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the continued  appointment  of a special  envoy  for freedom  of religion  or belief 
and make  provision  about  the special  envoy’s  functions. 
Presented  by Jim Shannon 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 41



Statutory  Instruments  (Amendment)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
7 November  2024 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Clause  1 
BARONESS  NEVILLE-ROLFE 
★_ Clause  1, page  1, line 25, at end insert— 
“(6) Where  for the purposes  of subsection  (1) the House  in which  the instrument 
is considered  is the House  of Commons,  the rest of section  6A will apply 
with  “the House  of Commons”  in place  of “the House  of Lords”. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This is a probing  amendment  that would  ensure  the House  of Lords  does not have greater  powers 
to amend  statutory  instruments  than the House  of Commons. 
59/1 HL Bill 14—Running  List 7 November 
Statutory  Instruments  (Amendment)  Bill [HL] 
RUNNING  LIST  OF ALL 
AMENDMENTS  IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
Tabled  up to and including 
7 November  2024 
7 November  2024 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 14—Running  List 7 November



Statutory  Instruments  Act 1946  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of draft  statutory  instruments  subject  to the affirmative  resolution 
procedure 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/4 Bill 111 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  that a draft  statutory  instrument  which  is subject  to the affirmative 
resolution  procedure  may  be amended  by either  House  of Parliament  before 
it is approved;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of draft  statutory  instruments  subject  to the affirmative 
resolution  procedure 
(1) The Statutory  Instruments  Act 1946  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  section  6, insert— 
5 “6A Statutory  Instruments  of which  drafts  are to be approved  by 
Parliament 
(1) Where  by any Act passed  after  the commencement  of this Act it is 
provided  that a draft  of any statutory  instrument  shall  be laid before 
10Parliament,  and the Act requires  approval  by resolution  of each  House 
of Parliament  before  the instrument  may  be made,  either  House  may 
amend  the statutory  instrument  before  approving  it. 
(2) Any  amendment  must  be agreed  to by both  Houses  of Parliament.” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act has the same  extent  as the provision  amended  by it. 
15 (2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Statutory  Instruments  Act 1946  (Amendment) 
Act 2024. 
58/4 Bill 111 1 Statutory  Instruments  Act 1946  (Amendment)  Bill 
Statutory  Instruments  Act 1946  (Amendment)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Provide  that a draft  statutory  instrument  which  is subject  to the affirmative  resolution 
procedure  may  be amended  by either  House  of Parliament  before  it is approved;  and 
for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Edward  Leigh . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   11th  December  2023 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/4 Bill 111



[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the definition  of still-birth  to apply  from  20 weeks  into a pregnancy; 
and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Meaning  of “still-born  child”,  etc. 
In section  12 of the Births  and Deaths  Registration  Act 1926  (definitions)  and 
section  41 of the Births  and Deaths  Registration  Act 1953  (interpretation),  in 
5the provisions  which  relate  to the meaning  of “still-born  child”  for 
“twenty-fourth  week”,  in both  places  where  they  occur,  substitute  “twentieth 
week”. 
2 Meaning  of “confinement”  for certain  social  security  purposes 
In the Social  Security  Contributions  and Benefits  Act 1992— 
(a) 
10in subsection  (6) of section  35 (definition  of “confinement”  for the 
purpose  of maternity  allowance),  and 
(b) in section  171(1)  (interpretation  of Part XII – statutory  maternity  pay), 
in the definition  of “confinement”, 
for “24 weeks”  substitute  “20 weeks”. 
3 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
15 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Still-Birth  (Definition)  Act 2024. 
59/1 HL Bill 39 1 Still-Birth  (Definition)  Bill [HL] 
Still-Birth  (Definition)  Bill [HL] 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Amend  the definition  of still-birth  to apply  from  20 weeks  into a pregnancy;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
Baroness  Benjamin 
Ordered  to be Printed,   14th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 39



Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Requirement  to make  rules  of court 
2 Meaning  of “SLAPP”  claim 
3 Consequential  amendments 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 55 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the misuse  of litigation  to suppress  freedom  of speech. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Requirement  to make  rules  of court 
(1) The power  to make  Civil  Procedure  Rules  must  be exercised  so as to secure 
that Civil  Procedure  Rules  include  provision  for ensuring  that a claim  may 
be struck  out before  trial where  the court  determines— 
5 (a) that the claim  is a SLAPP  claim  (see section  2), and 
(b) that the claimant  has failed  to show  that it is more  likely  than  not that 
the claim  would  succeed  at trial. 
(2) Rules  made  in compliance  with  subsection  (1) may  include  rules  about  how 
a determination  under  that subsection  is to be made,  including  (in particular)— 
10 (a) rules  for determining  the nature  and extent  of the evidence  that may 
or must  be considered; 
(b) rules  about  the extent  to which  evidence  may  or must  be tested; 
(c) rules  permitting  or requiring  the court  to determine  matters  of fact 
by way  of presumptions. 
15 (3) Rules  made  in compliance  with  subsection  (1) must  include  rules  under  which 
the court  may  make  a determination  under  that subsection  of its own  motion. 
(4) The power  to make  Civil  Procedure  Rules  must  be exercised  so as to secure 
that Civil  Procedure  Rules  include  provision  for ensuring  that,  in respect  of 
20a SLAPP  claim,  a court  may  not order  a defendant  to pay the claimant’s  costs 
except  where,  in the court’s  view,  misconduct  of the defendant  in relation  to 
the claim  justifies  such  an order. 
(5) The Lord  Chancellor  may  by regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  provide 
for subsections  (1) to (4) to apply  in relation  to any rules  of court  that may 
25be specified  in the regulations  as those  subsections  apply  in relation  to Civil 
Procedure  Rules. 
(6) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection  (5) is subject 
to annulment  in pursuance  of a resolution  of either  House  of Parliament. 
59/1 Bill 55 1 Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 
(7) In this section— 
“court”  includes  a tribunal; 
“rules  of court”  means  rules  relating  to the practice  and procedure  of a 
court  or tribunal. 
5 2 Meaning  of “SLAPP”  claim 
(1) For the purposes  of section  1 a claim  is a “SLAPP  claim”  if— 
(a) the claim  relates  to an expression  or potential  expression  made  or to 
be made  by the defendant  which  discloses  or would  disclose 
information  relating  to a matter  of public  interest, 
10 (b) the claimant’s  behaviour  in relation  to the matters  complained  of in 
the claim  is such  that it is reasonable  to conclude  that the behaviour 
has, or is intended  to have,  the effect  of restraining  the defendant’s 
exercise  by that disclosure  or potential  disclosure  of the right  to 
freedom  of speech,  and 
15 (c) any of the behaviour  of the claimant  in relation  to the matters 
complained  of in the claim  is such  that it is reasonable  to conclude 
that the behaviour  is intended  to cause  the defendant  any harm  or 
inconvenience  beyond  that ordinarily  encountered  in the course  of 
properly  conducted  litigation. 
20 (2) In subsection  (1)(c)  the reference  to “harm”  includes  (but is not limited  to) a 
reference  to any of the following— 
(a) expense; 
(b) harassment; 
(c) alarm; 
25 (d) distress. 
(3) For the purposes  of determining  whether  a claim  meets  the condition  in 
subsection  (1)(b), any limitation  prescribed  by law on the exercise  of the right 
to freedom  of speech  (for example  in relation  to the making  of defamatory 
statements)  is to be ignored. 
30 (4) For the purposes  of subsection  (1)(a) the matters  that are of “public  interest” 
include  (but are not limited  to) the following— 
(a) behaviour  of the claimant  or any other  person  that is, or is alleged  to 
be, unlawful; 
(b) 
35statements  made  by the claimant  or any other  person  that are, or are 
alleged  to be, false; 
(c) public  health  and safety,  the climate  or the environment; 
(d) an investigation  or review  being  undertaken  by a public  body. 
(5) In determining  whether  any behaviour  of the claimant  falls within  subsection 
(1)(c), the court  may,  in particular,  take into account— 
40 (a) whether  the behaviour  is a disproportionate  reaction  to the matters 
complained  of in the claim,  including  whether  the costs  incurred  by 
the claimant  are out of proportion  to the remedy  sought; Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 2 
(b) whether  the defendant  has access  to fewer  resources  with  which  to 
defend  the claim  than  another  person  against  whom  the claimant  could 
have  brought  (but did not bring)  proceedings  in relation  to the matters 
complained  of in the claim; 
5 (c) any relevant  failure,  or anticipated  failure,  by the claimant  (or a person 
acting  on behalf  of a claimant)  to comply  with  a pre-action  protocol, 
rule of court  or practice  direction,  or to comply  with  or follow  a rule 
or recommendation  of a professional  regulatory  body. 
(6) 
10For the purposes  of subsection  (5)(c) a failure,  or anticipated  failure,  is 
“relevant”  so far as it relates  to— 
(a) the choice  of jurisdiction, 
(b) the use of dilatory  strategies, 
(c) the nature  or amount  of material  sought  on disclosure, 
(d) responses  to requests  for comment  or clarification, 
15 (e) the use of correspondence, 
(f) making  or responding  to offers  to settle,  or 
(g) the use of alternative  dispute  resolution  procedures. 
(7) In this section— 
“court”  has the same  meaning  as in section  1; 
20 “public  body”  means  any person  certain  of whose  functions  are of a 
public  nature; 
“the right  to freedom  of speech”  means  the right  set out in Article  10 of 
the European  Convention  on Human  Rights  (freedom  of expression) 
25so far as it consists  of a right  to impart  ideas,  opinions  or information 
by means  of speech,  writing  or images  (including  in electronic  form). 
(8) In the definition  of “the right  to freedom  of speech”  in subsection  (7) “the 
European  Convention  on Human  Rights”  means  the Convention  for the 
Protection  of Human  Rights  and Fundamental  Freedoms  agreed  by the Council 
30of Europe  at Rome  on 4 November  1950  as it has effect  for the time  being  in 
relation  to the United  Kingdom. 
3 Consequential  amendments 
(1) The Economic  Crime  and Corporate  Transparency  Act 2023  is amended  as 
follows. 
(2) 
35Omit  sections  194 and 195 (power  to strike  out certain  claims)  and the italic 
heading  before  section  194. 
(3) In section  218 (extent)— 
(a) omit  subsection  (2), and 
(b) in subsection  (1), for “subsections  (2) and”  substitute  “subsection”. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
40 (1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 3 Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  at the end of the period  of two months  beginning 
with  the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation 
Act 2025. Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 4 
Strategic  Litigation  Against  Public  Participation  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the misuse  of litigation  to suppress  freedom  of speech. 
Presented  by Gregory  Stafford 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 55



Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
EUROPEAN  CONVENTION  ON HUMAN  RIGHTS 
James  Murray  has made  the following  statement  under  section  19(1)(a)  of the Human  Rights 
Act 1998: 
In my view  the provisions  of the Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill are compatible 
with the Convention  rights. 
59/1 Bill 4 
Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Main  authorisation  for use of resources  for 2024-25 
2 Main  authorisation  for issue  of money  out of Consolidated  Fund  in 2024-25 
3 Appropriation  of resources  authorised  for use for year  2024-25 
4 Appropriation  of money  authorised  for issue  in year  2024-25 
5 Appropriation  and other  use of income 
6 Operation  from  beginning  of financial  year 
7 Interpretation 
8 Short  title 
Appropriations  for financial  year  2024-25 Schedule  —  
59/1 Bill 4 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Authorise  the use of resources  for the year  ending  with  31 March  2025;  to 
authorise  both  the issue  of sums  out of the Consolidated  Fund  and the 
application  of income  for that year;  and to appropriate  the supply  authorised 
for that year  by this Act and by the Supply  and Appropriation  (Anticipation 
and Adjustments)  Act 2024. 
W HEREAS the Commons  of the United  Kingdom  in Parliament  assembled  have 
resolved  to authorise  the use of resources  and the issue  of sums  out of the 
Consolidated  Fund  towards  making  good  the supply  which  they  have  granted  to 
His Majesty  in this Session  of Parliament:— 
Be it therefore  enacted  by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Main  authorisation  for use of resources  for 2024-25 
(1) The amount  up to which  there  is authorisation  for the use of resources  for 
the year  ending  with  31 March  2025  is increased  by £566,935,188,000. 
(2) Of the amount  authorised  by subsection  (1)— 
5 (a) £463,737,669,000  is authorised  for use for current  purposes,  and 
(b) £103,197,519,000  is authorised  for use for capital  purposes. 
2 Main  authorisation  for issue  of money  out of Consolidated  Fund  in 2024-25 
The amount  up to which  the Treasury  has authorisation— 
(a) to issue  money  out of the Consolidated  Fund,  and 
10 (b) to apply  it in the year  ending  with  31 March  2025  for expenditure 
authorised  by Parliament, 
is increased  by £463,992,280,000. 
3 Appropriation  of resources  authorised  for use for year  2024-25 
(1) 
15The aggregate  of the following  (which  is £1,039,448,062,000)  is appropriated 
for the year  ending  with  31 March  2025  in accordance  with  subsections  (2) 
to (4)— 
59/1 Bill 4 1 Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
(a) the amount  of resources  the use of which  for that year  is authorised 
by section  1(1) of the Supply  and Appropriation  (Anticipation  and 
Adjustments)  Act 2024,  and 
(b) 
5the amount  of resources  the use of which  for that year  is authorised 
by section  1(1). 
(2) The amount  of resources  which  is— 
(a) set out in each  of the Scheduled  Estimates,  and 
(b) identified  in that Estimate  as a net amount  authorised  subject  to a 
particular  Departmental  Expenditure  Limit, 
10 is appropriated  by this Act for use, for current  or for capital  purposes 
(according  to how  it is identified  in the Estimate),  in respect  of any relevant 
DEL  matter. 
(3) The amount  of resources  which  is— 
(a) set out in each  of the Scheduled  Estimates,  and 
15 (b) identified  in that Estimate  as a net amount  of Annually  Managed 
Expenditure, 
is appropriated  by this Act for use, for current  or for capital  purposes 
(according  to how  it is identified  in the Estimate),  in respect  of any relevant 
AME  matter. 
20 (4) The amount  of resources  which  is— 
(a) set out in each  of the Scheduled  Estimates,  and 
(b) identified  in that Estimate  as a net amount  of Non-Budget  Expenditure, 
is appropriated  by this Act for use, for current  or for capital  purposes 
25(according  to how  it is identified  in the Estimate),  in respect  of any relevant 
NBE  matter. 
(5) Section  5(4) applies  (instead  of subsections  (2) to (4) of this section)  to any 
amount  of resources  set out in a Scheduled  Estimate  if it is identified  in that 
Estimate  as representing  the amount  of an estimated  surplus. 
4 Appropriation  of money  authorised  for issue  in year  2024-25 
30 (1) The aggregate  of the following  (which  is £850,446,959,000)  is appropriated 
for the year  ending  with  31 March  2025  in accordance  with  subsection  (2)— 
(a) the amount  of money  the issue  of which  out of the Consolidated  Fund 
is authorised  by section  1(3) of the Supply  and Appropriation 
(Anticipation  and Adjustments)  Act 2024,  and 
35 (b) the amount  of money  the issue  of which  out of that Fund  is authorised 
by section  2. 
(2) The amount  of money  which  is set out in each  of the Scheduled  Estimates 
and identified  in that Estimate  as a net cash  requirement  is appropriated  for 
expenditure— 
40 (a) on any use of resources  that has been  authorised  by Parliament  in 
relation  to the department  or other  person  to which  the Estimate 
relates,  or in relation  to the service  to which  it relates,  or Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 2 
(b) for any other  purpose  specified  in that Estimate  as a purpose  for which 
that money  may  be applied. 
(3) Section  5(4) applies  (instead  of subsection  (2) of this section ) to any amount 
5of money  set out in a Scheduled  Estimate  if it is identified  in that Estimate 
as representing  the amount  of an estimated  surplus. 
5 Appropriation  and other  use of income 
(1) Subsections  (2) to (4) make  provision  (instead  of imposing  limits  on 
appropriations  in aid under  section  2 of the Government  Resources  and 
10Accounts  Act 2000)  about  the use of income  arising  for the year  ending  with 
31 March  2025  from  matters  specified  in the Scheduled  Estimates  as matters 
from  which  income  may  arise. 
(2) Income  specified  in a Scheduled  Estimate  may  be appropriated  for use for 
current  or capital  purposes  (according  to the nature  of the income)— 
(a) 
15where  the matters  from  which  the income  may  arise  are specified  in 
relation  to a particular  Departmental  Expenditure  Limit,  in respect  of 
relevant  DEL  matters, 
(b) where  the matters  from  which  the income  may  arise  are specified  in 
relation  to an amount  of Annually  Managed  Expenditure,  in respect 
of relevant  AME  matters,  and 
20 (c) where  the matters  from  which  the income  may  arise  are specified  in 
relation  to an amount  of Non-Budget  Expenditure,  in respect  of 
relevant  NBE  matters. 
(3) This  section  authorises  an appropriation  of income  to the extent  only  that the 
25appropriation  is made  in accordance  with  any applicable  rules  about  the 
appropriation  of income  that have  been— 
(a) issued  by the Treasury;  and 
(b) laid before  the House  of Commons  before  the passing  of this Act. 
(4) Where  an amount  specified  in a Scheduled  Estimate  is identified  as 
30representing  the amount  of an estimated  surplus,  appropriations  of income 
in respect  of any matter  are authorised  by this section  to the extent  only  that— 
(a) they  are consistent,  in the opinion  of the Treasury,  with  financial 
planning  that is calculated  to produce  a surplus  of at least  that amount, 
or 
(b) 
35they  are authorised  by a direction  given  by the Treasury  for the 
purpose  of anticipating  a proposal  for the reduction  or elimination  of 
the estimated  surplus  by a subsequent  Act relating  to financial  supply 
and appropriation. 
(5) All amounts  of money  received  in the year  ending  with  31 March  2025  in 
40respect  of any matter  whatever  by a department  or other  person  to whom  a 
Scheduled  Estimate  relates,  or in respect  of any service  to which  a Scheduled 
Estimate  relates,  must  be paid  into the Consolidated  Fund,  unless— 
(a) the appropriation  for any other  use of those  amounts,  or of the accrued 
amounts  in respect  of which  they  are received,  is authorised  by this 
section  or any other  enactment,  or 3 Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
(b) they  are dealt  with  in some  other  manner  in accordance  with  any 
other  enactment  or in consequence  of the exercise  of a power  conferred 
by any other  enactment. 
(6) 
5Where  the Treasury  determine  that there  has been  or is likely  to be a 
contravention  of this section , the Treasury  may  give  the person  appearing  to 
them  to be responsible  for the contravention  whatever  directions  the Treasury 
think  fit for rectifying  the situation. 
(7) A direction  by the Treasury  under  this section  may  be revoked  or varied  by 
a subsequent  direction. 
10 6 Operation  from  beginning  of financial  year 
The appropriations  and other  provision  made  by sections  3 to 5 are to be 
treated  as having  had effect  from  the beginning  of 1 April  2024. 
7 Interpretation 
(1) In this Act— 
15 “estimated  surplus”  is to be read  in accordance  with  subsection  (2); 
“income”  includes  capital  amounts  but only  to the extent  that they  have 
accrued  in respect  of actual  or anticipated  capital  receipts  or the 
acquisition  of a capital  asset; 
20“relevant  AME  matter” , in relation  to an amount  of Annually  Managed 
Expenditure  specified  in a Scheduled  Estimate,  means  a matter  in 
relation  to which  that amount  is identified  as Annually  Managed 
Expenditure; 
“relevant  DEL  matter” , in relation  to a Departmental  Expenditure  Limit 
25specified  in a Scheduled  Estimate,  means  a matter  expenditure  relating 
to which  is identified  in that Estimate  as to be included  in the 
expenditure  which  is to be subject  to that limit; 
“relevant  NBE  matter” , in relation  to an amount  of Non-Budget 
Expenditure  specified  in a Scheduled  Estimate,  means  a matter  in 
relation  to which  that amount  is identified  as Non-Budget  Expenditure; 
30 “Scheduled  Estimates”  means  the Estimates  set out in the Schedule  to 
this Act (being  the relevant  part of Part 1 of each  of the main  Estimates 
as agreed  by the House  of Commons  for the year  ending  31 March 
2025). 
(2) 
35References  in this Act to an amount  identified  in a Scheduled  Estimate  as 
representing  the amount  of an estimated  surplus  are references  to an amount 
preceded  by a minus  sign. 
(3) In relation  to a Scheduled  Estimate  for a body  listed  in subsection  (4)— 
(a) the reference  in section  3(2)(b) to a net amount  authorised  subject  to 
40a particular  Departmental  Expenditure  Limit  is to be read  as a reference 
to a net requirement  identified  in that Estimate  as “Departmental 
Expenditure  Limit  equivalent”; 
(b) references  in this Act to a “relevant  DEL  matter”  are to be read  as 1 
references  to a matter  expenditure  relating  to which  is identified  in Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 4 
the Estimate  as to be included  in the expenditure  which  is subject  to 
a net requirement  mentioned  in paragraph  (a); 
(c) the reference  in section  5(2)(a) to matters  specified  in relation  to a 
5particular  Departmental  Expenditure  Limit  is to be read  as a reference 
to matters  specified  in the Estimate  as matters  from  which  income 
may  arise. 
(4) The bodies  are— 
(a) the House  of Commons:  Administration; 
(b) the National  Audit  Office; 
10 (c) the Parliamentary  Works  Grant. 
8 Short  title 
This  Act may  be cited  as the Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Act 
2024. 5 Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
Section  7 SCHEDULE 
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2024-25 Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 6 
Schedule—Appropriations  for financial  year 2024-25 
7
Department of Health and Social Care
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department of Health and Social Care
Departmental Expenditure Limit 158,270,901,000 12,655,707,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 10,880,000,000 942,600,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 173,199,047,000
Total 169,150,901,000 13,598,307,000 173,199,047,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Revenue (administration and programme) and capital expenditure of the Department of Health 
and Social Care (DHSC) and other designated bodies, including NHS England (including 
Integrated Care Boards), NHS Providers, Special Health Authorities, Executive Non-
Departmental Public Bodies, the UK Health Security Agency and the Medicines and Healthcare 
products Regulatory Agency.
Health and social service expenditure to and on behalf of the NHS including the settlement of 
claims for personal injury and clinical negligence, local authorities and other national bodies.
Local government services, prison health services, medical, scientific and technical services, 
services for disabled persons, education and training, grants to voluntary organisations and 
other bodies, information services, breast implant registry, Healthy Start programme, health 
promotion activities, research and development and expenditure incurred in relation to life 
sciences.
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic. This includes, but is not 
exhaustive: NHS Test and Trace, personal protective equipment, Covid-19 medicines, 
treatments and equipment and the supply, distribution and deployment of Covid-19 vaccines 
and associated activities.Department of Health and Social Care, 2024-25
Non-Departmental Public Bodies' expenditure on health and social care protection, training and 
regulation functions.
Expenditure to charitable trusts and companies providing financial support and other relief to 
persons who contracted HIV and Hepatitis C through receiving NHS treatment.
Forming, investing in or providing loans or guarantees to companies that will provide facilities 
or services to the NHS.
8
Department of Health and Social Care, 2024-25
Income arising from:Services provided to or on behalf of devolved governments and other government 
departments.
Medical treatment given to people from the United Kingdom in the European Economic Area 
and other countries.
Subsidies and grants to public corporations and local authorities, payments to local authorities 
for use in local area agreements. Official Development Assistance projects and activities. 
Subscriptions to international organisations and international and commercial facilitation 
relating to healthcare.
Charges for accommodation, sales of goods and services, income generation schemes. Local 
authorities under joint financing arrangements. Fines and penalty notices. Medical and dental 
education levy. Licensing of software, use of NHS logo, settlement of legal claims, dividends 
and interest from loans and investments, intellectual property, research and development, 
prescription fraud charges, NHS prescriptions, dental and ophthalmic fraud charges.
Sales of medicines, vaccines, antivenoms, antitoxins and equipment, premiums applied to the 
sale of stock.Recoveries from patients in respect of incorrect claims for eligibility including for NHS 
treatment and general ophthalmic services. Payments from manufacturers or suppliers of 
medicinal products to control the cost of health service medicines and purchasing and supply 
agency arrangements.Expenditure incurred in relation to the Covid-19 Vaccine Taskforce.Payments for services incurred by other government departments, including expenditure on 
behalf of the Department for Work and Pensions.
Associated depreciation and any other non-cash costs (including provisions, impairments and 
impairment of receivables).
Income from the Scottish Government, the Welsh Government, Northern Ireland, Channel 
Islands and Isle of Man for services provided for devolved or reserved work.
Provision of policy and advice to other countries and care trusts. Maintenance of the National 
Joint Registry, conference and meeting events, prison health services, contributions to substance 
misuse funding, use of radio communication bandwidth.
Income secured by counter fraud services from all sources.
9
Department of Health and Social Care, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Revenue and capital expenditure for hospital financing under Credit Guarantee Finance.
Interest and dividends. Income from the disposal of financial assets.Administration income from seconded officers, cost of legal proceedings, staff telephone calls, 
European fast stream programme. Recoveries and income from other government departments, 
recoveries and income from Arm's Length Bodies (including capital and grants), special health 
authorities and NHS bodies. Selling services into wider markets and open government, 
payment by commercial tenants in DHSC buildings and compensation income.
Contributions from the mobile phone industry, charitable contributions, refunds from 
voluntary organisations. Contributions to local authority grant schemes. Contributions and 
refunds towards communication campaigns contracts. Penalty charges, interest and dividends 
on trading fund loans. Income collected on behalf of health innovation and education clusters.
Income received from the sale of capital assets. Income received from the disposal of financial 
assets. Income associated with the acquisition of assets.Licence fees and royalties, sales of publications, contributions by members of the public, 
insurance claims and social exclusion programmes. Other European Economic Area countries 
for NHS treatment of their residents. Income collected for the immigration health surcharge. 
Sales of subsidised dried milk. Income from the European Union.
Provisions and other non-cash costs of the DHSC and other designated bodies, including NHS 
England (including Clinical Commissioning Groups), NHS Providers, Special Health 
Authorities, Executive Non-Departmental Public Bodies, the UK Health Security Agency and 
the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency.
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.Income arising from Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.
Income arising from activities in relation to the Covid-19 Vaccine Taskforce and Covid-19 
Antiviral Taskforce.
Expenditure for compensation payments.
10
Department for Education
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Education
Departmental Expenditure Limit 94,864,225,000 6,095,220,000
Annually Managed Expenditure -2,957,028,000 35,951,137,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 111,328,425,000
Total 91,907,197,000 42,046,357,000 111,328,425,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Education, 2024-25
The regulation of the social work profession and expenditure related to the regulation of the 
teaching profession.Centrally managed spend, grants and/or loans to primary, secondary, tertiary and 
international education, apprenticeships and wider skills institutions, including the purchase, 
development, protection and disposal of land and buildings in support of these sectors.
The provision of financial and other support for students and trainees including grants, 
allowances, access funds, loans and their repayment. Loans to students and support for 
students through Local Authorities. The cost of sales of the student loan debt and the cost of 
servicing the sold student loan debt. Reimbursement of fees for qualifying European Union 
(EU) students, post graduate awards, mandatory student awards, childcare and transport 
support and loans.
Children's services, including early years, childcare and safeguarding, welfare and young 
people’s services, expenditure incurred in relation to historical child migrants and wider 
support for families.
Curriculum, qualifications, and the inspection regime.
Schools Workforce development and reform.
Administering the Teachers’ Pension Scheme (England and Wales), pension costs for voluntary 
services overseas (VSO) participants.Social mobility policy.
11
Department for Education, 2024-25
Delivery of Government Guarantee funded policies should they be required.
Activities relating to the sale of income contingent student loans, including purchase of 
retention notes as financial instruments and repayments against the asset because of UK 
Government Investment activity.
Policy innovation and development, and leadership of the cross-government policy profession.Capital, recurrent payments and loans and associated non-cash items, including the impairment 
cost for student loans.
Provision of education in support of the wider Grenfell recovery efforts.
Delivery of teacher assessments and student qualifications including support to other 
government departments and devolved administrations.
Governmental response to recovery following the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic including 
the secondment and loan of staff to and from the Department in support of the response, 
including loans and recoveries to support its ALBs.
Expenditure and support to other central government departments in respect of EU Exit.
Revenue and capital expenditure to support the reclassification of further education (FE) 
colleges, sixth form colleges and designated institutions in England to central government. 
Including capital loans and loan interest, grants, recoveries and impairments.The costs of the Department, its Executive Agencies, and arm's length bodies (ALBs): the 
Children's Commissioner, Aggregator Vehicle plc, Located Ltd, Institute for Apprenticeships 
and Technical Education, Office for Students, Social Work England, Student Loans Company 
Ltd, Construction Industry Training Board, Engineering Construction Industry Training Board 
and Oak National Academy together with residual costs from ALBs being closed.Education-related payments, grants, and loans to organisations in the public, private and other 
sectors, including employers, community, voluntary and business support organisations, to 
individuals and other government departments, local authorities and the devolved 
administrations. Including expenditure relating to insolvency resulting in either a restructuring 
solution, education administration or closure. Expenditure relates primarily to England, but in 
some cases includes supporting activities in other parts of the United Kingdom and abroad.
Loan and lease interest payable and the efficient management and discharge of liabilities falling 
to the Department.
Acting as the Agent for other government departments in relation to payments and assurance 
made in relation to Covid-19 and the pandemic.
12
Department for Education, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Sales receipts, and rental income streams from sites originally purchased for academies and free 
schools that are not required by the school, penalty income for missed delivery dates in 
construction contracts, repayments of grant overpaid in previous years or where required 
conditions of grant retention have not been met, repayments of loans issued to academies, 
receipts associated with the closure of departmental ALBs. Activity associated with early years 
and supporting families.
International receipts, Music Manifesto Champion receipts, income from providing shared 
services, the receipt of administration fees collected by the Teachers’ Pension Scheme (England 
and Wales).
The general administration receipts of the Department, its Executive Agencies, its ALBs, and 
other partner organisations, including: the recovery of salaries and associated costs for 
seconded staff, the disposal of surplus assets, charges for accommodation, sale of goods and 
services, and interest from bank accounts and exchange rate gains and losses.
Delivery of teacher assessments and student qualifications including receipts from other 
government departments and devolved administrations.Administration and programme income in support of the Department's objectives including:
Activities relating to the sale of income contingent student loans, including purchase of 
retention notes as financial instruments and repayments against the asset because of UK 
Government Investment activity.The sale of goods and services and royalty receipts by the Department including publications, 
its Executive Agencies, its ALBs, and other partner organisations. Sale of research publications. 
Receipts from other government departments, the devolved administrations, and other sources 
(including the EU) in connection with a range of educational, training, youth support, student 
finance provision, children and family programmes with common objectives, and initiatives in 
the UK and overseas.
Interest receivable relating to Aggregator Vehicle plc.
Receipts from servicing sold student loan debt. Receipts from asset sales repayment and default 
recoveries by banks in respect of career development loans, receipts for student support, 
student loan interest receivable, repayment of working capital loans, receipts from the 
European Social Fund to cover departmental programmes, and sponsorship funding.Receipts from other government departments including charges for accommodation and 
property rental income from departmental properties and from its ALBs, the European School 
at Culham, sales receipts and profits from departmental or ALB properties, equipment, or other 
assets (including some repayment of proceeds of sale).
The regulation of the teaching and social work profession.
Insolvency as a result of education administration.Early Intervention Foundation receipts.
13
Department for Education, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Policy innovation and development, and leadership of the cross-government policy profession.
Acting as the Agent for other government departments in relation to income and assurance 
made in relation to Covid-19 and the pandemic.Income and support to other central government departments relating to support for EU Exit.
The Construction Industry Training Board and the Engineering Construction Industry Training 
Board.Governmental response to recovery following the Covid-19 pandemic including the 
secondment and loan of staff to and from the Department in support of the response. Including 
loans and recoveries to support its ALBs.
Income to support the reclassification of FE colleges, sixth form colleges and designated 
institutions in England to central government. Including capital repayments and loan interest, 
grant income, recoveries, and impairments.
Governmental response to recovery following the Covid-19 pandemic including the 
secondment and loan of staff to and from the Department in support of the response. Including 
loans and recoveries to support its ALBs.Take up and maintenance of Departmental, Executive Agencies' and ALBs' provisions and 
associated non-cash items including bad debts, impairments, tax and pension costs for the 
Department, Executive Agencies, and its ALBs, including academies, and payment of 
corporation tax.Income relating to the contractual obligations under the terms and conditions of any concession 
contracts.
Revenue and capital expenditure to support the reclassification of FE colleges, sixth form 
colleges and designated institutions in England to central government, including non-cash 
items for provisions, interest, impairment and other expenditure associated with loans.The provision of financial and other support for students and trainees including grants, 
allowances, access funds, loans and their repayment, the resource consequences of loans to 
students, support for students through local authorities, the cost of sales of the student loan 
debt, education maintenance allowances and loans.
Acting as the Agent for other government departments in relation to payments and assurance 
made in relation to Covid-19 and the pandemic.
14
Department for Education, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Income to support the reclassification of FE colleges, sixth form colleges and designated 
institutions in England to central government, including non-cash items for provisions, interest, 
impairment and other expenditure associated with loans.Activities relating tothe sale ofincome contingent student loans, including purchase of
retention notes asfinancial instruments and repayments against the asset because ofUK
Government Investment activity.
Governmental response to recovery following the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic including 
the secondment and loan of staff to and from the Department in support of the response. 
Including loans and recoveries to support its ALBs.Receipts from asset sales.
Acting as the Agent for other government departments in relation to payments and assurance 
made in relation to Covid-19 and the pandemic.Repayment of student loans, including of principal and interest.
Receipts and levies from the Construction Industry Training Board and the Engineering 
Construction Industry Training Board.
15
Home Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Home Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 16,057,049,000 931,136,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 2,717,720,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 20,880,000,000
Total 18,774,769,000 931,136,000 20,880,000,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Police resource and capital expenditure; crime reduction and prevention; firearms 
compensation and related matters; other services related to crime; tackling drug abuse.Home Office, 2024-25
Safeguarding children and vulnerable adults including reducing and preventing child 
trafficking and modern slavery; registration of forensic practitioners; grants to, and other 
expenditure on behalf of associated entities.
Identity management; passports.
Emergency planning and services; counter-terrorism and intelligence.
Responsibility for the fire and rescue services; financial support to Local Authorities and Fire 
and Rescue Authorities; emergency assistance; improvement, transformation and efficiency; 
intervention action and capacity building in local authorities; Private Finance Initiative Special 
Grant.
Net spending by Arm’s Length Bodies (Independent Office for Police Conduct, Security 
Industry Authority, Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner, College of Policing, 
Gangmasters Labour Abuse Authority and the Disclosure and Barring Service). Payments of 
grant and grant-in-aid to other organisations promoting Home Office objectives; support to 
local authorities including Area Based Grants; payments to other government departments; the 
administration and operation of the department; and other non-cash items.Control of immigration and nationality; Voluntary and Community Sector refugee 
organisations (including the provision of loans); support for asylum seekers; work permits.
Immigration Health Surcharge and Immigration Skills Charge.Securing the UK border and controlling the migration of people and goods at ports and airports 
across the UK and overseas.
16
Home Office, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Police Forces and Fire and Rescue Services pensions; and other non-cash items.Control of immigration and nationality; additional or special immigration services; work 
permits; fees, fines and penalties arising from relevant Home Office legislation.
Identity management and data protection; passports and certificates.
Emergency planning and services; counter-terrorism work, and intelligence.
Issue of licences and certificates; crime reduction and prevention; proceeds of crime; training 
and advisory services.
Contributions towards grant programmes from third parties, other government departments 
and the devolved administrations, the European Union, other governments; the administration 
and operation of the department (including the sale and hire of assets).
Receipts in respect of compensation claims.Immigration Health Surcharge and Immigration Skills Charge.Responsibility for and inspections of crown premises and emergency services.
Cyber-crime. Contributions for Police IT services.
17
National Crime Agency
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
National Crime Agency
Departmental Expenditure Limit 665,938,000 108,971,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 50,000,000 500,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 797,280,000
Total 715,938,000 109,471,000 797,280,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:National Crime Agency, 2024-25
Securing that efficient and effective activities to combat serious and organised crime are carried 
out including by:
Investigating, prosecuting, preventing and disrupting people engaged in serious and organised 
crime. Other expenditure related to tackling crime to support the objectives of the National 
Crime Agency (NCA). Payment of grants to partners to promote and deliver NCA objectives; 
and the administration and operation of the department, its enabling functions and non-cash 
items.
Expenditure including: fees to Counsel and outside accountants, witness expenses, use of 
information technology to improve presentation of evidence, other investigation, prosecution 
and litigation costs, defendants' costs, and damages ordered by the court to be paid by the 
NCA, including payments made as a result of asset recovery activity to individuals, charities, 
companies, other government departments, the devolved administrations, the European Union 
and other governments. All other costs associated with asset recovery through Criminal and 
Civil courts and the holding and safeguarding of third party assets.
Work relating to protection of witnesses and victims or potential victims of crime.
Gathering, storing, processing, analysing, and disseminating information that is relevant to any 
of the following:
Intelligence activities to combat serious and organised crime, activities to combat any other 
kind of crime and exploitation proceeds investigations, exploitation proceeds orders and 
applications for such orders.
Pursue: prosecute and disrupt people engaged in serious and organised criminality.
Prevent: prevent people from engaging in serious and organised crime.NCA's response to the Serious and Organised Crime Strategy:
18
National Crime Agency, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Training and accreditation fees;
Cyber Crime Prevention;
Asset Recovery Incentivisation Scheme;
Safeguarding children;
External contributions towards the NCA's own and also NCA led and managed crime 
reduction activities and grant programmes, from third parties including other government 
departments, the devolved administrations, the European Union and other governments. The 
administration and operation of the department (including the sale and hire of assets, charges 
such as the use of intellectual property, insurance claims and legal costs recovered).
External contributions for the provision of information to third parties.
Recovery of income awarded to the NCA in court or by negotiation with third parties, receipts 
of service provided by the NCA and receipts from any asset recovery activity, including the 
recovery of VAT expenditure where approved to do so.
Providing assistance to other law enforcement and government bodies.
Recovery of expenditure incurred by NCA enabling capability functions that established IT, 
recruitment of staff, financial and other enabling requirements from third parties who provide 
the agency with funds to deliver specific and mutually agreed objectives.Protect: increase protection against serious and organised crime.
Prepare: reduce the impact of this criminality where it takes place.
Work on research and development to increase knowledge and the furtherance of the NCA's 
strategy and the law enforcement family.
Activity to ensure the effective operation of the organisation after exiting the European Union 
including but not limited to contingency planning, amending information systems, 
implementation of new systems and processes and surge staff to new deployments as required.
Expenditure to support, protect and enable the NCA and its officers and national and local 
government and law enforcement organisations during the Covid-19 pandemic or other new 
threats.For provision of training to both internal and external parties.
Expenditure on goods and services to enable the reduction of the carbon footprint of the 
organisation.
The receipt or deployment of resources or people to other government departments to mitigate 
industrial action.
UK and overseas activity including but not limited to:Work in support of HM Government plans for negotiation and implementation of new deals 
with other countries after exiting the European Union.
19
National Crime Agency, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:The receipt or deployment of resources or people to other government departments to mitigate 
industrial action.Income relating to costs incurred to ensure the effective operation of the organisation after 
exiting the European Union including but not limited to contingency planning, amending 
information systems, implementation of new systems and processes and surging staff to new 
deployments as required.
Recovery of costs incurred for work in support of HM Government plans for a negotiation and 
implementation of new deals with other countries after exiting the European Union.
Funds from other government departments to enable the organisation to reduce its carbon 
footprint.
Income relating to costs and pressures in relation to Covid-19 or other new threats.
Pension and all other provisions and other non-cash items.
20
Ministry of Justice
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Ministry of Justice
Departmental Expenditure Limit 10,910,924,000 1,504,451,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 710,287,000 23,303,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 11,935,786,000
Total 11,621,211,000 1,527,754,000 11,935,786,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Ministry of Justice, 2024-25
Administration of the Ministry of Justice, its Agencies, Arm's Length Bodies (ALBs) and 
associated offices including the Office of the Accountant General; administration of judicial pay 
and of the Judicial Pensions Scheme.
Policy and activities relating to the justice system including: civil, family and criminal justice; 
administrative justice (e.g. tribunals policy work), closed material procedures including in 
Northern Ireland, legal aid and legal support; support for victims and witnesses; miscarriages 
of justice; review of Post Office convictions; judicial and legal services policy.
Policy and activities related to coroner, burial and cremation services including the 
administration of the Children’s Funeral Fund.
Policy and activities relating to sentencing and offender reform, including prison, probation 
and youth justice; reducing reoffending; support for youth, women and vulnerable offenders; 
commissioning of prison, probation, and youth custody services including safety and security.
Policy and activities relating to human rights, both domestic and in relation to the United 
Kingdom's (UK's) international obligations; management of the Government’s constitutional 
relationship with the Crown Dependencies; European and international business in the justice 
field including costs arising from the UK's exit from the European Union.
Payments in respect of public inquests and inquiries; fee refund schemes; grants and other 
payments to Police and Crime Commissioners, local authorities, other justice system partners, 
support providers and public sector bodies.
Compensation to judicial office holders, including payments in lieu of pension where these 
cannot be met by the Judicial Pensions Scheme.
21
Ministry of Justice, 2024-25
Recoveries from the Debt Management Office for the cost of administering funds in court; from 
investment managers for the cost of administering the Lord Chancellor’s Strategic Investment 
Board; for research and recommendation work undertaken by the Law Commission; recoveries 
by the Office of the Official Solicitor.
Legal services regulation; judicial superannuation contributions and receipts from the Judicial 
Pensions Scheme supply estimate for administrative costs.Capital, depreciation and other non-cash costs falling in DEL.
The activities of His Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service, including Civil and Family Court 
fee income; Tribunals fee income; Probate fee income.
Fine income, including retention of legacy criminal court charging income; receipts relating to 
the asset recovery incentive scheme; receipts from the Victims Surcharge; receipts retained in 
relation to the costs of fine enforcement and pre-1990 loan charge debt payments.
The activities of His Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service, including share of gross profits 
from sales and services; prisoners' earnings and contributions related to damage to property; 
receipts from external organisations, subsidies and sales; receipts from local authorities for 
secure remand places.
The activities of the Legal Aid Agency including client contributions, recoveries, interest and 
grants from other third parties.
Repayment of criminal injuries compensation; contributions from other government 
departments towards the costs of inquests and inquiries.Expenditure by the following Executive Agencies: His Majesty's Prison and Probation Service; 
His Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service including the Court of Protection; the Office of the 
Public Guardian; the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority and the Legal Aid Agency, 
including costs paid from central funds.
Fees charged by the Public Trustee, Office of the Public Guardian and Court of Protection.Net expenditure by the following executive ALBs: Criminal Cases Review Commission; 
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service; Independent Monitoring Authority 
for the Citizens’ Rights Agreements, Judicial Appointments Commission; Legal Services Board; 
Office for Legal Complaints; Parole Board; Youth Justice Board; Oasis Restore Trust and Gov 
Facility Services Limited.
Expenditure of advisory ALBs on inspectorates, monitoring boards, lay observers, the UK 
National Preventive Mechanism, the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman, Judicial 
Appointments and Conduct Ombudsman; support for the judiciary and other monitoring and 
advisory activities; the Law Commission, the Office of the Official Solicitor and the Public 
Trustee; the Sentencing Council for England and Wales and the Victims’ Commissioner.
Income arising from:
22
Ministry of Justice, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Maintenance of departmental, executive agencies and ALBs' provisions and other non-cash 
items including bad debts, impairments, tax and pension costs and corporation tax.Receipts from: the European Commission; Royal Licences; Crown Office fees; Design 102 
activities; the New Deal Scheme and wider markets initiatives; the Scottish Government, 
Northern Ireland Executive and the Welsh Government; National Insurance Fund and Scottish 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Appeals Panel; the Education and Skills Funding Agency; the 
Heritage Lottery Fund and Sport England.
The general administration receipts of the Department and its executive agencies, including the 
recovery of salaries, the disposal of capital assets, charges for accommodation, sale of goods 
and services, and interest from bank accounts; other charges and receipts received from other 
government departments.
Additional Universal Credit expenditure associated with the early release of prisoners.
23
Crown Prosecution Service
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Crown Prosecution Service
Departmental Expenditure Limit 753,568,000 12,490,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 7,950,000 2,859,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 743,465,000
Total 761,518,000 15,349,000 743,465,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Crown Prosecution Service, 2024-25
Administrative, operational, and capital costs incurred by the CPS in prosecuting criminal cases 
in England and Wales. These costs include prosecution costs, costs of confiscating the proceeds 
of crime and capacity building in the Criminal Justice System along with staff costs, the hire of 
agents, support of voluntary sector organisations within the Criminal Justice System and 
associated depreciation and any non-cash costs falling in DEL.
The CPS has two main sources of income: Costs awarded to CPS in court and receipts from any 
asset recovery schemes or deferred prosecution agreements. Additional to this the CPS receives 
income from the following sources: revenue from contract with customers, refund of 
expenditure for seconded staff, collaborative working with partner organisations and other 
administrative income.
Write-offs and changes in allowances, including for irrecoverable debts, provisions and other 
non-cash costs falling in AME.
24
Serious Fraud Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Serious Fraud Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 59,819,000 33,007,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 88,669,000
Total 59,819,000 33,007,000 88,669,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Serious Fraud Office, 2024-25
Administration of the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) including staff costs, capital and operational 
costs, fees to counsel and outside accountants, witness expenses, use of information technology 
to analyse and review documents and improve the presentation of evidence, other 
investigation, prosecution and litigation costs, defendants’ costs and damages ordered to be 
paid by the SFO.
Recovery of income awarded to the SFO in court, receipts from the Asset Recovery 
Incentivisation Scheme and deferred prosecution agreements.
25
HM Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
HM Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor
Departmental Expenditure Limit 11,786,000 2,676,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 16,058,000
Total 11,786,000 2,676,000 16,058,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:HM Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor, 2024-25
Administration of HM Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor’s Department comprising the 
Government Legal Department, the Attorney General’s Office and HM Crown Prosecution 
Service Inspectorate and costs and fees for providing legal and other services, and non-cash 
items in DEL. Includes programme costs associated with continuing work on EU Exit 
Transition.
Recovery of costs from other government departments and associated bodies including costs 
recovered for legal and administrative services provided and receipts from secondments of 
staff; favourable costs awarded; cost awards made by the courts in favour of the Attorney 
General; charges for Bona Vacantia work; recovery of costs from tenants in jointly occupied 
buildings; income in relation to the Government Legal Service operation; subscription services; 
photocopying services; receipts from sales of fixed assets and non-capital items; rent and rate 
rebates; recovery of old debts; receipts from staff; and other administrative income.
26
Ministry of Defence
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Ministry of Defence
Departmental Expenditure Limit 43,410,407,000 21,753,906,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 1,928,087,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 56,124,873,000
Total 45,338,494,000 21,753,906,000 56,124,873,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Ministry of Defence, 2024-25
Ongoing military commitments, including identifying and countering the threat of terrorist 
attack on the UK mainland and maintaining the integrity of UK waters and airspace. 
Contributing to the community, including through the administration of cadet forces, costs of 
assistance to other government departments and civil agencies. Defence engagement and 
delivery of agreed goods in support of wider British interests. Delivering military capability, 
including the full costs of front line troops including attributed costs of logistical, infrastructure 
and personnel support costs. Research on the equipment and non-equipment programme. 
Provision of financial interventions to the private and charitable sector in support of delivery of 
departmental outputs. To support Ministers and Parliament. Undertake strategic management 
and corporate services. Pensions and other payments/allowances for disablement or death 
arising out of war or service in the Armed Forces after 2 September 1939. Awards to surviving 
members of British groups held prisoner by the Japanese during the Second World War (Far 
Eastern Prisoners of War) or their surviving spouse. Pensions and other payments in respect of 
service in the Armed Forces at other times, excluding claims under the Armed Forces 
Compensation Scheme and Armed Forces pension scheme.
Personnel costs of the Armed Forces and their Reserves, Cadet forces. Personnel costs of 
Defence Ministers, civilian staff employed by the Ministry of Defence and contractors working 
on Defence contracts. Procurement of Defence assets including the development and 
production of equipment and weapon systems for the Armed Forces. Support to the nuclear 
warhead and fissile material programme. Research by contract. Wider procurement services 
including those on repayment terms, purchases for sale abroad, purchases for gifting abroad, 
contractor costs including on redundancy.
The repair, maintenance, stores, support and supply services for Defence including associated 
capital facilities and works, plant and machinery.
Movements of Defence assets including the contracting for vehicles (to include chartering of 
ships, trains and planes), and the wider logistic services for the Armed Forces and supporting 
groups.
27
Ministry of Defence, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Provision of services to Foreign Governments and other government departments. Payments 
for services provided by Trading Funds, Arm’s Length Bodies and other designated Defence 
bodies. Dividends, interest and loan repayments from Trading Funds, Arm’s Length Bodies and 
other designated Defence bodies. Sale of assets. Recovery of costs from personnel. Rent for use 
of Ministry of Defence property and miscellaneous receipts.
The creation and revaluation of provisions; impairments due to the revaluation of assets, 
unforeseen obsolescence and losses caused by catastrophic events. Bad debts and Foreign 
exchange gains and losses. Costs associated with decommissioning.Land and buildings facilities management and works services. Services provided by other 
government departments. Sundry services, subscriptions, grants, including support to Armed 
Forces charities and other payments, assistance to Foreign and Commonwealth Governments 
for defence-related purposes. UK youth community projects. Spending on, including set-up 
costs and loans to, Trading Funds, Arm’s Length Bodies and other designated Defence bodies. 
Support to Afghan relocations and resettlement.
In support of Military operations over and above the costs for early warning, crisis 
management, conflict resolution, humanitarian efforts, peace-making, peace-keeping and peace-
building activities in other parts of the World. The net additional costs of associated 
strengthening of international regional systems through, but not exclusive of, capacity-building 
and other stabilisation activities.
Personnel costs of the Armed Forces and their Reserves includes provision for Regular Naval 
and Marine Services to a number not exceeding 39,650; provision for the Regular Army Service 
to a number not exceeding 97,710; provision for Regular Air Force Service to a number not 
exceeding 35,800; and provision for Officers, Men and Women in the Reserve Forces not 
exceeding the numbers specified in respect of each Reserve Force for the purposes of Parts 1, 3, 
4 and 5 of the Reserve Forces Act 1996 in House of Commons paper No. 529 of Session 2023-24.
28
Security and Intelligence Agencies
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Security and Intelligence Agencies
Departmental Expenditure Limit 4,010,665,000 1,369,593,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 38,500,000 2,200,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 4,672,164,000
Total 4,049,165,000 1,371,793,000 4,672,164,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Security and Intelligence Agencies, 2024-25
Administration and operational costs, research and development works, equipment and other 
payments, and associated depreciation and any other non-cash costs falling in DEL.
The sale of services to other government departments, the recovery of costs of staff on loan, 
recovery from staff for miscellaneous items and certain other services. The sale of fixed assets, 
freehold interest and land.
Provisions and other non-cash items.
29
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 7,885,962,000 2,758,701,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 520,700,000 420,000,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 11,740,959,000
Total 8,406,662,000 3,178,701,000 11,740,959,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Central government response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, 2024-25
Development and humanitarian assistance under the International Development Act 2002 
through financial and technical assistance to governments, institutions, voluntary agencies and 
individuals for activities including: strengthening global peace, security and governance; 
strengthening resilience and response to crisis; promoting global prosperity; tackling extreme 
poverty and helping the world’s most vulnerable; delivering value for money and delivery 
efficiency in FCDO; continued assistance to UK Overseas Territories; costs relating to 
investments in public corporations and shareholdings in private sector companies.
Conflict prevention, early warning, crisis management, conflict resolution/peace-making, peace-
keeping and peace-building activity and associated strengthening of international and regional 
systems and capacity.Diplomacy; hospitality and facilities; international organisations; information services; 
scholarships and sponsored visits; consular assistance; special payments and assistance; 
programmes supporting foreign policy objectives including human rights, good governance, 
international security, the fight against the illicit drug trade and promoting prosperity.Wilton Park Executive Agency; the British Council; BBC World Service; spending by Arm’s 
Length Bodies (ALBs): Commonwealth Scholarship Commission on scholarships to individuals 
from Commonwealth countries; Independent Commission for Aid Impact, an advisory ALB 
which provides independent scrutiny of UK Aid in order to promote the delivery of value for 
money for British taxpayers and the maximisation of the impact of aid; Westminster 
Foundation for Democracy; Great Britain-China Centre and the Marshall Aid Commemoration 
Commission.
Operational and legal costs, related capital expenditure, administration costs and associated 
depreciation and other non-cash costs falling in DEL.
30
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Capital repayments and receipt of interest on development assistance and budget support 
loans; management fees relating to loan guarantees; refunds of payments made under UK 
guarantees to the European Investment Bank; recoveries from other government departments; 
recovery of advances from procurement agents.
Other government departments for the FCDO platform; grants; receipts from overseas 
governments and other third parties in respect of programme funds and receipts from overseas 
governments in respect of bilateral country and sector programmes.
Income from financial instruments issued to FCDO by British International Investment and 
other private sector entities; other income in relation to capital assets; interest and dividends 
from financial instruments; sales into Wider Markets, use of assets and sponsorships.
Non-cash movements in provisions including contributions to International Finance Facility for 
Immunisation (IFFIm); change in fair value of financial instruments and other non-cash costs 
falling in AME; the re-capitalisation of British International Investment.
Non-cash unrealised gains on foreign exchange, defined benefit pensions and financial 
instruments.
Cash fees from financial guarantee contracts.Visa and passport services provided at consular offices; repayments of sums advanced to 
distressed British Nationals.
Wilton Park Executive Agency receipts from customers for running costs, sales and rents; 
Hospitality Section, Conference and Visits Group; Lancaster House receipts.
The refund of certain taxes and duties paid by certain foreign and commonwealth 
governments.
Non-cash accounting adjustments on loans, provisions and contingent liabilities.Receipts for seconded officers and country based staff; rental income; recoveries from staff for 
use of official vehicles; refund of rental and rates payments; rent uplifts and sub-letting; 
abatements and settlement of legal cases; the sale of information material; sales of surplus 
property, material and equipment; legalisation fees collected at both home and abroad; 
telephone and postage recoveries; medical scheme recoveries, bank interest and sundry 
receipts; repayment by locally engaged staff of loans for car purchase and medical and other 
assistance.
31
Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Levelling Up, Housing 
and Communities
Departmental Expenditure Limit -
Housing and Communities3,465,605,000 7,157,829,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit -Local
Government11,337,390,000 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 24,223,628,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 32,044,883,000
Total 39,026,623,000 7,157,829,000 32,044,883,000
Expenditure arising from:
Increasing the supply of affordable housing and supporting home ownership and diversifying 
the housing market; policies and activities regulating and helping people access the housing 
market, whether they are renting or looking to buy; policies to improve housing quality; 
supporting infrastructure and planning programmes including policy; buying, remediating and 
selling land for housing and economic development; preventing homelessness, and supporting 
people to stay in their homes and supporting those already homeless.
Supporting effective local government to deliver public services to local people, driving 
efficiencies and transformation; encouraging action at neighbourhood level; legacy and historic 
programmes previously run by the Department including payments to the Valuation Office 
Agency; research and development programmes; supporting the effective functioning of the 
local audit system.Supporting local economies across the United Kingdom (UK) to boost productivity and deliver 
inclusive growth for all communities, cultural institutions and society in general; economic 
growth and devolving powers and responsibilities at a local level; European Union (EU) 
structural funds; UK Holocaust Memorial project.Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, 2024-25
Departmental Expenditure Limit - Housing and Communities
Supporting local authorities and communities; bringing them together; emergency assistance 
and financial support to local authorities and communities; encouraging race, gender and faith 
equality; helping support troubled families and victims of domestic violence and child sexual 
exploitation; tackling extremism and promoting cohesive communities; Gypsy and Traveller 
policy.
32
Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Exiting the EU, public corporations, including Homes England.Supporting effective local government to deliver public services to local people, driving 
efficiencies and transformation; supporting local authorities; disabled facilities grant; legacy 
and historic programmes previously run by the Department; research and development 
programmes.
Delivery of the Building Safety portfolio and energy performance regime.Supporting local economies across the country to boost productivity and deliver inclusive 
growth for all communities and economic growth; EU structural funds and European Regional 
Development Fund programme; city deals.Increasing the supply of affordable housing and supporting home ownership and diversifying 
the housing market; policies and activities regulating and helping people access the housing 
market, buying and selling land for housing and economic development; capital pooled 
housing receipts; planning programmes and policy.Administration and operation of the Department in connection with maintaining the integrity 
of the Union, and sustaining a flourishing democracy.Delivery of the Building Safety portfolio through supporting and monitoring the rectification of 
safety issues relating to buildings and enforcement by local regulators; reviewing the current 
building safety system and implementing changes to that system as they are required; delivery 
of the energy performance of buildings regime. UK-wide delivery of insurance products to 
rectify building safety issues and a National Regulator for Construction Products, and the 
delivery of a new Building Safety Regulator for England along with training and recruitment of 
local regulators.
Exiting the EU and net spending by Arm’s Length Bodies (ALBs) and public corporations, 
including Homes England.
Administration of the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, its ALBs, and 
associated offices, ensuring that they deliver on the Department’s objectives.Expenditure relating to any of the above areas in the form of: equity investment, or making 
loans through advances of principal (financial transactions); using a payment by results 
mechanism; the creation of liabilities and expenditure related to a financial guarantee or similar 
financial instrument given by the Department; providing grant funding to charities; providing 
funding through endowments as laid out in Managing Public Money; social investment models; 
purchase and management of exchange rate contracts to hedge exposure risk; financial 
transactions devolved to and delivered by local authorities.Responsibility for keeping the Grenfell Tower site safe and secure until a decision is made 
about its future. Supporting residents and victims of the Grenfell fire and engaging with the 
Grenfell Tower Memorial Commission.
33
Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, 2024-25
Expenditure arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Deposits forfeited by candidates in an election.
Insurance schemes.Administration of the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, its ALBs, and 
associated offices, ensuring that they deliver on the Department’s objectives.
Philanthropic donations towards the construction and management of the Holocaust Memorial 
and Learning Centre.
Supporting cyber and digital modernisation.Income relating to any of the above areas in the form of: equity investment, or making loans 
through advances of principal (financial transactions); using a payment by results mechanism; 
fees and charges including by ALBs; creation of liabilities related to a financial guarantee or 
similar financial instrument given by the Department; purchase and management of exchange 
rate contracts to hedge exposure risk; financial transactions devolved to and delivered by local 
authorities.
Departmental Expenditure Limit - Local Government
Supporting effective local government to deliver public services to local people.Supporting communities to respond and recover from Covid-19.Supporting social care and independent living; local government devolved powers.
Supporting effective local government to deliver public services to local people and net 
spending by the Department's ALBs and other public bodies not classified as ALBs and setting 
up of new Development Corporations. Movements arising from pension schemes of the 
Department and its ALBs.Supporting effective local government to deliver public services to local people.
Financial support to local authorities and specified bodies including grant payments; including 
revenue support grant, business rates retention including transitional relief; business rate relief 
measures and Covid-19 measures.
Debt payments relating to housing stock; charges on financial products’ repayments of excess 
contributions made by local authorities; provision for future liabilities, impairments, and 
exchange rate movements including on financial instruments (including guarantees); business 
rates retention; hedging.
34
Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport
Departmental Expenditure Limit 1,610,557,000 630,647,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 4,671,141,000 960,291,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 6,142,105,000
Total 6,281,698,000 1,590,938,000 6,142,105,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 2024-25
Delivery of Covid-19 response activities for Culture, Media, Sport and Civil Society sectors, 
including loan book management and insurance and indemnity schemes.
Support for the cultural, heritage and visitor economy sectors. Support for libraries and archive 
institutions. UK City of Culture programme. Government Art Collection. The Government 
Indemnity Scheme. Blythe House programme. Legacy relating to Unboxed: Creativity in the 
UK. Historic Royal Palaces, Royal Parks, national heritage and historic buildings, natural 
heritage, assets, sites, and structures, and associated activities, ancient monuments and sites. 
Listed Places of Worship schemes. Memorials and ceremonial occasions. Expenditure on the 
Honours Database.
Promoting trade, inward investment and global engagement.
Investment in elite and community/grassroots sport and facilities. Delivery of 2012 Olympic 
and Paralympic games legacy, Commonwealth Games 2022 legacy and related programmes. 
Bidding for and staging of major sporting events. The establishment of the Independent 
Football Regulator. Expenditure associated with ensuring that commercial gambling is socially 
responsible and that the National Lottery and society lotteries are effectively regulated.Administration, operating and legal costs of the Department and grants to other government 
departments. Net spending and sponsorship of Arm’s Length Bodies (ALBs), sponsored bodies 
and associated offices.
Research, development and surveys. Funding for UK membership of various international 
organisations. The closure or restructure of organisations and legal cases. Management of 
overseas development funding for cultural protection.
35
Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Provisions, impairments and other AME expenditure from DCMS and its sponsored bodies.
National Lottery grants made by the Lottery Distributing Bodies.
Associated AME non-cash costs.Funding the BBC, Channel Four Corporation and S4C.Proceeds from the sale of properties, assets and the early release of office leases, fees and 
charges for licences and receipts from concessionaires and sponsors, fees for provision of 
corporate and technology services, repayment of grants, fees charged for Subject Access 
Requests, regulatory fees, levies, data protection enquiries and repayment of loan principal and 
related interest.Income arising from:Associated non-cash costs in DEL.Delivery of other major, ceremonial and commemorative events. New activity arising from 
consideration and implementation of recommendations from the UK Commission on Covid 
Commemoration’s independent report.Sponsorship of and support for the creative industries and film and video licensing. Support for 
broadcasting, radio, journalism, gambling, the Gambling Commission and regulatory regimes 
and schemes.
The legacy of the Olympic and Paralympic Games 2012, Commonwealth Games 2022, 
Unboxed: Creativity in the UK and related programmes.
Voluntary donations to fund a new King's Award for Voluntary Service operating system.Building a stronger civil society through a range of public, private and civil society 
partnerships. Increasing and improving services, facilities and positive activities for young 
people; ensuring a robust legal and regulatory framework for charities; maximising sustainable 
income streams, and providing support into Civil Society.
Other government departments, ALBs, devolved administrations, local authorities, and the 
private sector.
Covid-19 response activities for Culture, Media and Sport sectors.
Government Art Collection, recovery of commemorative and ceremonial costs, recovery of 
associated costs relating to the display and/or conservation of artworks across international 
locations; funds from philanthropic gifts.
Cultural objects of significance received under the Cultural Gifts scheme and passed to the 
Acceptance in Lieu panel.
The National Lottery Distribution Fund, National Lottery operator's licence fees and recoveries 
from the issue of licensing certificates.
36
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Science, Innovation 
and Technology
Departmental Expenditure Limit 605,903,000 13,848,888,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 251,149,000 72,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 16,543,008,000
Total 857,052,000 13,848,960,000 16,543,008,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 2024-25
Grants to and investments in private companies. Governmental response to the coronavirus 
Covid-19 pandemic. Grants to local authorities.Increasing science and research excellence in the United Kingdom (UK) and maximising its 
contribution to society. Support for space related programmes. The payment of subscriptions 
and contributions to international organisations and fulfilment of international treaty 
obligations. Support for the activities of the Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) Office.
Supporting the better management of Knowledge Assets held by the public sector - for social, 
economic, and financial value to the UK economy and the UK taxpayer.
Making payments to local authorities in respect of Local Area Agreements and New Burdens 
responsibilities. Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department. The 
efficient management and discharge of liabilities falling to the Department and its partner 
organisations. The management of the Government's shareholder interest in the portfolio of 
commercial businesses wholly or partly owned by Government; providing financial assistance 
to public corporations and trading funds.
Specialist support services, staff management and development; legal costs; other departmental 
administration and non-cash costs; exchange risk and other guarantee losses; publicity, 
promotion, publications, knowledge sharing initiatives and departmental research and 
development (R&D); surveys, monitoring, statistics, advice and consultancies; management of 
asset sales; contributions to fund cross government initiatives and grants to other government 
departments; regulatory innovation; payments to HM Treasury towards the cost of 
Infrastructure UK.
Expenditure arising from the UK’s departure from the European Union (EU). Association and 
participation fees payable to the European Commission following the UK's decision to associate 
to EU R&D programmes.
37
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 2024-25
Management of Official Development Assistance (ODA) funding.
Delivery and sponsorship of digital infrastructure and telecommunications, including Building 
Digital UK delivery. Sponsorship and support of the digital economy, including developing a 
pro-innovation regulatory regime for artificial intelligence (AI).
The enablement of the use of secure digital identity products across the UK economy. The 
delivery of certain elements of the National Cyber Security Strategy and responsibilities 
concerning the security and resilience of the UK telecoms sector, the UK Network and 
Information Systems Regulations.
Development of policy and legislation to establish a new pro-competition regulatory regime for 
digital markets. International activity to further the Government’s digital policy objectives. The 
development of, and initiatives to increase the UK's contribution to the development of 
technical digital standards. Tackling harmful content online, counter misinformation and 
disinformation.
Development and implementation of policy, including economic security policy, in relation to 
digital and emerging technologies. Development and implementation of policy, including 
research and testing into AI. Grants to private companies for research and testing, and for 
infrastructure to support research of AI.
Development of data policy for the economy, science, research as well as society and security, 
including the National Data Strategy. Work to enable trustworthy data innovation in the public 
and private sector. Activities of the Geospatial Commission, including expenditure on the 
Public Sector Geospatial Agreement, Postcode Address File Public Sector Licence and Aerial 
Photography Great Britain.
Income arising from:
Income from investments; financial investments made by UK Research and Innovation; 
repayment of loans and investments, capital grants, grants and contributions; asset sales.The provision of support for technology firms to promote R&D, innovation and standards, best 
practice and sustainable development, including the provision of financial solutions to 
accelerate private sector investment.
Funding organisations supporting departmental objectives, including the department’s 
executive agencies and arm’s length bodies (ALBs), their subsidiaries, and associated offices.
Support for high-risk projects with potential for transformative change through the Advanced 
Research and Invention Agency (ARIA), including set up costs.
Other government departments, ALBs and devolved administrations. Statutory regulators in 
respect of expenses related to levies from industry. Licences and levies; dividends; equity 
withdrawals; interest on loans and loan repayments from the Ordnance Survey, Met Office, UK 
Intellectual Property Office and National Physical Laboratory.
European Fast Stream; repayment of working capital loans; outside organisations in respect of 
advertising and publicity activities and materials; sale of research publications; the European 
Social Fund to cover departmental programmes; sponsorship funding.
38
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.
The management of asset sales. Payment of corporation tax. Contributions to partner 
organisations’ pension schemes, such as the Research Councils' Pension Scheme. Activities of 
UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department. The expenditure of The NESTA 
Trust. Impairment of loans and investments; exchange rate gains and losses. Association and 
participation fees payable to the European Commission following the UK's decision to associate 
to EU R&D programmes.The efficient management and discharge of liabilities falling to the Department and its partner 
organisations. Bad debts, impairments and provisions; other non-cash items. Departmental 
administration; financial guarantee schemes; regional investment and programmes; enterprise 
for small and medium firms; provision of support for business, including support for specific 
industries; support for innovation and research activity; miscellaneous programmes.LifeArc/MRC Technology, the Ufi Charitable Trust, and subsidiaries and shares in joint 
ventures of UK Research and Innovation, and other partner organisations, the public weather 
service and mapping services.
General administration receipts of the Department, its executive agencies, its ALBs, and other 
partner organisations, including: the recovery of salaries and associated costs for seconded 
staff; sale of goods and services; HM Revenue and Customs receipts arising from the R&D 
Expenditure Credit; and interest from bank accounts and exchange rate gains and losses.
Income relating to legal services, consultancy, publications, public enquiries, information, 
central services; occupancy charge; administrative and professional services; EU receipts; 
refund of input VAT not claimed in previous years on departmental expenditure; fees for 
services provided for energy resilience purposes; interest payments; non-cash income. 
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department. Contributions from 
other organisations to cover the cost of activities they have agreed to fund in total or in part.
Fees charged to data controllers under data protection legislation and regulations. Fines and 
penalties collected by the Information Commissioner's Office under legislation that it regulates. 
Receipts from Local authorities and the private sector. The sale of radio spectrum and 
contributions from other government departments toward the costs of joint schemes.Receipts and profit from the sale of surplus land, buildings and equipment; rental income and 
repayments including from three domestic properties on the estate of the European School of 
Culture at Culham, Oxfordshire and from the National Physical Laboratory. Receipts associated 
with the closure of partner organisations.
39
Department for Transport
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Transport
Departmental Expenditure Limit 17,380,983,000 19,948,882,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 4,973,022,000 -101,402,000 
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 31,878,073,000
Total 22,354,005,000 19,847,480,000 31,878,073,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Department for Transport, 2024-25
Improving transport connections across the United Kingdom. Support of transport-related 
activities including roads; vehicles and driving; rail; shipping and maritime; mountain rescue; 
ports; sustainable travel; aviation; search and rescue; local transport; transport security and 
safety; and highway services. Net spending by Arm’s Length Bodies. Grants to Transport for 
London and local authorities in respect of local transport programmes. Support for other minor 
transport services; use of European funding for transport-related schemes; administrative costs 
and associated other non-cash items falling in DEL. Smart-ticketing and related technology. 
Work to support the Government’s relationship with the EU under the Trade and Cooperation 
Agreement and associated workstreams. Grants to Transport for the North and Statutory 
Bodies. Loans for Shimmer Relocation Assistance Scheme and transport-related activities. 
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic. The Public Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme. Financial assistance under the UK Internal Markets Act 2020 in any 
area of the United Kingdom. Losses and special payments relating to the administration of the 
Department for Transport and its associated agencies. Rail reform. Costs associated with 
Network North plans and cancellation of HS2 Phase 2.
Sales of assets; loan repayments; interest receivable and European grants for transport-related 
activities including roads; vehicles and driving; rail; shipping and maritime; mountain rescue; 
ports; sustainable travel; aviation; search and rescue; local transport; transport security and 
safety; highway services. Shipping and maritime income including, but not limited to 
Registration fees. Contributions from other organisations to cover the cost of activities they 
have agreed to fund in total or in part. Dividend income from shareholdings. Public Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme. Fees for use of clean air zones central services.
40
Department for Transport, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Loan repayments and other income for transport-related activities. Dividends and interest 
receivable.Grant and pension provisions and associated non-cash costs incurred by the Department for 
Transport and its associated agencies in respect of transport-related activities including roads; 
vehicle and driving; rail; sustainable travel; aviation; local transport; transport security and 
safety; and highway services. Shipping and maritime activities. Other costs incurred by the 
Department for Transport and its associated agencies in respect of transport-related activities 
including payments to General Lighthouse Authorities. Net spending by ALBs. Governmental 
response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.
41
Department for Energy Security and Net Zero
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Energy Security and 
Net Zero
Departmental Expenditure Limit 2,912,883,000 8,298,859,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 40,399,321,000 215,030,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 12,597,172,000
Total 43,312,204,000 8,513,889,000 12,597,172,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Measures to increase transparency and competitiveness of road fuel prices.
Support for energy-related activities including regulation, civil emergency planning, energy 
resilience measures, environmental remediation and support and facilitation for new and 
sustainable or more efficient, or less carbon intensive energy sources, technologies, transmission 
and storage, security and non-proliferation.The provision of support for business, including support for specific industries, small and 
medium businesses, regional programmes, programmes to promote research and development, 
innovation and standards, best practice and sustainable development.Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, 2024-25
Respond to fuel poverty needs.
Measures to improve energy efficiency, security and environmental practice; payments to 
energy companies to reduce the impact of government policies on bills.
Work towards international agreement on climate change; promote and support actions to 
reduce national and global greenhouse gas emissions; climate modelling and risk assessment.Support for business and other non-domestic energy bills.
Support for consumer and household energy bills.
The Energy Security Strategy, to enable or encourage the supply of energy, including 
acquisition of, and making available or enabling access at government expense to, energy or 
related infrastructure.
42
Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, 2024-25
Recovery or return of funds for the support for other consumer and household, business and 
other non-domestic energy bills (following reconciliation and assurance activity).Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.Safety, environment and social impact programmes relating to nuclear sites in Central and 
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union and other countries where future G8 Global 
Partnership related initiatives may be pursued.
Inspections and compliance in accordance with regulatory requirements and recovery of 
expenditure through cost sharing arrangements.
The efficient management and discharge of liabilities falling to the Department and its partner 
organisations, including nuclear waste management and decommissioning, and liabilities in 
respect of former coal industry employees.
The management of the Government's shareholder interest in the portfolio of commercial 
businesses wholly or partly owned by Government; providing financial assistance to public 
corporations, and trading funds.
The payment of subscriptions and contributions to international organisations and fulfilment of 
international treaty obligations.
Making payments to local authorities in respect of Local Area Agreements and New Burdens 
responsibilities.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Specialist support services, staff management and development; other departmental 
administration and non-cash costs; payments towards the United Kingdom Atomic Energy 
Authority Combined Pension Scheme deficit; exchange risk and other guarantee losses; 
publicity, promotion, publications, knowledge sharing initiatives and departmental research 
and development; surveys, monitoring, statistics, advice and consultancies; management of 
asset sales; contributions to fund cross government initiatives; payments to HM Treasury 
towards the cost of Infrastructure UK.
Expenditure arising from the UK’s departure from the European Union (EU).
Grants to local authorities.
Funding organisations supporting departmental objectives, including the department’s 
executive agencies and arm’s length bodies and their subsidiaries.
Income arising from:
The Energy Security Strategy, to enable or encourage the supply of energy, including 
acquisition of, and making available or enabling access at government expense to, energy or 
related infrastructure.
Other government departments and devolved administrations.
43
Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Investments; repayment of investments; repayment of capital grants; repayments of grants and 
contributions; asset sales.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Government carbon offsetting scheme.
Retention of financial securities relating to the decommissioning of renewable devices such as 
offshore wind.
Oil and gas industries (including petroleum licensing and levy receipts).
Support for consumer and household, business and other non-domestic energy bills.
The Energy Security Strategy, to enable or encourage the supply of energy, including 
acquisition of, and making available or enabling access at government expense to, energy or 
related infrastructure.Contributions from other organisations to cover the cost of activities they have agreed to fund 
in total or in part.Partner organisations. Commercial loan recoveries in relation to UK Coal Production Limited.
Nuclear Decommissioning Authority.General administration of the Department, its executive agencies, its arm’s length bodies, and 
other partner organisations, including: the recovery of salaries and associated costs for 
seconded staff; sale of goods and services; HMRC receipts arising from the Research and 
Development Expenditure Credit; and interest from bank accounts and exchange rate gains and 
losses.Statutory regulators in respect of expenses related to levies from industry.
Licences and levies; dividends; equity withdrawals; interest on loans and loan repayments.
European Fast Stream; working capital loans; outside organisations (including the EU) in 
respect of advertising and publicity activities and materials; sale of research publications; 
European Social Fund to cover departmental programmes; sponsorship funding.
The sale of surplus land, buildings and equipment; rental income and repayments; the closure 
of partner organisations.
Legal services, consultancy, publications, public enquiries, information, central services; 
occupancy charge; administrative and professional services; EU receipts; refund of input VAT 
not claimed in previous years on departmental expenditure; fees for services provided for 
energy resilience purposes; interest payments; non-cash income.
44
Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Trading Funds.
Asset sales.Bad debts, impairments and provisions; other non-cash items.The efficient management and discharge of liabilities falling to the Department and its partner 
organisations, including nuclear waste management and decommissioning and liabilities in 
respect of former coal industry employees.
Enrichment Holdings Ltd in respect of dividends from shares held by Enrichment Investments 
Ltd in URENCO.Departmental administration; support for innovation and research activity; miscellaneous 
programmes.
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.
The management of asset sales.
Payment of corporation tax.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Renewable Heat Incentive including Renewable Heat Premium Payments.
Impairment of loans and investments; Exchange rate gains and losses.
Efficient discharge of liabilities relating to contracts for difference for the supply of electricity.
The Energy Security Strategy, to enable or encourage the supply of energy, including 
acquisition of, and making available or enabling access at government expense to, energy or 
related infrastructure.
Recovery or return of funds for the support for other consumer and household, business and 
other non-domestic energy bills (following reconciliation and assurance activity).
Repayment and recoveries of compensation and legal costs, distribution of surpluses from coal 
industry pension schemes and coal privatisation receipts.
Refund of input VAT not claimed in previous years on departmental expenditure; interest 
payments; repayments of grants and contributions; non-cash income.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Nuclear Decommissioning Authority.
45
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs
Departmental Expenditure Limit 4,632,872,000 2,759,421,000
Annually Managed Expenditure -523,455,000 56,697,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 10,000,000
Net Cash Requirement 7,841,378,000
Total 4,119,417,000 2,816,118,000 7,841,378,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2024-25
Expenditure by Natural England and the Environment Agency. Represent forestry interests, 
encourage good forestry practice, sustainable forest management and conduct forest research. 
International policy, research, standard-setting and monitoring to support sustainable forestry. 
Land grants, countryside access and rights of way. Policy on commons, national parks and 
town and village greens. Environmental protection and conservation, maintain air and ozone 
quality, increase UK's environmental decontamination capabilities, deliver social, 
environmental and economic programmes; maintain water quality and a resilient supply, 
support for management of inland waterways and obligations under the Water Act 2003 and 
Water Act 2014.
Support terrestrial, marine, waterway environments and protection of water bodies. Fair 
charges for supply of water and provision of sewerage services to customers. Support 
protection of species, wildlife management, habitat protection and conservation. Support 
national and global biodiversity, geodiversity and research. Support for rural and regional 
development. Better waste management. Promotion and support for sustainable development, 
consumption and production. Supporting development of farming and cost-sharing initiatives, 
payments, losses and penalties relating to the administration of European Union (EU) schemes 
including disallowance.
Compensation payments to producers and support for agriculture. Championing hygienic 
production, marketing, delivery and processing in the agriculture, fisheries and food industries. 
Support bee and fish conservation and health, UK's responsibilities under the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and fishing industry.
Support keeping, movement tracing, trade with Northern Ireland, the EU and Internationally, 
health and welfare of animals, animal products and by-products, and marketing. Support a 
sustainable, secure and healthy food supply; food labelling and composition policy.
46
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Non-Budget Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Costs associated with ongoing repatriation of functions and funds following exit from the EU 
and ongoing responses to the Covid-19 pandemic. Specialist support services; legacy and 
residual delivery body costs; subsidies to support delivery bodies; staff management and 
development; other departmental administration and non-cash costs; publicity, promotion; 
awareness and publications; knowledge-sharing initiatives; research and development; surveys; 
monitoring; statistics; advice and consultancies; funding through Area-Based Grants; 
subscriptions and contributions to international organisations; international policy-making; 
working with the EU; licensing, approvals and certification; inspections; compliance and 
enforcement in accordance with regulatory requirements. Voted Loans in relation to National 
Museums.
Devolved administrations, overseas Governments and European Commission; delivery body 
funding contributions; provision of employee and financial shared services to other public 
sector bodies; surveys; receipts from sale of carcasses and vaccines; income from licensing; 
regulatory income; approvals; investments; interest gained; donations and bequests; 
commercial activities; certification; publications; public inquiries; information; inspections; 
registrations; supervision and extensification; administration of grant; waste disposal; recovery 
of costs incurred for waste water testing; fees and charges arising from relevant Defra 
legislation; capital loan schemes; commissioned surveys; research; studies and provision of 
advice; rental income and repayments; income from sale of energy generated on Defra group 
sites; occupancy charge; administrative training and professional services; pension and 
redundancy contributions and knowledge-sharing initiatives.
Payments to devolved administrations.Levy collection; publicity, promotion, awareness and publications; research and development; 
market and supply chain analysis and support; packaging recovery support; licensing, 
approvals and certification. Specialist support services; staff management and development; 
delivery body funding contributions; surveys; monitoring; statistics; advice and consultancies; 
provision for future liabilities; bad debts; depreciation; revaluations and impairment losses; 
legacy and residual delivery body costs. Promotion of affordable insurance in relation to flood 
risk. Non-cash financing charges relating to reservoir operating agreement financial liabilities.Flood risk management and development implications, land drainage and sewerage. Exotic and 
endemic animal and plant disease policy portfolio and eradication. Regulatory systems for 
chemicals, veterinary medicines and pesticides.
Radioactive waste management, justifying authority for new nuclear power, pollution 
emergency response services, emergency response/contingency services, noise mapping and 
manage other environmental risks. Consultation on town, urban and country developments. 
Climate modelling, risk assessment and adaptation.
47
Department for Business and Trade
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Business and Trade
Departmental Expenditure Limit 1,592,969,000 1,238,716,000
Annually Managed Expenditure -8,192,000 796,000,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 10,069,299,000
Total 1,584,777,000 2,034,716,000 10,069,299,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Business and Trade, 2024-25
Trade development and promotion, outward and inward investment, the formulation and 
implementation of trade policy and remedies, contribution to the cross government GREAT 
campaign and to any and all international-focused events, support Trade Remedies Authority 
as an arm's length body; including grants, associated capital and other related expenditure and 
non-cash items, developing trade relationships and supporting supply chain management and 
resilience, and commencing, pursuing and defending the United Kingdom's (UK) trade 
disputes and UK’s present and future relationship with the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Administration of the Department for Business and Trade ('the Department'), including 
continued administration of ex-Department for International Trade, and associated offices; 
publicity, promotion and publications; communications; purchase, acquisition, hire, lease and 
rent of land, buildings, plant, equipment, machinery, vehicles and capital assets; digital and IT; 
special payments, and domestic legal proceedings.
Funding to provide redress to claimants who have suffered detriment arising from the errors in 
the Post Office Horizon IT system or the other matters identified in the relevant court 
judgments.
The promotion of enterprise, innovation and increased productivity delivered through 
international trade and investment, regional investment and delivering regulatory reform, and 
measures to combat international bribery and corruption.
The provision of support for business, including support for specific industries, small and 
medium businesses, regional programmes, programmes to promote research and development, 
innovation and standards, best practice and sustainable development.
The provision of financial solutions to accelerate private sector investment and address market 
failures through the British Business Bank, and other similar intervention mechanisms.
48
Department for Business and Trade, 2024-25
The provision of a partial guarantee to a lender making a loan to a ship-buyer or operator as 
part of the Shipbuilding Credit Guarantee Scheme.
The management of the Government's shareholder interest in the portfolio of commercial 
businesses wholly or partly owned by Government; providing financial assistance to public 
corporations, and trading funds.
Grants to local authorities.
Funding organisations supporting departmental objectives, including the Department’s 
executive agencies and arm’s length bodies and their subsidiaries.The management of miscellaneous programmes including payments in respect of claims for the 
restitution of the property of victims of Nazi persecution.
The UK’s departure from the EU.
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic and Inquiry.
Developing, implementing and enforcing trade sanctions.
Regulating military and other sensitive exports such as dual-use items done through a licensing 
system, ensuring UK exports are consistent with our national and international obligations and 
standards.
The appointment of an Official Receiver.Increasing science and research excellence in the UK and maximising its contribution to society.The payment of subscriptions and contributions to international organisations and fulfilment of 
international treaty obligations.
Making payments to local authorities in respect of Local Area Agreements and New Burdens 
responsibilities.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.The promotion of strong, fair and competitive markets at home and abroad; measures to protect 
investors and consumers including from unsafe products and unfair practices; support for 
employment relations programmes and measures to promote a skilled and flexible labour 
market.
The discharge of liabilities falling to the Department in respect of former shipbuilding industry 
historic claims.
Inspections and compliance in accordance with European Union (EU) regulatory requirements 
and recovery of expenditure through cost sharing arrangements.The efficient management and discharge of specific costs falling to the Department and its 
partner organisations relating to outstanding personal injury claims against Thomas Cook.
49
Department for Business and Trade, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Receipts from other government departments and devolved administrations; the Advisory, 
Conciliation and Arbitration Service; the Insolvency Service.
Receipts associated with the closure of partner organisations.Receipts from licences and levies; Launch Investment receipts; Capital Venture Funds receipts; 
premium income and other receipts from Financial Guarantee schemes, and of dividends; 
equity withdrawals. Investments; receipts from financial investments made by the British 
Business Bank; repayment of loans and investments; repayment of capital grants; repayments of 
grants and contributions; receipts from asset sales.Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.The sale of goods and services relating to trade development and promotion, outward and 
inward investment, the formulation and implementation of trade policy, contribution to the 
cross government GREAT campaign; including sponsorship; asset sales; insurance claims; 
recovery of costs incurred on behalf of others; recovery of overpayment; capital grant-in-kind, 
income from grant programmes.
General administration receipts of the Department, its executive agencies, its arm’s length 
bodies, and other partner organisations, including: the recovery of salaries and associated costs 
for seconded staff; sale of goods and services.
Receipts from other government departments and devolved administrations; the Advisory, 
Conciliation and Arbitration Service and the Insolvency Service.Receipts from statutory regulators in respect of expenses related to levies from industry.
Legal services and legal proceedings, consultancy, publications, public enquiries, information, 
central services; occupancy charge; administrative and professional services; EU receipts; 
refund of input value-added tax (VAT) not claimed in previous years on departmental 
expenditure; interest payments; non-cash income.
Depreciation, impairments, amortisation, revaluation, provisions, bad debts and other non-cash 
items.Proceeds of Crime income generated in criminal enforcement.
Receipts and profit from the sale of equipment.
Contributions from other organisations to cover the cost of activities they have agreed to fund 
in total or in part.
General administration receipts of the Department, its executive agencies, its arm’s length 
bodies, and other partner organisations, including: the recovery of salaries and associated costs 
for seconded staff; sale of goods and services.
50
Department for Business and Trade, 2024-25
Income arising from:Impairment of loans and investments; exchange rate gains and losses.The provision of repayable credit facilities for Post Office Ltd; contributions to partner 
organisations’ pension schemes; and the provision of parental leave schemes.Departmental administration; financial guarantee schemes; regional investment and 
programmes; enterprise for small and medium firms; provision of support for business, 
including support for specific industries; miscellaneous programmes.
Payment of corporation tax.
The Redundancy Payments Service.The management of asset sales.
Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Receipts from asset sales.
Refund of input VAT not claimed in previous years on departmental expenditure; interest 
payments; repayments of grants and contributions; non-cash income.
Dividends from shares held by Postal Services Holding Ltd in Royal Mail.Activities of UK Government Investments on behalf of the Department.
Receipt of interest on loans and loan repayments from Post Office Ltd.
Receipts from Trading Funds.The discharge of liabilities falling to the Department in respect of former shipbuilding industry 
historic claims.
The appointment of an Official Receiver.
51
HM Land Registry
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
HM Land Registry
Departmental Expenditure Limit 413,617,000 59,100,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 12,000,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 450,007,000
Total 425,617,000 59,100,000 450,007,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:HM Land Registry, 2024-25
Support and operational costs, transformation, technology, equipment, other payments, 
associated depreciation and any other non-cash costs falling in DEL. Governmental response to 
the Covid-19 pandemic. The disposal, sale or donation of capital assets.
Provisions and other non-cash items. Governmental response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
52
Department for Work and Pensions
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Department for Work and Pensions
Departmental Expenditure Limit 8,047,093,000 522,387,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 145,245,795,000 575,617,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 2,003,173,000
Net Cash Requirement 156,895,303,000
Total 155,296,061,000 1,098,004,000 156,895,303,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Department for Work and Pensions, 2024-25
Payments relating to the administration and operating costs of the Department to enable the 
Department to fulfil its obligations to all its client groups as well as supporting the 
Governmental response to the ongoing and longer-term impacts of the increased costs of living.
International educational programmes and the UK’s subscription to the International Labour 
Organisation.Costs associated with the Department’s contribution to cross-government programmes.Promoting the Department's aims and objectives in other organisations including government 
departments, local authorities, devolved administrations and Crown and Executive Non-
Departmental Public Bodies, including the Health and Safety Executive, Remploy Pension 
Scheme Trustees Ltd, the Money and Pensions Service including the provision of money and 
debt advice and the Department’s pensions and advisory arm’s length bodies and private, 
public and voluntary organisations.
The costs incurred from activity to support the detection and minimisation of fraud and error in 
the benefit system and the collection of debt arising from overpayments of benefit and on behalf 
of other public and private sector bodies.
Costs associated with providing training and employment projects assisted by the European 
Union (EU) through the European Social Fund and expenditure relating to exiting the EU.
Information Technology, employee and financial services to other public sector bodies and data 
technology services. Policy, research, and publicity supporting the Department’s activities.
53
Department for Work and Pensions, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Costs and payments associated with the collapse of private pension schemes.Recoveries of payments and income from other government departments and devolved 
administrations in respect of services the Department provides.Assisting people to make plans for their retirement, including research into pensions, provision 
of pension guidance, private pension industry regulatory work, programmes, and measures to 
help improve independence and social inclusion for older people.Assistance and advice on employment and labour market issues to international organisations 
and measures and assistance to promote financial and digital inclusion.
Employment and training programmes. Payment of appropriate grants, loans, compensation, 
benefits, and allowances.
Donations and bequests.
Non-cash items falling in DEL.Provision for general levy payments to arm’s length bodies.
The payment of pensions, social security and other benefits, grants, loans, allowances and 
payments to people of working age, pensioners, and people with disabilities and their carers, in 
accordance with the prevailing legislation and regulations, including the Governmental 
response to the ongoing and longer term impacts of the increased costs of living.
Other non-cash costs falling in AME. Losses, special payments, write-offs and provisions.
Interest, receipts in respect of benefits paid in lieu, recoveries of benefit payments and 
advances.
Non-cash costs falling in AME.The administration of the Department and its Crown and Executive Non-Departmental Public 
Bodies in delivering their statutory responsibilities, in accordance with the prevailing 
legislation and regulations. Receipts from staff, outward secondments, sale of capital assets and 
non-capital items, the recovery of court costs, services carried out on behalf of public and 
private sector bodies and members of the public, EU activity, levy funded bodies and other 
associated income.Subsidies to housing, billing, levying and local authorities for administration and payment of 
Housing Benefit and other locally delivered support.
Depreciation and any other non-cash costs falling in DEL. Losses, special payments and write-
offs.
54
Department for Work and Pensions, 2024-25
Non-Budget Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Payment of the Grant to the Social Fund to fund Regulated, Discretionary and Winter Fuel 
payments.
Other relevant non-budget expenditure.
55
HM Revenue and Customs
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
HM Revenue and Customs
Departmental Expenditure Limit 5,325,920,000 507,506,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 15,396,488,000 260,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 21,234,562,000
Total 20,722,408,000 507,766,000 21,234,562,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Providing shared services, services provided to third parties and provision of trade 
information.Law enforcement, criminal investigation and provision of resources to independent 
investigatory bodies including the Adjudicator's Office. Payments for the HMRC National 
Museum and grants to the voluntary and community sector.
Valuations, administration, setting and maintaining of assessments, advice, property services, 
payments of Local Authority Rates on behalf of accredited foreign countries and non-cash items 
incurred by the Valuation Office Agency. All activities, including ensuring that systems are 
maintained and updated as necessary, to enable the integrity of the lists for current use and 
preparing for any possible future revaluations and reforms to council tax and non-domestic rate 
systems.Delivering policies held by other government departments, assistance to devolved 
administrations and public bodies.
European Union transition and implementation of trade agreements.
Governmental response to the Covid-19 pandemic.Administration of the National Insurance Funds for Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Non-cash items falling in DEL.Payments to assist with cost of living.HM Revenue and Customs, 2024-25
Administration in management, collection and payment of a range of taxes, tax credits, benefits, 
reliefs, refunds, duties, levies, Statutory Payments, allowances, loans, entitlements, regulatory 
and verification schemes.
International Tax Cooperation Agreements, customs controls, overseas tax administration, 
Official Development Assistance and support of projects abroad.
56
HM Revenue and Customs, 2024-25
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Non-cash items falling in DEL.
Governmental response to the Covid-19 pandemic.Services provided to the Valuation Office Agency, other government departments, devolved 
administrations, other bodies and international parties and providing shared services.
Valuations, administration, setting and maintaining of assessments, advice, property services, 
payments of Local Authority Rates on behalf of accredited foreign countries and non-cash items 
incurred by the Valuation Office Agency.Governmental response to the Covid-19 pandemic.Income arising from contributions to programmes conducted on behalf of government.
Payments of Rates on behalf of accredited Commonwealth and foreign countries and certain 
international organisations and non-cash items.
Payments of Rates by accredited Commonwealth and foreign countries and certain 
international organisations, refunds from local authorities.Tax reliefs, entitlements, levies, regulatory and verification schemes.
Charges made for attendance of officers, international commitments, travel expenses, use of 
cars and rent, and other services.
Sales of assets, information, publications, statistical services, certificates and other services.
Tax credits, benefits, reliefs, refunds, duties, levies, allowances and entitlements.
Remittance of irrecoverable debts, losses on asset revaluation and exchange rate movements. 
Incentive payments for filing, transitional payments to charities, provisions movements and 
payments that add capacity to debt recovery.The Asset Recovery Incentivisation Scheme and other receipts. Recovery of administration costs 
of the National Insurance Funds, collection of National Insurance contributions.
Recoveries of income from other government departments (including grants).Recovery of costs associated with debt collection and other law costs, overpayments, insurance 
and compensation claims, staff costs, apprenticeships funding, valuation and other services, 
transaction fees and excess cash receipts, and other services.
Non-cash items falling in AME.
57
HM Treasury
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
HM Treasury
Departmental Expenditure Limit 328,840,000 17,068,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 51,171,752,000 58,188,594,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 60,433,674,000
Total 51,500,592,000 58,205,662,000 60,433,674,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:HM Treasury, 2024-25
Core Treasury functions covering economic and financial matters, including promoting and 
supporting the financial services sector, illegal money lending, a financial sanctions regime, 
consumer credit, legal claims, and the provision of guarantees. Assistance and compensation to 
institutions, businesses, and individuals. The purchase of investments, honours and dignities, 
gilt administration compensation payments and business support measures. The administration 
costs of the department, depreciation, and other non-cash items.
Spending on Treasury related bodies including the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the 
UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB), IUK Investments Limited, IUK Investments Holdings Limited, 
HMT UK Sovereign SUKUK plc, the Royal Mint Advisory Committee on the design of Coins, 
Medals, Seals and Decorations, UK Government Investments Limited (UKGI), UK Asset 
Resolution Limited (UKAR) and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Assistance to institutions, businesses, and individuals, including fees and charges for the 
provision of guarantees, loan repayments, loan interest and fees, dividends, the sale of shares 
and debt royalties, financial regulators, insurance sponsorship and supervision responsibilities. 
Reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of other entities.Funding for the Department’s executive agencies, the UK Debt Management Office (DMO), the 
National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) and the Government Internal Audit Agency (GIAA).
Recoveries in respect of Honours and Dignities and the administration of the Treasury, 
including rent from tenants and recharges for work and training, work of the Government 
Finance Function and Government Economic and Social Research Team, the sale of assets and 
redundant capital items.
The administration of Pool Re and other related bodies.
58
HM Treasury, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
The EU as agreed in the Withdrawal Agreement. Repayment of the UK’s paid in capital from 
the European Investment Bank (EIB).Help to Buy ISA. Administration of the Equitable Life Payments Scheme and the creation and 
use of provisions. The Royal Household, UKAR, Help to Buy (HMT) Limited, Reclaim Fund 
Ltd (RFL), Pool Reinsurance Company Ltd (Pool Re), the Debt Management Office and the 
UKIB. Costs associated with the UK exiting the European Union (EU) as per the Withdrawal 
Agreement.
Transactions with financial institutions and public and private organisations, businesses and 
individuals including interest, fees and charges, dividends, loan repayments, sale of shares and 
other assets. The Mortgage Guarantee Scheme (MGS).Income and royalties from training.
Spending by HM Treasury on costs related to investment in, and financial assistance to, 
financial institutions and non-financial organisations, businesses, and individuals. Includes 
credit easing, provision of guarantees, loans, compensation, warranties and indemnities and 
Infrastructure finance. Movements in the value of the Bank of England Asset Purchase Facility 
Fund (APF) derivative and payments to the APF. The production costs of UK coinage, 
including manufacture, purchase of metal, storage, and distribution.DMO, GIAA, NIC and UKGI for services provided to other government departments and 
organisations.
59
Cabinet Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Cabinet Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 961,383,000 395,252,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 216,300,000 30,000,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,726,835,000
Total 1,177,683,000 425,252,000 1,726,835,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:Cabinet Office, 2024-25
Administration and operation of the department in connection with the following functions:
Seize the opportunities of Brexit, through creating the world’s most effective border to increase 
UK prosperity and enhance security; secure a safe, prosperous and resilient UK by coordinating 
national security and crisis response, realising strategic advantage through science and 
technology, and the implementation of the Integrated Review; advance equality of opportunity 
across the UK; increase the efficiency, effectiveness and accountability of government through 
modernising and reforming the work of the Government Functions; support the design and 
implementation of Government’s and Prime Minister’s priorities.
Activities of the Government Property Agency, Civil Service Commission, Registrar of 
Consultant Lobbyists, Commission for Equality and Human Rights and the Infected Blood 
Compensation Authority.
Governance of the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme and the Royal Mail Statutory Pension 
Scheme. Expertise in infrastructure financing, delivery and assurance of major projects to 
support more effective management and delivery across government.
Payments of grant and grant-in-aid to organisations promoting Cabinet Office objectives; 
supporting not-for-profit bodies associated with the public service; payments to and relating to 
former Prime Ministers and Deputy Prime Ministers; reimbursement of Lord Lieutenants’ 
expenses; expenses in connection with honours; losses and special payments.
Underwriting of the Official Receiver, appointed as Liquidator, services provided to other 
government departments and apprenticeship training for staff.
60
Cabinet Office, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Royalties, dividends, interest receivable, income from the European Union (EU), rental income, 
sales of goods and services, rebates from suppliers, refunds, cost recoveries, training courses, 
expert and transactional services carried out on behalf of other public sector bodies, shared 
services income, cost sharing arrangements, contributions to programmes conducted on behalf 
of government, sale of contractual rights, framework establishment and management fee 
income, recoverable management costs of the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme and 
income from employers participating in the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme to cover 
administration of the scheme, secondment and loan receipts, receipts from staff, repayment of 
grants and subsidies, income from services provided to other government departments or 
external organisations, notional grant income relating to apprenticeship training for staff, 
repayment of loan principal and related interest, sale or use of rights and assets, capital grant 
income, capital grant-in-kind income on receipt of donated assets, capital receipts and income 
on disposal of donated assets.
Activities of the Government Property Agency, Registrar of Consultant Lobbyists and 
Commission for Equality and Human Rights.
Payments by the Infected Blood Compensation Authority, provisions for early departures, 
dilapidations, onerous contracts, revaluation of assets, expected credit losses, and depreciation 
on donated assets, impairments and associated non-cash items in AME.Income arising from:Expenditure on non-current assets, depreciation, impairments, notional audit fee, doubtful 
debts, bad debt write-offs and associated non-cash items in DEL.Payment of recovered fraud into the Consolidated Fund; disbursement of fraud recovery and 
Asset Recovery Incentivisation Scheme (ARIS) payments to government departments and 
public bodies, return of seized funds and assets, fraud debt management, expenditure 
consequential to action by Cabinet Office against fraud occurring in any government 
department and public body.
Recovery of fraudulently obtained funds and assets through use of civil recovery and criminal 
powers; participation in the Asset Recovery Incentivisation Scheme (ARIS), fraud debt 
management, interest on seized funds.
61
Scotland Office and Office of the Advocate General
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Scotland Office and Office of the 
Advocate General
Departmental Expenditure Limit 13,577,000 50,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 48,260,140,000
Net Cash Requirement 48,273,551,000
Total 48,273,717,000 50,000 48,273,551,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Non-Budget Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Scotland Office and Office of the Advocate General, 2024-25
Payments to the Scottish Consolidated Fund.Administration costs in supporting the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Advocate 
General for Scotland; providing advice on policy and legislation; Boundary Commission for 
Scotland; capital, and associated non-cash costs.
Rental income; receipts from legal services provided to other government departments; receipts 
from other government departments and other miscellaneous receipts.
62
Wales Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Wales Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 5,822,000 30,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 22,813,160,000
Net Cash Requirement 22,818,920,000
Total 22,818,982,000 30,000 22,818,920,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Non-Budget Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Wales Office, 2024-25
Payments of a grant to the Welsh Consolidated Fund.Administration costs for the Wales Office; Lord Lieutenant's expenditure; capital, and 
associated non-cash costs; other non-cash costs.
63
Northern Ireland Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Northern Ireland Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 47,989,000 2,055,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 6,201,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 23,933,312,000
Net Cash Requirement 24,090,203,000
Total 23,987,502,000 2,055,000 24,090,203,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Overseeing the effective operation of the devolution settlement in Northern Ireland and 
representing the interests of Northern Ireland within the UK Government. Expenditure on 
administrative services, Head of State related costs, VIP visits to Northern Ireland, Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission and Commissions or Reviews arising from the 
Belfast/Good Friday Agreement, the Northern Ireland Act 1998, the Northern Ireland Act 2000, 
the Northern Ireland Act 2009, political development and inquiries, the Electoral Office for 
Northern Ireland, elections and boundary reviews, legal services, security, victims of the 
Troubles including the work of the Independent Commission for the Location of Victims’ 
Remains, Parades Commission for Northern Ireland, Civil Service Commissioners for Northern 
Ireland, the Independent Reporting Commission, compensation schemes under the Justice and 
Security (Northern Ireland) Act 2007 and Terrorism Act 2000 and certain other grants. 
Expenditure arising from the Stormont House Agreement, the Fresh Start Agreement, New 
Decade New Approach and New Deal for Northern Ireland. Expenditure on arrangements for 
the running of Hillsborough Castle. This will include associated depreciation and any other non-
cash costs falling in DEL. Commissions or Reviews arising from the Northern Ireland Troubles 
(Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023, including the work of the Independent Commission for 
Reconciliation and Information Recovery.Northern Ireland Office, 2024-25
Recoupment of electoral expenses, receipts from the use of video conferencing facilities, fees 
and costs recovered or received for work done for other departments, freedom of information 
receipts, data protection act receipts, recovery of compensation paid, recoupment of grant 
funding, costs and fees awarded in favour of the Crown. Fees and costs recovered or received 
for the use of the Northern Ireland Office estate. Contributions from third parties to fund grant 
programmes and monies from other departments to fund projects in Northern Ireland.
Provisions.
64
Northern Ireland Office, 2024-25
Non-Budget Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Providing appropriate funding to the Northern Ireland Consolidated Fund for the delivery of 
transferred public services as defined by the Northern Ireland Act 1998, Northern Ireland Act 
2000 and the Northern Ireland Act 2009. Grants to the Northern Ireland Consolidated Fund and 
transfers of European Union funds.
65
National Savings and Investments
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
National Savings and Investments
Departmental Expenditure Limit 247,672,000 10,560,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 700,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 254,936,000
Total 248,372,000 10,560,000 254,936,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:National Savings and Investments, 2024-25
Cost of delivery of National Savings and Investments operations, and leveraged activities with 
other bodies including administration, operational research and development works, 
transformation activity, other payments and non-cash items. Other payments including 
payments in respect of recovered losses, and expenditure on capital items.
The leveraging of National Savings and Investments core infrastructure and capabilities and 
associated contracts including rent receipts and other receipts such as loss recovery payments. 
The sale of assets resulting in some capital income being used as sale proceeds.
Non-cash movements in provisions including changes to fair value of National Savings and 
Investments' properties.
66
Charity Commission
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Charity Commission
Departmental Expenditure Limit 31,519,000 5,274,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 33,132,000
Total 31,519,000 5,274,000 33,132,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Charity Commission, 2024-25
Revenue and Capital expenditure in relation to the registration and regulation of charities. 
Expenditure in connection with depreciation and other non-cash items in DEL.
Providing services, in both the UK and abroad, relating to the Commission's knowledge and 
expertise in the field of registration and regulation of charities. Shared working approaches 
with other government departments.
67
Competition and Markets Authority
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Competition and Markets Authority
Departmental Expenditure Limit 137,736,000 8,120,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 22,000,000 2,000,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 136,399,000
Total 159,736,000 10,120,000 136,399,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Competition and Markets Authority, 2024-25
Advancing and safeguarding the economic interests of United Kingdom (UK) consumers, 
businesses and the economy; enforcing competition and consumer law, including payment for 
information; analysing and monitoring markets; merger control; advocacy; information, 
education and advice; costs in respect of reactive and proactive litigation; providing expert, 
independent, trusted advice and economic analysis to support the four nations to trade 
effectively within the UK Internal Market; providing advice to public authorities and report on 
the effective operation of the subsidy control regime; operationalising and preparing for the 
new regulatory regime to implement and enforce a new pro-competition regime for digital 
markets; statutory information gathering powers for the monitoring function for road fuel; 
administrative and operational costs, associated depreciation and any other non-cash items 
falling in DEL. Supporting the Government's Places for Growth programme by increasing 
presence in Edinburgh, Belfast and Cardiff, and establishing new offices in Manchester and 
Darlington.
Recovery of legal costs; recovery of regulatory appeal costs; contributions from other 
departments towards the costs of market studies; payments from the Home Office under the 
asset recovery incentivisation scheme; income from office space rental and other property 
related income, including compensation from the landlord; fees for common services provided 
to other organisations; recoveries of salaries of staff on loan or seconded to outside bodies; sale 
of plant and machinery.
Provisions and other non-cash costs.
68
The Statistics Board
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
The Statistics Board
Departmental Expenditure Limit 389,479,000 22,098,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 2,300,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 396,383,000
Total 391,779,000 22,098,000 396,383,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:The Statistics Board, 2024-25
The collection, preparation and dissemination of economic, social, labour market and other 
statistics; undertaking and commissioning statistical research, and assisting statistical research 
by providing access to data; promoting and safeguarding the quality of official statistics, 
monitoring the production and publication of official statistics; conducting a programme of 
assessment of existing and candidate National Statistics against the Code of Practice for Official 
Statistics; providing analysis of statistics to enhance understanding; coordinating the design, 
collection, preparation, supply, quality management of the UK’s European statistics, provision 
of business support and IT services and associated non-cash items. Undertaking of various roles 
in an international context.
Provision of social surveys and the provision of other services (statistical and corporate); 
provision of statistical related IT platforms to other public sector organisations; recovery costs 
of shared projects; sales of statistical data supply services, analyses and publications; research 
grants or funding for Statistical Research; receipts from EU and other overseas contracts; rental 
income; recovery of Apprenticeship Levy; the provision of business support services and 
through the sale of fixed assets.
Creation of provisions in respect of onerous contracts; early departure costs; and other 
provisions and associated non-cash items.
69
Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Office for Standards in Education, 
Children's Services and Skills
Departmental Expenditure Limit 157,558,000 53,733,000
Annually Managed Expenditure -53,000 883,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 154,288,000
Total 157,505,000 54,616,000 154,288,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills, 2024-25
Provisions and other non-cash items in AME.Promoting improvement in the quality of education, skills, care, and support for children and 
young people through independent inspection, regulation and reporting, and sector workforce 
training and development. Sharing research findings and good practice through mechanisms 
including publications, seminars, conferences and collaboration with and support to other 
regulators.
The registration of childcare providers, inspection for the care and support of children and 
young people, some maintained schools, independent schools and further education colleges, 
publicly funded adult education and training and accreditation of online education providers.
Transactions with departmental and other government or not-for-profit bodies: receipts for 
inspection and other related activity undertaken on behalf of other government departments, 
and overseas government bodies (where clearance has been provided by the relevant UK 
government department).Governmental emergency responses including (but not limited to) advice and support, and the 
deployment or secondment of staff to and from the Office for Standards in Education, 
Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) in support of the response.
This includes related administrative and operational costs, capital expenditure, and associated 
depreciation and other non-cash costs falling within DEL.
Miscellaneous asset sales and recovery of costs, property charges made to minor occupiers, and 
receipts for goods and services provided by Ofsted.
70
Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation
Departmental Expenditure Limit 30,016,000 2,910,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 32,174,000
Total 30,016,000 2,910,000 32,174,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation, 2024-25
The regulation of the validity of general, vocational and other qualifications throughout their 
lifecycle; promoting public confidence in regulated qualifications; continuing delivery of 
vocational and technical education reforms; monitoring and evaluating reformed qualifications; 
and evaluating the validity of National Assessments. Conducting relevant investigation, 
research and analysis, and undertaking engagement and consultation with stakeholders to 
provide assurance that regulated qualifications are fit-for-purpose and support good 
educational and training outcomes.
The Department for Education to support ongoing Reform programmes, and, where required, 
to enable the Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) to take on new 
Reform programmes as they arise.
The recovery of costs associated with the monetary penalties imposed on awarding 
organisations for breaches of Ofqual’s regulations.Developing the skills and capabilities of its people, and developing and investing in its digital 
systems to secure efficiency and value for money.
The recovery of costs associated with the provision of data and analysis to regulatory 
counterparts and to other government departments; for provision of support relating to 
IT/digital development, including developments to the register of qualifications; and income 
from the disposal of hardware as part of ongoing IT refresh. Receipts relating to the recovery of 
salaries and associated costs for seconded staff. Receipts relating to the recovery of building-
related costs.Exploring, investigating and acknowledging opportunities for innovation, including the use of 
artificial intelligence to improve the quality of marking in high-stakes qualifications.
71
Food Standards Agency
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Food Standards Agency
Departmental Expenditure Limit 117,028,000 11,528,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 9,603,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 122,807,000
Total 126,631,000 11,528,000 122,807,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Food Standards Agency, 2024-25
Delivering the Food Standards Agency's (FSA’s) statutory purpose of protecting public health 
and consumers wider interests in relation to food, ensuring food is safe, is what it says it is and 
is healthier and more sustainable; managing research and evidence gathering, food incidents, 
investigations, prosecutions, combating food fraud and crime, deploying the risk analysis 
process for food and animal feed safety issues, product authorisations, policy development, 
enforcement and management of regulated products; inspections, meat hygiene and official 
controls; controls on primary production; animal health and welfare monitoring, surveillance 
and enforcement; supporting local authorities and port health authorities to deliver food 
and/or feed law official controls; support to public analyst laboratories; regulatory reform, 
developing new regulatory frameworks; international and border activity on official controls; 
support for trade negotiations, market access and related activities with European Union (EU) 
and non-EU countries; engaging internationally to influence key priorities; Windsor Framework 
activity on food safety and standards; collaboration with or on behalf of UK and international 
public bodies; Government’s wider aims to ensure that food is healthier and more sustainable 
including working with devolved governments; digital and data services for food businesses, 
local authorities and consumers; information and communication services to food businesses 
and consumers; FSA’s annual report on food standards; advice and education, marketing and 
publications; accrediting third party auditors; staff and overhead costs; debt recovery, 
payments of penalties and interest, funding for depreciation, audit fees and other non-cash 
items.
Meat official controls and other official activities, including enforcement and export related 
activities; wine standards and other food-related activities concerning international market 
access; risk assessments, evidence and research, testing, sampling, food crime – Proceeds of 
Crime Act (POCA) activities, receipt of court costs and fees; enforcement and surveillance work 
for, and recharge of expenditure relating to, work done in collaboration with or on behalf of 
UK, EU and Non-EU countries' public bodies; assessments/consultations on radioactive 
discharges; staff loans and secondments; sub-letting of accommodation and associated services; 
disposal of fixed assets; and income arising from capital grants-in-kind.
72
Food Standards Agency, 2024-25
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
The creation, adjustment and utilisation of provisions relating to pensions, early exits and 
retirements, bad debts, leases, personal injury and legal claims; revaluations and write off of 
bad debts; and other non-cash items.
73
The National Archives
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
The National Archives
Departmental Expenditure Limit 47,168,000 6,900,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 45,923,000
Total 47,168,000 6,900,000 45,923,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:The National Archives, 2024-25
Ensuring the United Kingdom (UK) public records - past and future - remains authentic, 
available and accessible to all including: providing leadership and support to the archive sector 
across England and Wales; leading on policy and best practice in knowledge and information 
management for the public sector; setting standards and driving forwards the public sector 
information re-use agenda; official publishing services for the whole of government including 
publishing all UK legislation and making it accessible online; managing Crown and 
Parliamentary copyright; administration of The National Archives and other non-cash items.
Sale of copies of documents; sale of publications and other items and services; professional fees; 
fees receivable from service providers; sale of non-current assets; grants received to carry out 
specific projects; reproduction fees and royalties for the publication of images; Crown copyright 
fees and royalties; fees for the management of third parties' copyright; fees for the management 
of the Office of the King's Printer for Scotland; income from contractual arrangements for 
official publishing and partnerships to make historical records electronically accessible; sale and 
recovery of costs for goods/services provided to other government departments, public bodies 
and the general public; and donations from the public in support of the work of The National 
Archives.
74
United Kingdom Supreme Court
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
United Kingdom Supreme Court
Departmental Expenditure Limit 4,769,000 2,143,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 1,000,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 5,462,000
Total 5,769,000 2,143,000 5,462,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:United Kingdom Supreme Court, 2024-25
Operation of the UK Supreme Court (UKSC), Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC); 
costs associated with the United Kingdom's legal and constitutional system; education and 
outreach activities; wider market initiatives; cost of running selection commissions for the 
appointment of the Justices; and maintenance of links with apex courts in other countries. The 
modernisation of the UKSC and JCPC systems and processes to improve court users’ 
experiences, increase transparency and public trust and bolster the UKSC’s reputation as a 
world leading Court.
Court fees and receipts; contributions from the UK jurisdictions, to contribute to the cost of the 
administration of justice in the UK Supreme Court (UKSC) and Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council (JCPC); receipts of VAT refunds on contracted out services; receipts from wider market 
initiatives; recovery of staff costs for staff on loan or seconded to outside bodies; payments for 
information and publications; postal and bank charge recoveries; receipts from shop sales, and 
any other miscellaneous income.
Diminution in value of assets.
75
Government Actuary's Department
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Government Actuary's Department
Departmental Expenditure Limit 1,000 350,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 50,000 100,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 974,000
Total 51,000 450,000 974,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Government Actuary's Department, 2024-25
Administration costs incurred in providing actuarial and specialist analysis, advice and 
assurance to Government and other clients, principally in the public sector, and associated non-
cash items.
Receipts for providing actuarial and specialist analysis, advice and assurance in a range of 
areas, including employer-sponsored pension arrangements and other employee benefits, social 
insurance, health care financing arrangements, risk management and strategic investment, 
asset/liability considerations, pension and insurance regulation etc.
The setting up and use of provisions and other associated non-cash items.
76
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
Departmental Expenditure Limit 52,341,000 4,801,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 70,395,000
Total 52,341,000 4,801,000 70,395,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, 2024-25
Administrative and operational costs; development and administration of licensed regimes and 
industry processes; payments to other government departments; co-operation with 
international regulators; services to other government and energy related organisations; 
administration and payments made under the Green Gas Support Scheme; administration of 
energy efficiency, offshore transmission and other environmental schemes; regulation of and 
participation in the Smart Meter programme; payments in relation to legal costs arising from 
regulatory duties; adjustments to provisions; depreciation and other non-cash items in DEL. 
Notional expenditure relating to the Supplier of Last Resort (SoLR) levy and levelisation 
process.
Gas and electricity licence fees; receipts in respect of the administration of the Offshore Tender 
regime; income from fees and charges levied under the Gas Act 1986 and the Electricity Act 
1989; income from fees and charges levied under the Green Gas Support Scheme; bank interest, 
receipts in respect of letting, disposal, vacation or occupation of accommodation; income from 
services to other government and energy related organisations; bank interest and other cost 
recovery receipts. Notional income relating to the Supplier of Last Resort (SoLR) levy and 
levelisation process.
77
Office of Rail and Road
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Office of Rail and Road
Departmental Expenditure Limit 1,000 720,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 2,000,000
Total 1,000 720,000 2,000,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Office of Rail and Road, 2024-25
Administration of ORR, its support establishments, all associates of non-cash items and all 
activities as the combined economic and safety regulator including health and safety matters, 
the regulation of access to railways, the regulation of HS1 stations, the promotion of rail 
services, efficiencies and economy for those providing railway services, protecting the interests 
of railway services and railway users, payment of the apprenticeship levy, sponsorship of the 
Rail Ombudsman and providing advice on the future funding framework for Transport for 
London.
All activities as highways monitor with responsibility for monitoring and enforcing the 
performance and efficiency of National Highways’ delivery of the government's roads 
investment strategy and its management and operation of the strategic road network. Support 
for activities as highways monitor.
Regulatory licences, concession agreements, levies, subscription fees, charges for courses and 
officers loaned to other organisations, High Speed 1 Limited; Channel Tunnel 
Intergovernmental Commission; Channel Tunnel Authority; NIR Networks Limited; Amey 
Keolis Infrastructure/Selwaith Amey Keolis Limited; Transport for Wales; and government 
grants.
Income from recovery actions in connection with successful legal cases. Charges for rental, 
administrative and other services, and other activities to other government departments, 
executive and non-executive non-departmental public bodies. Overhead recharges. Grant 
funding from the Department for Transport in respect of monitoring and enforcing the 
performance of National Highways including its delivery of the government's road investment 
strategy and its management and operation of the strategic road network, and for providing 
advice on the future funding framework for Transport for London.Acting as the appeal body, controlling the network statement, monitoring the competitive 
situation of rail services, and overseeing the efficient management and fair and non-
discriminatory use of rail infrastructure for Northern Ireland and for the infrastructure 
manager of the Core Valley Lines.
78
Water Services Regulation Authority
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Water Services Regulation Authority
Departmental Expenditure Limit 160,000 650,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 13,810,000
Total 160,000 650,000 13,810,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Water Services Regulation Authority, 2024-25
Regulation of, and the application of competition law to, the water and sewerage industry in 
England and Wales. Administration and operation costs of the department, including 
depreciation, pension payments, provisions and other non-cash items. Payments in relation to 
legal costs arising from carrying out legal functions including regulatory and/or competition 
functions.
Regulatory licence fees and otherwise recovering Ofwat’s costs and expenses associated with 
the regulation of, and being a competition authority in relation to, the water and sewerage 
industry in England and Wales.
Contributions towards former Director Generals’ pension payments.
Recovery in respect of administration and operation costs of the department, including salary 
recovery for staff on loan or seconded, contributions relating to participants' share of 
collaborative projects, sale of fixed assets and any other miscellaneous cost recovery receipts.
79
Export Credits Guarantee Department
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Export Credits Guarantee Department
Departmental Expenditure Limit 2,000 2,510,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 1,703,587,000 1,005,402,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,801,895,000
Total 1,703,589,000 1,007,912,000 1,801,895,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Export Credits Guarantee Department, 2024-25
Arrangements made by ECGD for supporting or developing UK exports, for insuring UK 
investments overseas for transaction and portfolio management, and income arising from the 
release of and decrease in provisions related to ECGD’s operational activities.The running of ECGD’s operational activity (operating costs of the Department), including 
Governmental response to the coronavirus Covid-19 pandemic.
Some underwriting activity, notional income in respect of the Apprenticeship Levy and 
sponsorship income raised to defray specific marketing costs.
Arrangements made by ECGD for supporting or developing UK exports, for insuring UK 
investments overseas and for transaction and portfolio management, and expenditure arising 
from the creation and increase in provisions related to ECGD’s operational activities.Services provided on behalf of other government departments including payment for services 
incurred on behalf of other government departments.
Services provided on behalf of other government departments including recoveries of income 
from other government departments and third parties.
Services provided on behalf of other government departments including payment for services 
incurred on behalf of other government departments.
Services provided on behalf of other government departments including recoveries of income 
from other government departments and third parties.
80
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Office of the Parliamentary 
Commissioner for Administration and 
the Health Service Commissioner for 
England
Departmental Expenditure Limit 42,777,000 11,748,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 600,000 384,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 43,565,000
Total 43,377,000 12,132,000 43,565,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration and the Health Service Commissioner for 
England, 2024-25
Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration and the Health Service Commissioner for 
England
Operational and administration costs, capital expenditure, and associated depreciation and 
other non-cash costs falling in DEL.
Monies received from the recovery of costs or miscellaneous income not classified elsewhere.
Use of provisions, including provisions for onerous leases, early departure, legal costs and 
dilapidations.
81
House of Lords
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
House of Lords
Departmental Expenditure Limit 163,669,000 35,617,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 1,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 187,095,000
Total 163,670,000 35,617,000 187,095,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:House of Lords, 2024-25
Members' expenses and allowances; administrative and accommodation costs, including staff 
salaries and pensions; security; stationery; printing; financial assistance to opposition parties; 
grants and grants-in-aid to Parliamentary bodies and organisations who promote the House of 
Lords' objectives; and associated depreciation and any other non-cash costs falling in DEL.
Catering and retail sales; rental income; reproductions of works of art; pension scheme related 
income; fees; income from the sales of assets; other charges and receipts in connection with 
parliamentary activities.
Pensions; administrative and accommodation costs; and provisions and other non-cash costs 
falling in AME.
82
House of Commons: Members
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
House of Commons: Members
Departmental Expenditure Limit 19,991,000 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 19,969,000
Total 19,991,000 0 19,969,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:House of Commons: Members, 2024-25
The House of Commons Members’ Estimate is to cover expenditure arising from: financial 
assistance to Opposition parties to support them in the discharge of their Parliamentary or 
representative functions; the Exchequer contribution to the Parliamentary Contributory Pension 
Fund; payroll costs of Members appointed to specific parliamentary duties, and other non-cash 
costs.
83
Crown Estate Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Crown Estate Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 2,368,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 2,357,000
Total 2,368,000 0 2,357,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Crown Estate Office, 2024-25
A contribution to the salary and administrative costs of the Crown Estate Commissioners and 
associated non-cash items.
84
Armed Forces Pension and Compensation Schemes
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Armed Forces Pension and 
Compensation Schemes
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 5,240,271,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,804,671,000
Total 5,240,271,000 0 1,804,671,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Armed Forces Pension and Compensation Schemes, 2024-25
Payment of pensions, lump sum benefits, transfers out and associated non-cash items to 
persons covered by the scheme. Provision is also made for payment of those benefits outside 
the scheme: Short Service Gratuities, Resettlement Grants and Criminal Injuries Compensation 
Overseas.
MOD employer contributions (Superannuation Contributions Adjusted for Past Experience), 
transfers in from other schemes and purchases of added years.
85
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office: Overseas Superannuation
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Foreign, Commonwealth and 
Development Office: Overseas 
Superannuation
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 23,000,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 38,325,000
Total 23,000,000 0 38,325,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Pension and superannuation payments, grants and compensation payments, etc. in respect of 
overseas services; pensions for beneficiaries of certain former overseas pension funds for which 
the UK assumed responsibility; pensions for beneficiaries and former beneficiaries of the 
Gibraltar Social Insurance Fund; contributions to pension funds guaranteed by the UK; refund 
of contributions made by overseas governments; war service credit; and associated non-cash 
items such as adjustments to pension scheme liabilities like interest on outstanding scheme 
liabilities.Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office: Overseas Superannuation, 2024-25
86
National Health Service Pension Scheme
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
National Health Service Pension Scheme
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 14,427,636,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement -4,719,777,000 
Total 14,427,636,000 0 -4,719,777,000 
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Pension contributions, inward transfer values, employer contributions relating to the 
Compensation for Premature Retirement Scheme, cost of scheme administration levy, from or 
in respect of persons engaged in health services or in other approved employment.Pensions, allowances, gratuities, transfers to alternative pension arrangements, refunds of 
contributions, compensation for early retirement, to or in respect of persons engaged in health 
services or in other approved employment and other cash and non-cash items.National Health Service Pension Scheme, 2024-25
87
Teachers' Pension Scheme (England and Wales)
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Teachers' Pension Scheme (England and Wales)
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 9,257,552,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,069,514,000
Total 9,257,552,000 0 1,069,514,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Receipts from employers' and employees' superannuation contributions; transfer values 
received; deductions from returns of contributions towards payment in lieu of graduated 
national insurance contributions equivalent premiums; recovery of contributions equivalent 
premiums from the state pension scheme; amounts received from employers of teachers' 
scheme members in reimbursement of the cost of premature retirement compensation 
payments on their behalf by Capita; receipt of administration charge from employers for the 
specific purpose of meeting the costs of administering the scheme.Superannuation allowances and gratuities, and other related expenditure, in respect of teachers 
and the widows, widowers, children and dependants of deceased teachers, and for premature 
retirement and compensation payments made to members of the Teachers' Pension Scheme and 
on behalf of their employers, the cost of paying the Department for Education to administer the 
scheme; and associated non-cash items.Teachers' Pension Scheme (England and Wales), 2024-25
88
UK Atomic Energy Authority Pension Schemes
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
UK Atomic Energy Authority Pension Schemes
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 224,300,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 230,700,000
Total 224,300,000 0 230,700,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Receipts of employees' and employers' contributions and inward transfers.Payments of pensions etc. to members of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority 
pension schemes, related expenditure and non-cash items.UK Atomic Energy Authority Pension Schemes, 2024-25
89
Ministry of Justice: Judicial Pensions Scheme
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Ministry of Justice: Judicial Pensions Scheme
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 174,075,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement -97,333,000 
Total 174,075,000 0 -97,333,000 
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Employers’ pension contributions (Accruing Superannuation Liability Charges), scheme 
members' pension contributions, transfers in from other schemes, purchases of added years, 
and receipt of administration charges from employers towards the cost of administering the 
schemes.Payment of pensions, lump sum benefits, transfers out, refunds of contributions, refunds of 
added pension payments, and McCloud compensation payments in respect of members of the 
Judicial Pensions Schemes; payments to the Ministry of Justice towards the cost of 
administering the schemes; and other associated cash and non-cash items.Ministry of Justice: Judicial Pensions Scheme, 2024-25
90
Cabinet Office: Civil Superannuation
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Cabinet Office: Civil Superannuation
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 9,913,000,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,235,000,000
Total 9,913,000,000 0 1,235,000,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Charges received from departments and others on account of the cost of pension cover 
provided for their staff. Periodical contributions for widows', widowers', and dependants' 
benefits. Other superannuation contributions, transfer values and bulk transfer receipts.The superannuation of civil servants; pensions etc., and other pensions and non-recurrent 
payments, for other related services and related non-cash items.Cabinet Office: Civil Superannuation, 2024-25
91
Royal Mail Statutory Pension Scheme
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Royal Mail Statutory Pension Scheme
Departmental Expenditure Limit 0 0
Annually Managed Expenditure 1,516,000,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 1,975,000,000
Total 1,516,000,000 0 1,975,000,000
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:
Payment of pensions etc. to members of the Royal Mail Statutory Pension Scheme, related 
expenditure and non-cash items.Royal Mail Statutory Pension Scheme, 2024-25
92
House of Commons: Administration
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
House of Commons: Administration
Departmental Expenditure Limit 
equivalent 421,493,000 165,490,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 527,983,000
Total 421,493,000 165,490,000 527,983,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit equivalent
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:General administration of the House of Commons and activities undertaken to meet 
Parliament’s objectives; associated commercial activities; grants to organisations who promote 
the House of Commons’ objectives; and other non-cash costs.
Rental, fees and charges in connection with activities within Parliament.House of Commons: Administration, 2024-25
93
Parliamentary Works Grant
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Parliamentary Works Grant
Departmental Expenditure Limit 
equivalent 82,300,000 1,000,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 83,300,000
Total 82,300,000 1,000,000 83,300,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit equivalent
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Paying of a grant to the Delivery Authority to support its activities and operations in delivering 
the restoration and renewal programme of the Palace of Westminster and related works on 
behalf of the Houses of Parliament, including all necessary costs incurred and the audit costs 
associated with both this Estimate and the Delivery Authority.
Any income arising from the sale of goods and services or the secondment of staff in furthering 
the delivery of the restoration and renewal programme.Parliamentary Works Grant, 2024-25
94
National Audit Office
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
National Audit Office
Departmental Expenditure Limit 
equivalent 101,900,000 4,300,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 0 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 101,500,000
Total 101,900,000 4,300,000 101,500,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit equivalent
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:Expenditure and associated non-cash items incurred in the provision of independent assurance 
and information to Parliament on the proper accounting for central government expenditure, 
revenue, assets and liabilities, including compliance with laws and regulations, and in the 
economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which central government resources have been 
used; and the provision of independent assurance and information and advice to a wide range 
of other public, international, and overseas bodies and to members of the public.
The provision of audit and assurance services to a range of organisations, including 
international and overseas bodies, income from the rental of surplus office space, income 
arising from the disposal of assets and miscellaneous receipts.National Audit Office, 2024-25
95
The Electoral Commission
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
The Electoral Commission
Departmental Expenditure Limit 45,706,000 2,211,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 50,000 100,000
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 46,467,000
Total 45,756,000 2,311,000 46,467,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Registration of political parties, recognised third parties and permitted participants; regulation 
and reporting of the income and expenditure of political parties, candidates, third parties and 
permitted participants; making grants to eligible parties for policy development; reviewing and 
advising on the administration and law of elections and encouraging best practice; providing 
guidance, and reporting, on the conduct of elections and referendums; determining standards 
of performance for those administering electoral registration, elections and referendums, and 
collecting information in relation to those standards and to expenditure on elections and 
campaigning; conducting certain referendums and promoting public awareness of electoral 
systems.
Registration and re-registration of political parties; providing guidance, and reporting, on the 
conduct of elections and referendums; determining standards of performance for those 
administering electoral registration, elections and referendums, and collecting information in 
relation to those standards and to expenditure on elections and campaigning; conducting 
certain referendums and promoting public awareness of electoral systems, including devolved 
administrations; and any other non-cash items.
Provisions, impairments and other non-cash costs arising in AME. Provisions include early 
departures, obligations under office and other leases, pension and tax and national insurance 
on benefits in kind.The Electoral Commission, 2024-25
96
Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority
Departmental Expenditure Limit 259,850,000 271,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 150,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 259,597,000
Total 260,000,000 271,000 259,597,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Income arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority, 2024-25
Operation and administration of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (IPSA), 
and all activities connected to its purpose. Determination and operation of a business costs and 
expenses scheme for Members of Parliament, payment of the salaries, business costs and 
expenses of Members of Parliament and their staff. Determination of policy for the 
administration and salaries and pensions for Members of Parliament. Conducting reviews and 
investigations carried out under the auspices of the Office of the Compliance Officer. 
Depreciation and other non-cash costs. The reimbursement of travel and subsistence costs for 
meeting attendance of IPSA appointed managers of the UK MEP Pension Scheme.
Funding received from the House to cover the costs of interns employed by some MPs. 
Miscellaneous repayments made under the MPs' Scheme of Business Costs and Expenses.
Provisions and impairments.
97
The Local Government Boundary Commission for England
Estimate Net resources 
authorised for 
current purposesNet resources 
authorised for
capital purposesNet Cash 
Requirement
(£) (£) (£)
The Local Government Boundary 
Commission for England
Departmental Expenditure Limit 2,769,000 50,000
Annually Managed Expenditure 10,000 0
Non-Budget Expenditure 0
Net Cash Requirement 2,749,000
Total 2,779,000 50,000 2,749,000
Departmental Expenditure Limit
Expenditure arising from:
Annually Managed Expenditure
Expenditure arising from:Administration and operational cost and associated non-cash items, planning for and carrying 
out the functions and duties imposed on it by, or by virtue of, the Local Government and Public 
Involvement in Health Act 2007, the Local Democracy, Economic Development and 
Construction Act 2009 and the Greater London Authority Act 1999.
Provision.The Local Government Boundary Commission for England, 2024-25
These functions and duties include: undertaking electoral reviews of local authorities in 
England and implementing any changes by Order; undertaking reviews of the administrative 
boundaries of local authorities in England and making recommendations to the Secretary of 
State for any changes; providing advice, at their request, to the Secretary of State on any 
proposals they receive from local authorities for a change to unitary status; undertaking 
reviews of the constituencies of the Greater London Assembly and implementing any changes 
by Order; altering the boundaries of district council or London borough wards and county 
council divisions as a consequence of the outcome of community governance reviews 
conducted by local authorities in England; and making Orders to implement proposals from 
local authorities wishing to move to elections by thirds or by halves.
Supply  and Appropriation  (Main  Estimates)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Authorise  the use of resources  for the year  ending  with  31 March  2025;  to authorise 
both  the issue  of sums  out of the Consolidated  Fund  and the application  of income  for 
that year;  and to appropriate  the supply  authorised  for that year  by this Act and by the 
Supply  and Appropriation  (Anticipation  and Adjustments)  Act 2024. 
Ordered  to be brought  in by 
the Chairman  of Ways  and Means , 
the Chancellor  of the Exchequer , Darren  Jones , 
Tulip  Siddiq , James  Murray  and Emma  Reynolds . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   24th  July 2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 4



Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information) 
Bill [HL] 
[NOTE:  The words  marked  in hold  type were inserted  by the Lords  to avoid  questions  of 
privilege.] 
59/1 Bill 137 
Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
CONTENTS 
1 English  local  authorities:  duties  relating  to Start  for Life offer 
2 Guidance 
3 Secretary  of State’s  duty  to report 
4 Data  protection 
5 Interpretation 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 137 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for and in connection  with  the making  available  of information 
about  support  available  for infants,  parents  and carers  of infants,  and 
prospective  parents  and carers,  including  reporting  requirements  relating  to 
such  support;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 English  local  authorities:  duties  relating  to Start  for Life offer 
(1) An English  local  authority  must  publish  a Start  for Life offer  for its area on 
its website  under  the heading  “Start  for Life”. 
(2) 
5A “Start  for Life offer”  for an English  local  authority’s  area is information 
about  the following  services  that the authority  is aware  are available  in its 
area for infants,  parents  or carers  of infants,  or prospective  parents  or carers— 
(a) maternity  services  provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority; 
(b) health  visiting  services  provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority; 
(c) 
10services  promoting  positive  relationships  between  infants  and their 
parents  or carers  provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority; 
(d) breastfeeding  and other  infant  feeding  services  provided  by or on 
behalf  of a public  authority; 
(e) mental  health  services  provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority; 
(f) such  other  kinds  of services  that are— 
15 (i) likely  to support  infants,  parents  or carers  of infants,  or 
prospective  parents  or carers,  and 
(ii) provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority, 
as the Secretary  of State  may  specify  by regulations; 
(g) 
20such  services  that are likely  to support  infants,  parents  or carers  of 
infants,  or prospective  parents  or carers,  being— 
(i) services  of a kind  mentioned  in paragraphs  (a) to (f) provided 
other  than  by or on behalf  of a public  authority,  or 
(ii) other  services,  whether  or not provided  by or on behalf  of a 
public  authority, 
59/1 Bill 137 1 Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information)  Bill [HL] 
as the local  authority  considers  it appropriate  to include  information 
about  in the Start  for Life offer  for its area. 
(3) Services  referred  to in subsection  (2) include  services  that are available  to 
5infants,  parents  or carers  of infants,  or prospective  parents  or carers,  as well 
as to others. 
(4) An English  local  authority  must  also— 
(a) publish  a Start  for Life offer  for its area by any other  means  it considers 
appropriate, 
(b) 
10take such  steps  as it considers  appropriate  to bring  the Start  for Life 
offer  to the attention  of parents  and carers  of infants,  and prospective 
parents  and carers,  in its area,  and 
(c) take such  steps  as are reasonably  practicable  to ensure  that the Start 
for Life offer  is kept  up to date. 
(5) 
15An English  local  authority  must  have  regard  to guidance  published  by the 
Secretary  of State  under  section  2 when  complying  with  its duties  under  this 
section. 
(6) Regulations  under  subsection  (2)(f)  must  be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(7) A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  subsection  (2)(f)  may 
20not be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and 
approved  by a resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
2 Guidance 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  publish  guidance  to English  local  authorities 
relating  to their  duties  under  section  1. 
(2) 
25Before  publishing  guidance  under  subsection  (1), and any revisions  to the 
guidance  that the Secretary  of State  considers  substantive,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  consult— 
(a) English  local  authorities,  and 
(b) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(3) If— 
30 (a) consultation  was undertaken  during  a period  before  the day (“The 
commencement  day”)  on which  this section  comes  into force  (including 
during  a period  that occurred  before  the day on which  this Act is 
passed),  and 
(b) 
35the consultation  would  to any extent  have  satisfied  subsection  (2) had 
it occurred  on or after  the commencement  day, 
then,  on the commencement  day,  the consultation  is taken  to satisfy  subsection 
(2) to that extent. 
3 Secretary  of State’s  duty  to report 
(1) 
40The Secretary  of State  must  publish  a report  each  year  relating  to support 
available  in England  for infants,  parents  and carers  of infants,  and prospective 
parents  and carers. Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information)  Bill [HL] 2 
(2) The report  must  include— 
(a) an overview  of support  that is available  for such  persons  through 
services  of the kind  covered  by section  1(2)(a)  to (f), and 
(b) 
5such  other  information  as the Secretary  of State  considers  is appropriate 
to include  in the report  (for example,  information  about  any impacts 
of support  on outcomes  for such  persons,  or steps  that are being  taken 
in relation  to the collection  of information  relating  to such  impacts). 
(3) A report  under  subsection  (1) must  be published  on a government  website 
as soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  1 April  in the relevant  year. 
10 4 Data  protection 
(1) Sections  1 and 3 do not require  a publication  of information  if the publication 
would  contravene  the data  protection  legislation  (but in determining  whether 
the publication  would  do so, take into account  the duties  imposed  by those 
sections). 
15 (2) In subsection  (1), “the data  protection  legislation”  has the same  meaning  as 
in the Data  Protection  Act 2018  (see section  3(9) of that Act). 
5 Interpretation 
(1) In this Act— 
“English  local  authority”  means— 
20 (a) a county  council  in England, 
(b) a district  council  for an area in England  for which  there  is no 
county  council, 
(c) a London  borough  council, 
(d) 
25the Common  Council  of the City  of London  in its capacity  as 
a local  authority,  or 
(e) the Council  of the Isles  of Scilly; 
“infant”  means  a child  under  the age of two years. 
(2) In this Act, a service  is “provided  by or on behalf  of a public  authority”  if— 
(a) 
30the service  is provided  by or on behalf  of a person  who  has a function 
of a public  nature,  and 
(b) the service  is provided  in the performance  of that function. 
6 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) 
35The following  provisions  come  into force  on the day on which  this Act is 
passed— 
(a) section  1, for the purpose  of making  regulations, 
(b) section  4, 
(c) section  5, and 
(d) this section. 3 Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information)  Bill [HL] 
(3) Sections  1 (for the purposes  not mentioned  in subsection  (2)(a)),  2 and 3 come 
into force  on such  a day as the Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  appoint. 
(4) Regulations  under  subsection  (3) are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(5) 
5This  Act may  be cited  as the Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information) 
Act 2024. 
(6) Nothing  in this Act shall  impose  any charge  on the people  or on public 
funds,  or vary  the amount  or incidence  of or otherwise  alter  any such  charge 
in any manner,  or affect  the assessment,  levying,  administration  or 
application  of any money  raised  by any such  charge. Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information)  Bill [HL] 4 
Support  for Infants  and Parents  etc (Information) 
Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  for and in connection  with  the making  available  of information  about 
support  available  for infants,  parents  and carers  of infants,  and prospective  parents 
and carers,  including  reporting  requirements  relating  to such  support;  and for connected 
purposes. 
Brought  from  the House  of Lords  on 
18th November  2024 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   19th  November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  and House  of Lords  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 137



Terminal  Illness  (Relief  of Pain) 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Guidance:  administration  of pain  relief  to people  who  are terminally  ill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 136 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to issue  guidance  about  the application  of the 
criminal  law in respect  of the administration  of pain  relief  by healthcare 
professionals  to people  who  are terminally  ill; and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Guidance:  administration  of pain  relief  to people  who  are terminally  ill 
(1) Within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  issue 
guidance  to— 
(a) chief  officers  of police,  and 
5 (b) healthcare  professionals 
about  the application  of the criminal  law in respect  of the administration  of 
pain  relief  by healthcare  professionals  to people  who  are terminally  ill. 
(2) The guidance  must  in particular  include  guidance  about  the application  of 
10the criminal  law in cases  where  a healthcare  professional  administers  pain 
relief  to a person  who  is terminally  ill shortly  before  the end of their  life. 
(3) In preparing  guidance  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State  must 
consult— 
(a) people  who  are terminally  ill and their  families; 
(b) healthcare  professionals; 
15 (c) the Director  of Public  Prosecutions; 
(d) the Attorney  General; 
(e) the Welsh  Ministers;  and 
(f) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  relevant. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  may  revise  guidance  issued  under  this section. 
20 (5) The Secretary  of State  must  arrange  for guidance  issued  under  this section 
to be published. 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
59/1 Bill 136 1 Terminal  Illness  (Relief  of Pain) 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Terminal  Illness  (Relief  of Pain)  Act 2024. Terminal  Illness  (Relief  of Pain) 2 
Terminal  Illness  (Relief  of Pain) 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Require  the Secretary  of State  to issue  guidance  about  the application  of the criminal 
law in respect  of the administration  of pain  relief  by healthcare  professionals  to people 
who  are terminally  ill; and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Sir Edward  Leigh 
supported  by Rachael  Maskell , Sir John Hayes , 
Danny  Kruger , Sir Christopher  Chope , 
Sir Julian  Lewis , Lincoln  Jopp, Martin  Vickers , 
Dame  Meg Hillier , Saqib  Bhatti , Helen  Grant  and 
Sir Roger  Gale. 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   20th  November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 136



Committee  Stage:  Monday  3 February  2025 
Terminally  Ill Adults  (End  of Life) Bill 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Terminally  Ill Adults  (End  of Life) Bill. Any withdrawn 
amendments  are listed  at the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which 
it is expected  they will be decided. 
 Amendments  which  will comply  with  the required  notice  period  at their  next appearance. 
_34 Sarah  Olney 
Antonia  Bance 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 4, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This replaces  the concept  of capacity  based  on the Mental  Capacity  Act and replaces  it with  a new 
concept  of ability  which  is defined  in NC1. 
_109 Juliet  Campbell 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 17, after  first “and”  insert  “demonstrably  ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  reflects  the changes  in Amendments  110 to 112 that change  the requirement  from 
having  to establish  that a person  who wishes  to end their  own life under  the Act has clear,  settled 
and informed  wish,  to a clear,  settled  and demonstrably  informed  wish. 
_23 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 19, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 

Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  include  the absence  of undue  influence  for the making  of a person’s  decision. 
This reflects  the changes  proposed  in Amendments  24 to 33. 
_82 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 19, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This would  add a lack of encouragement  to the list of requirements  for a person  to make  a decision 
to request  assistance.  This reflects  the changes  proposed  in Amendments  83 to 92. 
_113 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 19, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  reflects  the changes  in Amendments  114 to 115 which  require  steps  to be taken 
to establish  that the person  seeking  assistance  has not been  manipulated  by any other  person. 
_94 Mr James  Cleverly 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  1, page  1, line 20, at end insert  “, and 
(c) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  that a person  requesting  assistance  must  be acting  for their  own sake,  not 
the benefit  of others.  This amendment  reflects  the proposed  changes  in Amendments  95 to 104. 
_123 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  2, page  1, line 23, leave  out “ an inevitably”  and insert  “a typically” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  changes  the definition  of what  it is to be terminally  ill from  having  an “inevitably” 
to a “typically”  progressive  illness,  disease  or medical  condition  that cannot  be reversed  by treatment. 
_9 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  2, page  1, line 24, after  “reversed”  insert  “or the process  controlled  or substantially 
slowed” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 2 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  mean  that illness,  disease  or medical  condition  etc, the progress  of which 
can be managed  or controlled  by treatment  are not characterised  as terminal  illness. 
_48 Naz Shah 
. Clause  2, page  2, line 2, leave  out “can  reasonably  be expected  within  6 months”  and insert 
“is expected  with  reasonable  certainty  within  6 months,  even  if the person  were  to undergo 
all recommended  treatment” 
_51 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  2, page  2, line 2, leave  out from  “expected”  to end 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  remove  the six-month  time  requirement  for a person  to be eligible  to request 
assistance  under  the Act. 
_12 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  2 page  2, line 2, at end insert— 
“(c) their  illness,  disease  or medical  condition  is found  on a list that the 
Secretary  of State  may by regulations  specify. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  an illness,  disease  or medical  condition  to be specified  in regulations 
that may be made  by the Secretary  of State  to be considered  a terminal  illness  under  the Act. 
_10 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  2, page  2, line 6, at the end insert  “, providing  the treatment  does  not alter  the overall 
prognosis  of the condition.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  which  is linked  to Amendment  9, would  mean  that illness,  disease  or medical 
condition  etc, the progress  of which  can be managed  or controlled  by treatment  are not characterised 
as terminal  illness. 
_11 Sarah  Bool 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Rebecca  Paul 3 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. Clause  2, page  2, line 7, leave  out from  beginning  to first “of”  in line 8 and insert— 
“(3) A person  is not to be considered  to be terminally  ill by reason ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  amends  clause  2 to say that a person  cannot  be considered  terminally  ill by reason 
of having  mental  illness  or a disability. 
_13 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  2, page  2, line 10, at end insert— 
“(4) Regulations  under  subsection  (1)(c)  are subject  to the affirmative  procedure. 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may,  where  they consider  it appropriate,  make 
regulations  that expire  after  twelve  months  from  their  being  made  to include 
temporary  additions  to the list under  subsection  (1)(c) 
(6) Regulations  under  subsection  (5) are subject  to the negative  procedure. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  12 and specifies  regulations  under  that amendment 
must  be made  by the affirmative  procedure.  Temporary  additions  could  be made  by regulations 
subject  to the negative  procedure. 
_49 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  3, page  2, line 13, at end insert— 
“(2) The burden  of proof  for an assessment  of a person’s  capacity  is the balance  of 
probabilities  as required  under  section  2(4) of that Act. 
(3) For the purposes  of any such assessment,  the principles  set out in subsections 
(2) to (4) of section  1 (The principles)  of that Act apply. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  set out the burden  of proof  for capacity  assessments  as being  the same  as 
the Mental  Capacity  Act 2005  and apply  the principles  from  subsections  (2) to (4) of section  1 of the 
Mental  Capacity  Act 2005. 
_50 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  3, page  2, line 13, at end insert— 
“(2) An assessment  of a person’s  capacity  under  this Act must  include,  but is not 
limited  to, an assessment  that the person  understands— 
(a) the options  for care and treatment  of the terminal  illness,  including— 
(i) the extent  of prognostic  certainty  of their  illness  or condition, 
and COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 4 
(ii) the likely  effects  on day-to-day  functioning,  symptom 
management,  and pathway  to and experience  of death  of— 
(A) relevant  and available  care and treatment  including 
palliative  care,  hospice  or other  care, 
(B) withdrawal  or absence  of care and treatment,  and 
(C) requesting  assistance  in ending  their  own life under 
the terms  of this Act. 
(b) a decision  to proceed  under  this Act does  not prevent  or make 
unavailable  any care and treatment  provision  that would  normally  be 
provided. 
(c) the person’s  decision  to proceed  under  this Act must  be theirs  alone 
and not bound  or directed  by the views  or decisions  of others. 
(d) the person  is able to change  their  mind  at any stage  of the process  for 
requesting  assistance  to end their  own life under  the provisions  of this 
Act, regardless  of previous  decisions. 
(e) a decision  to proceed  under  this Act will lead to the provision  of a 
substance  that is reasonably  expected  to end someone’s  life following 
administration  and is reasonably  expected  to be irreversible. 
(f) relevant  legal  consequences  from  proceeding  with  a request  for 
assistance  to end their  own life, including  life insurance  and 
categorisation  of death  certification. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  set out certain  non-exhaustive  requirements  for a finding  that a person  has 
capacity. 
_35 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Marsha  De Cordova 
. Page  2, line 11, leave  out Clause  3 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC1. 
_8 Chris  Webb 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Rebecca  Paul 
John  Grady Blair  McDougall 
Helen  Hayes Darren  Paffey 
Laurence  Turner 5 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
. Clause  4, page  2, line 16, leave  out from  “practitioner”  to end of line 20 and insert  “shall 
raise  the subject  of the provision  of assistance  in accordance  with  this Act with  a person  who 
has not indicated  to that or another  registered  medical  practitioner  that they wish  to seek 
assistance  to end their  own life” 
_124 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  4, page  2, line 16, leave  out from  “practitioner”  to end of line 20 and insert  “shall 
discuss  assisted  dying  with  a person  unless  that matter  is first raised  by that person.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The amendment  prevents  a registered  medical  practitioner  from  discussing  the provision  of assistance 
under  the Act unless  that matter  is first raised  by that person. 
_108 Ms Polly  Billington 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  4, page  2, line 31, at end insert  "and  offer  to refer  them  to a registered  medical 
practitioner  who specialises  in such care for the purpose  of further  discussion." 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the doctor  who has an initial  discussion  with  a person  about  assisted 
dying  to offer  to refer  them  to a specialist  in palliative,  hospice  or other  care. 
_71 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  4, page  2, line 31, at end insert— 
“(4A) The practitioner  must,  following  the preliminary  discussion  under  subsection 
(3), refer  that person  to the Assisted  Dying  Agency  if the person  asks them  to 
do so.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4 and would  establish  a pathway  by which  a person  is referred 
to the Assisted  Dying  Agency. 
_125 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  4, page  2, line 35, leave  out from  start  of line to end of line 36 and insert  “who  is on 
the Register  of Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  provides  that only a medical  practitioner  who is on the Register  of Assisted  Dying 
Medical  Practitioners  as provided  for in NC7 would  have  a person  referred  to them. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 6 
_144 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 14, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
5(3)(a)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of coordinating  doctors).  A linked  amendment  to 
Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and 
the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_52 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 15, leave  out from  “State”  to end and insert  “must  specify  by regulations, 
including  experience  of managing  terminal  illnesses,” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor  to have  experience  of managing  terminal 
illness. 
_2 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 15, leave  out “may”  and insert  “must” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to make  regulations  specifying  the training, 
qualifications  and experience  required  for the coordinating  doctor. 
_72 Dr Ben Spencer 
Laurence  Turner 
Neil Coyle 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 16, leave  out paragraph  (b) and insert— 
“(b) has been  assigned  to the person  by the Assisted  Dying  Agency, ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4 and provides  that the coordinating  doctor  must  have  been 
assigned  to the person  by the Assisted  Dying  Agency. 
_145 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 24, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 7 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  the Welsh  Ministers  to consult  regarding  the making 
of regulations  under  Clause  5(3)(a)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of coordinating  doctors). 
A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in 
relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_20 Jess Asato 
Rebecca  Paul 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Maya  Ellis 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Blair  McDougall 
Apsana  Begum 
John  Grady Mr James  Frith 
Ms Polly  Billington 
Darren  Paffey 
Helen  Hayes 
Dr Scott  Arthur Anna  Dixon 
Melanie  Ward 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Laurence  Turner 
Anneliese  Midgley 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 25, at end insert— 
“(4A) Regulations  under  subsection  (3)(a)  must  specify  that training  in respect  of 
domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and financial  abuse  is mandatory. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the registered  medical  practitioner  acting  as the coordinating  doctor 
to have  undertaken  training  on domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and financial  abuse. 
_3 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  5, page  3, line 28, leave  out “negative”  and insert  “affirmative” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  change  the regulations  specifying  the training,  qualifications  and experience 
required  for the coordinating  doctor  from  the negative  procedure  to the affirmative  procedure. 
_146 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  6, page  3, line 34, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
6(3) (forms  of proof  of identity).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority 
to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 8 
_127 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 2, leave  out “as soon  as reasonably  practicable”  and insert  “within  10 
working  days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The amendment  requires  the coordinating  doctor  to carry  out an assessment  under  the Act within 
ten working  days. 
_36 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Marsha  De Cordova 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 7, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_53 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 8, at end insert— 
“(ca) has relevant  and available  palliative  care options. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  mean  that someone  is only eligible  for assistance  in ending  their  own life 
under  this Act if they have  relevant  and available  palliative  care options. 
_110 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 13, after  “and”  insert  “demonstrably” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the coordinating  doctor  to ascertain  whether,  in their  opinion,  the person 
has a “demonstrably”  informed  wish  to end their  own life. 
_24 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 14, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 9 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_83 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 14, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_114 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 14, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the coordinating  doctor  to ascertain  whether,  in their  opinion,  the person 
has manipulated. 
_95 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 15, at end insert  “, and 
(h) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_14 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Ms Polly  Billington 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Blair  McDougall Darren  Paffey 
John  Grady Marsha  De Cordova 
Helen  Hayes 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 15, at end insert— 
“(2A) The coordinating  doctor  must  take the report  required  under  subsection  (2B) 
into account  in making  an assessment  under  paragraph  (2)(b),  (f) and (g). 
(2B) One or more  qualified  persons  must  have  conducted  a separate  interview  with 
the person  and made  a report  to the coordinating  doctor  on the matters 
specified  in subsection  (2C). 
(2C) The matters  that must  be covered  in the report  required  under  subsection  (2B) 
are— 
(a) any evidence  of duress  or coercion  affecting  the person’s  decision  to 
end their  life, 
(b) any difficulties  of communication  with  the person  interviewed  and an 
explanation  of how those  difficulties  were  overcome,  and COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 10 
(c) the capacity  of the person  interviewed  to understand  the information 
given  to them  under  paragraph  (9)(2),  (b), (c) and (d). 
(2D) A person  shall  be taken  to be qualified  to conduct  an interview  under 
subsection  (2B) if that person— 
(a) is a registered  medical  practitioner  who— 
(i) is registered  in the specialism  of psychiatry  in the Specialist 
Register  kept  by the General  Medical  Council,  or 
(ii) has such training,  qualifications  and experience  as the Secretary 
of State  may by regulations  specify, 
(b) has not provided  treatment  or care for the person  being  assessed  in 
relation  to that person’s  terminal  illness, 
(c) is not a relative  of the person  being  assessed, 
(d) is not a partner  or colleague  in the same  practice  or clinical  team  as the 
coordinating  doctor, 
(e) did not witness  the first declaration  made  by the person  being  assessed, 
and 
(f) does  not know  or believe  that they— 
(i) are a beneficiary  under  a will of the person,  or 
(ii) may otherwise  benefit  financially  or in any other  material  way 
from  the death  of the person. 
(2E) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (2D)(a),  the Secretary  of State 
must  consult  such persons  as they consider  appropriate. 
(2F) Regulations  under  subsection  (2D)(a)  are subject  to the negative  procedure. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  and its consequential  and linked  amendments  (15, 16, 17, 18 and 19), would  provide 
for an independent  assessment,  via an interview  conducted  by a specialist,  of a person’s  capacity  to 
make  the decision  to end their  own life, their  clear,  settled  and informed  wish  to do so, and that 
they have  made  the first declaration  voluntarily  and without  coercion. 
_54 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 17, leave  out “(g)”  and insert  “(h)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  53. 11 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_73 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 21, leave  out paragraphs  (b) and (c) and insert— 
“(b) provide  the person  who was assessed  and the Assisted  Dying  Agency 
with  a copy  of the statement. 
(3A) Upon  receipt  of the statement  specified  in subsection  (3)(a),  the Assisted  Dying 
Agency  must  assign  to the person,  as soon  as practicable,  another  registered 
medical  practitioner  who meets  the requirements  of section  8(6) for the second 
assessment  (“the  independent  doctor”). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4 and would  require  the coordinating  doctor  to send  a copy 
of their  statement  to the Assisted  Dying  Agency.  That  Agency  must  then  to assign  an “independent 
doctor”  to the person. 
_128 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  7, page  4, line 23, leave  out “as soon  as practicable”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor  to refer  a person  within  10 working  days 
rather  than  as soon  as practicable  to another  registered  medical  practitioner  to carry  out the second 
assessment. 
_129 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 29, leave  out “as soon  as reasonably  practicable,”  and insert  “within 
10 working  days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the independent  doctor  to carry  out the second  assessment  within 
10 working  days rather  than  as soon  as practicable  to another  registered  medical  practitioner  to 
carry  out the second  assessment. 
_55 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 33, leave  out paragraph  (a) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  remove  an assessment  of whether  the person  is terminally  ill from  the 
independent  doctor’s  assessment. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 12 
_37 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Marsha  De Cordova 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 34, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_56 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 34, at end insert— 
“(ba) would  not, in the opinion  of the independent  doctor,  be liable  for 
detention  under  the Mental  Health  Act 1983. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the independent  doctor  to assess  whether,  in their  opinion,  a person 
would  be liable  for detention  under  the Mental  Health  Act 1983. 
_111 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 36, after  “and”  insert  “demonstrably” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the independent  doctor  to ascertain  whether,  in their  opinion,  the person 
has a “demonstrably”  informed  wish  to end their  own life. 
_25 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 37, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_84 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 37, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 13 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_115 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 37, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the independent  doctor  to ascertain  whether,  in their  opinion,  the person 
has manipulated. 
_96 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 38, at end insert  “, and 
(f) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_15 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
John  Grady 
. Clause  8, page  4, line 38, at end insert— 
“(2A) The independent  doctor  must  take the report  required  under  subsection  7(2B) 
into account  in making  an assessment  under  subsections  (2)(b)(d)  and (e).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to Amendment  14 and requires  the independent  doctor  to take into 
account  an assessment  that would  be required  under  that amendment. 
_57 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 1, leave  out subsection  (4) and insert— 
“(4) The independent  doctor  must,  where  possible,  undertake  the second  assessment 
jointly  with  the coordinating  doctor. 
(4A) If the independent  doctor  is unable  to undertake  the second  assessment  jointly 
with  the coordinating  doctor  under  subsection  (4), the independent  doctor 
must  confer  with  the coordinating  doctor  before  completing  that assessment. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the independent  doctor  to undertake  the second  assessment  jointly 
with  the coordinating  doctor,  or, if they are unable  to, to confer  with  that doctor  before  completing 
the assessment. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 14 
_75 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 9, leave  out “coordinating  doctor”  and insert  “Assisted  Dying  Agency” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_1 Sojan  Joseph 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 13, at beginning  insert  “is a registered  medical  practitioner  who is 
registered  in the specialism  of psychiatry  in the Specialist  Register  kept  by the General  Medical 
Council  and” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  that the independent  doctor  is a registered  psychiatrist. 
_147 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 13, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
8(6)(a)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of second  doctors).  A linked  amendment  to Clause 
40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_4 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 14, leave  out “may”  and insert  “must” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to make  regulations  specifying  the training, 
qualifications  and experience  required  for the independent  doctor. 
_58 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 14, at end insert— 
“(aa) is a practitioner  approved  as having  special  experience  in the diagnosis 
or treatment  of mental  disorder  for the purposes  of subsection  (2) of 
Section  12 (General  provisions  as to medical  recommendations)  of the 
Mental  Health  Act 1983, ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  which  is linked  to Amendment  56 would  require  the independent  doctor  to have 
special  experience  in the diagnosis  of mental  disorder. 15 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_16 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
John  Grady 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 16, at end insert  “or conducted  the interview  under  subsection  (7) (2B)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to Amendment  14 and ensures  that the independent  doctor  cannot  be 
the same  person  who undertakes  the assessment  that would  be required  under  that amendment. 
_74 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 16, at end insert— 
“(ba) has been  assigned  to the person  by the Assisted  Dying  Agency, ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4 and provides  that the independent  doctor  must  have  been 
assigned  to the person  by the Assisted  Dying  Agency. 
_148 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 28, leave  out “Secretary  of State  must  consult  such persons  as the 
Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority  must  consult  such persons  as the 
appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  the Welsh  Ministers  to consult  regarding  the making 
of regulations  under  Clause  8(6)(a)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of second  doctors).  A 
linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in 
relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_21 Jess Asato 
Rebecca  Paul 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Maya  Ellis 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Apsana  Begum 
Dr Scott  Arthur Mr James  Frith 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Helen  Hayes 
Blair  McDougall Anna  Dixon 
Melanie  Ward 
Laurence  Turner 
Anneliese  Midgley 
John  Grady COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 16 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 29, at end insert— 
“(8A) Regulations  under  subsection  (6)(a)  must  specify  that training  in respect  of 
domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and financial  abuse  is mandatory. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the registered  medical  practitioner  acting  as the independent  doctor 
to have  undertaken  training  on domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and financial  abuse. 
_5 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  8, page  5, line 30, leave  out “negative”  and insert  “affirmative” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  change  the regulations  specifying  the training,  qualifications  and experience 
required  for the independent  doctor  from  the negative  procedure  to the affirmative  procedure. 
_93 Dr Neil Shastri-Hurst 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 1, leave  out “might”  and insert  “is to” 
_142 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 3, after  “death”  insert  “and  how it will be administered” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the assessing  doctor  to explain  and discuss  with  the person  how the 
substance  that might  be provided  to assist  the person  to end their  own life will be administered. 
_112 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 13, insert  at end— 
“(da) be satisfied  that,  in their  opinion,  the person  has demonstrated  their 
understanding  of the matters  in subsections  (2) (b) to 2 (d).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the assessing  doctor  to be satisfied  that,  in their  opinion,  the person  has 
demonstrated  their  understanding  of the matters  that have  to be discussed  and the information 
provided  under  subsections  (2)(b)  to 2(d). 
_76 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 14, leave  out paragraph  (e) 17 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_59 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 21, leave  out subsection  (3) and insert— 
“(3) To inform  their  assessment,  the coordinating  doctor  must— 
(a) if they have  doubt  as to whether  the person  being  assessed  is terminally 
ill, refer  the person  for assessment  by a registered  medical  practitioner 
who holds  qualifications  in or has experience  of the diagnosis  and 
management  of the illness,  disease  or condition  in question. 
(b) if they make  a referral  under  paragraph  (a), take account  of any opinion 
provided  by that other  registered  medical  practitioner. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to Amendments  55 and 58 and removes  the option  for the independent 
doctor  and coordinating  doctor  to refer  the person  to another  doctor  or an assessment  of capacity 
for their  assessments  of capacity. 
_17 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
John  Grady 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 27, leave  out paragraph  (b) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  14. 
_6 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 27, leave  out “may”  and insert  “must” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the assessing  doctor  to refer  the person  being  assessed  for a mental 
capacity  assessment  if the assessing  doctor  had doubt  as to the person's  capacity. 
_38 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 27, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "ability" COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 18 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_39 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 31, leave  out “capability”  and insert  “ability” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_18 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
John  Grady 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 32, leave  out “or (b)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  14. 
_19 Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Marsha  De Cordova 
John  Grady 
. Clause  9, page  6, line 34, leave  out “or (b)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  14. 
_143 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  10, page  7, line 10, leave  out “one  referral  for a second  opinion”  and insert  “up to 
two referrals  for a second  or third  opinion,” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  allow  the coordinating  doctor  to make  up to two referrals  for a second  or 
third  opinion  by an independent  doctor. 19 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_81 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Page  6, line 42, leave  out Clause  10 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_149 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  11, page  7, line 13, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
11(1)  (replacing  the coordinating  doctor  on death  etc). A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines 
appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers 
in relation  to Wales. 
_77 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  11, page  7, line 18, after  “appointment,”  insert  “by the Assisted  Dying  Agency” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_40 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 2, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_26 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 13, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_85 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 13, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 20 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_97 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 14, at end insert  “, and 
(i) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_105 Catherine  Atkinson 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Laurence  Turner 
Helen  Hayes 
John  Grady 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 15, leave  out subsections  (4) and (5) and insert— 
“(4A) Rules  of Court  must  secure  that in relation  to an application  under  subsection 
(1), the High  Court  must— 
(a) prescribe  a procedure  which  in relation  to each  application  appoints  a 
person  (the Official  Solicitor  in cases  in brought  in England  and Wales) 
to act as advocate  to the Court, 
(b) hear  from  and question,  in person— 
(i) the person  who made  the application  for the declaration, 
(ii) the coordinating  doctor, 
(iii) the independent  doctor,  and 
(c) consider  hearing  from  and questioning,  in person— 
(i) persons  properly  interested  in the welfare  of the person  who 
made  the application  for the declaration  and other  persons  they 
are close  to, and 
(ii) any other  person  who has provided  treatment  or care for the 
person  being  assessed  in relation  to that person’s  terminal 
illness. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  court  rules  to be made  that would  ensure  an adversarial  court 
process,  by appointing  an advocate  to the court.  It would  also require  them  to hear  from  the person 
seeking  assistance  to end their  life and both  assessing  doctors,  and to consider  also hearing  from 
family  members  and others  involved  in the person's  care. 21 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_106 Catherine  Atkinson 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Laurence  Turner 
John  Grady 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 30, leave  out “(5)”  and insert  “(4A)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  105. 
_107 Catherine  Atkinson 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Laurence  Turner 
John  Grady 
. Clause  12, page  8, line 44, leave  out "(4)"  and insert  "(4A)" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  105. 
_60 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Page  7, line 25, leave  out Clause  12 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to NC2 and NC3. 
_61 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 5, leave  out from  “the”  to “has”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_62 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 13, leave  out from  “the”  to “or”  in line 14 and insert  “First-tier 
Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 22 
_41 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 31, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_27 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 33, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_86 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 33, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_98 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Clause  13, page  9, line 34, at end insert  “, and 
(e) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_78 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  14, page  10, line 7, leave  out from  “person)”  to end of line 12 and insert  “the  Assisted 
Dying  Agency” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_63 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  16, page  11, line 12, leave  out “the”  to “has”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 23 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_79 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  16, page  11, line 18, leave  out subsections  (2) and (3) and insert— 
“(1A) The Assisted  Dying  Agency  must,  as soon  as practicably  possible,  record  the 
making  of the statement  or declaration. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_130 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  16, page  11, line 19, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor,  where  they are a practitioner  with  the 
person’s  GP practice  to record  the making  of the declaration  or statement,  or the refusal  to make 
the declaration  or statement,  in the person’s  medical  records  within  10 working  days rather  than  as 
soon  as practicable. 
_131 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  16, page  11, line 23, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor,  where  they are not practitioner  with  the 
person’s  GP practice,  to give a registered  medical  practitioner  from  that practice  notice  of the making 
of the declaration  or statement,  or the refusal  to make  the declaration  or statement,  in the person’s 
medical  records  within  10 working  days rather  than  as soon  as practicable. 
_132 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  16, page  11, line 27, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor,  where  they are not a practitioner  with  the 
person’s  GP practice  to record  the making  of the declaration  or statement,  or the refusal  to make 
the declaration  or statement,  in the person’s  medical  records  within  10 working  days rather  than  as 
soon  as practicable. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 24 
_80 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  17, page  11, line 36, leave  out subsections  (2) and (3) and insert— 
“(1A) The Assisted  Dying  Agency  must  record  the cancellation. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC4. 
_133 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  17, page  11, line 38, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the coordinating  doctor,  where  they are not a practitioner  with  the 
person’s  GP practice  to record  the making  of the declaration  or statement,  or the refusal  to make 
the declaration  or statement,  in the person’s  medical  records  within  10 working  days rather  than  as 
soon  as practicable. 
_134 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  17, page  12, line 2, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the medical  practitioner  to whom  notice  or indication  of the 
cancellation  of declaration  is given  to notify  a registered  medical  professional  from  the person’s  GP 
practice  within  10 working  days rather  than  as soon  as practicable. 
_135 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  17, page  12, line 5, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_64 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  18, page  12, line 9, leave  out from  “the”  to “has”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 25 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_42 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  18, page  12, line 23, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_28 Sarah  Bool 
. Clause  18, page  12, line 26, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_87 Rebecca  Paul 
. Clause  18, page  12, line 26, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_99 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Clause  18, page  12, line 26, at end insert  “, and 
(d) is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_150 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  19, page  13, line 21, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
19(2)(b)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of other  doctors).  A linked  amendment  to Clause 
40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 26 
_151 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  19, page  13, line 31, leave  out “Secretary  of State  must  consult  such persons  as the 
Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority  must  consult  such persons  as the 
appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  the Welsh  Ministers  to consult  regarding  the making 
of regulations  under  Clause  19(2)(b)  (training,  qualifications  and experience  of other  doctors).  A 
linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in 
relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_22 Jess Asato 
Rebecca  Paul 
Dame  Meg  Hillier 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Maya  Ellis 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Apsana  Begum 
Dr Scott  Arthur Mr James  Frith 
Mary  Kelly  Foy 
Helen  Hayes 
Blair  McDougall Anna  Dixon 
Melanie  Ward 
Laurence  Turner 
Anneliese  Midgley 
John  Grady 
. Clause  19, page  13, line 32, at end insert— 
“(5A) Regulations  under  subsection  (2)(b)  must  specify  that training  in respect  of 
domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and financial  abuse  is mandatory. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  that,  in the event  of the coordinating  doctor  authorising  another 
registered  medical  practitioner  to provide  assistance  under  the Act, that other  registered  medical 
practitioner  must  also have  undertaken  training  on domestic  abuse,  including  coercive  control  and 
financial  abuse. 
_152 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  20, page  13, line 35, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
20(1)  (meaning  of “approved  substance”).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate 
authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation 
to Wales. 
_136 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  21, page  14, line 12, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 27 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_137 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  21, page  14, line 15, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_138 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  21, page  14, line 18, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_139 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  22, page  14, line 27, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_140 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  22, page  14, line 30, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_141 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  22, page  14, line 33, leave  out “as soon  as practicable,”  and insert  “within  10 working 
days” 
_126 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  23, page  15, line 5, insert  at end— 
“(1A) Medical  practitioners  who wish  to provide  assistance  under  this Act must 
“opt-in”  to the Register  of Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners  under  clause 
(Register  of Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  provides  that any medical  practitioner  who wishes  to provide  assistance  under  the 
Act must  have  opted  in to the Register  of Medical  practitioners. 
_116 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  26, page  16, line 3, after  “coercion”  insert  “, manipulation” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  creating  an offence  of manipulating  someone  to make  a first or second 
declaration  (or not to cancel  such a declaration). COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 28 
_117 Juliet  Campbell 
. Clause  26, page  16, line 6, after  “coercion”  insert  “, manipulation” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  creates  an offence  of manipulating  someone  to self-administer  an approved 
substance  provided  in accordance  with  this Act. 
_65 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  27, page  16, line 16, leave  out from  “the”  to “under”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_153 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  28, page  17, line 3, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
28(1)  (prescribing,  dispensing,  transporting  etc of approved  substances).  A linked  amendment  to 
Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and 
the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_7 Daisy  Cooper 
. Clause  29, page  18, line 9, insert  at end “and,  a statistical  analysis  of the number  of people 
assessed  by a medical  practitioner  as not eligible  as they do not meet  the criteria  set out in 
section  1 of this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Registrar  General  for England  and Wales  to at least  once  a year, 
prepare  and lay before  Parliament  a statistical  analysis  of the number  of people  who had been 
assessed  by a medical  practitioner  as not eligible  for assisted  dying. 
_154 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  30, page  18, line 12, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  a Code  of Practice  in Wales 
under  Clause  30. A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the 
Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 29 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_43 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  30, page  18, line 16, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 
_155 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  30, page  18, line 31, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to an amendment  that allows  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  a Code  of 
Practice  in Wales  under  Clause  30. A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority 
to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_156 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  30, page  18, line 33, leave  out “Secretary  of State  must  consult  such persons  as the 
Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority  must  consult  such persons  as the 
appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  the Welsh  Ministers  to consult  regarding  the making  a 
Code  of Practice  for Wales  under  Clause  30. A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate 
authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation 
to Wales. 
_157 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  32, page  19, line 21, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
32(1)  (powers  to ensure  assistance  is available).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate 
authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation 
to Wales. 
_158 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  32, page  19, line 22, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 30 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to an amendment  that allows  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations 
under  Clause  32(1)  (powers  to ensure  assistance  is available).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 
defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_159 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  33, page  19, line 34, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
33(1)  (notifications  to Chief  Medical  Officers).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate 
authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation 
to Wales. 
_160 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  33, page  20, line 16, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
33(2)(h)  (notifications  to Chief  Medical  Officers:  notifiable  events).  A linked  amendment  to Clause 
40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_66 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Clause  34, page  20, line 40, leave  out from  “the”  to “has”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_161 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  35, page  21, line 30, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  the Welsh  Ministers  to review  the operation  of the Act 
in relation  to Wales.  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the 
Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_162 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  35, page  21, line 35, at end insert  “or the Senedd  Cymru  (as the case may be)” 31 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of requiring  a review  carried  out by the Welsh  Ministers  under  Clause 
35 to be laid before  the Senedd. 
_163 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  35, page  22, line 8, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to an amendment  that requires  the Welsh  Ministers  to review  the operation 
of the Act under  Clause  35. 
_164 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  37, page  22, line 30, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
37(1)  (modification  of form  of declarations  and statements).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 
defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_165 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  38, page  22, line 34, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
38(1)  (power  to make  consequential  and transitional  provision  etc). A linked  amendment  to Clause 
40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh 
Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_166 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  38, page  22, line 37, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is linked  to an amendment  that allows  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  amendments 
under  Clause  38(1)  (power  to make  consequential  and transitional  provision  etc). A linked  amendment 
to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England 
and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 32 
_167 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  39, page  23, line 9, at end insert  “or, where  the regulations  are to be made  by the 
Welsh  Ministers,  the Senedd  Cymru” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of making  certain  powers  of the Welsh  Ministers  subject  to the 
affirmative  procedure  before  the Senedd  Cymru.  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines 
appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers 
in relation  to Wales. 
_168 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  39, page  23, line 12, at end insert  “or, where  the regulations  are to be made  by the 
Welsh  Ministers,  the Senedd  Cymru” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of making  certain  powers  of the Welsh  Ministers  subject  to the 
negative  procedure  before  the Senedd  Cymru.  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate 
authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation 
to Wales. 
_169 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  40, page  23, line 23, at end insert— 
““appropriate  authority”  means— 
(a) in relation  to England,  the Secretary  of State; 
(b) in relation  to Wales,  the Welsh  Ministers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  to the interpretation  provision  in Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean 
the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales.  A series 
of linked  amendments  change  references  to the Secretary  of State  to appropriate  authority  in order 
to allow  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  in relation  to Wales. 
_44 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Clause  40, page  23, line 26, leave  out from  "capacity"  and insert  "ability" 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  34 and NC1. 33 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_170 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  42, page  24, line 21, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
42(2)  (commencement).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines  appropriate  authority  to mean 
the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers  in relation  to Wales. 
_171 Liz Saville  Roberts 
. Clause  42, page  24, line 26, leave  out “Secretary  of State”  and insert  “appropriate  authority” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  has the effect  of allowing  the Welsh  Ministers  to make  regulations  under  Clause 
42(4)  (commencement:  transitional  and saving  provision).  A linked  amendment  to Clause  40 defines 
appropriate  authority  to mean  the Secretary  of State  in relation  to England  and the Welsh  Ministers 
in relation  to Wales. 
_NC1 Sarah  Olney 
Antonia  Bance 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
Marsha  De Cordova 
Helen  Hayes 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Ability  to make  decision 
The person  is to be considered  as having  the ability  to make  a decision  to 
request  assistance  to end their  life if they can fully understand,  use and weigh 
the relevant  information  in accordance  with  regulations  made  by the Secretary 
of State  under  affirmative  resolution. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  defines  the concept  of ability  which  is intended  to replace  the concept  of capacity. 
This new clause  is intended  to replace  Clause  3. 
_NC2 Dr Ben Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Tribunal  authorisation 
(1) Where— 
(a) a person  has made  a first declaration  under  section  5 which  has not 
been  cancelled, COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 34 
(b) the coordinating  doctor  has made  the statement  mentioned  in section 
7(3), and 
(c) the independent  doctor  has made  the statement  mentioned  in section 
8(5), that person  may apply  to the First-tier  Tribunal  (“the  Tribunal”) 
for a declaration  that the requirements  of this Act have  been  met in 
relation  to the first declaration. 
(2) On an application  under  this section,  the Tribunal— 
(a) must  make  the declaration  if it is satisfied  of all the matters  listed  in 
subsection  (3), and 
(b) in any other  case,  must  refuse  to make  the declaration. 
(3) The matters  referred  to in subsection  (2)(a)  are that— 
(a) the requirements  of sections  5 to 9 of this Act have  been  met in relation 
to the person  who made  the application, 
(b) the person  is terminally  ill, 
(c) the person  has capacity  to make  the decision  to end their  own life, 
(d) the person  has relevant  and available  palliative  care options  available 
to them, 
(e) the person  is not liable  to be detained  under  the Mental  Health  Act 
1983, 
(f) the person  was aged  18 or over at the time  the first declaration  was 
made, 
(g) the person  is ordinarily  resident  in England  and Wales  and has been  so 
resident  for at least  12 months  ending  with  the date  of the first 
declaration, 
(h) the person  is registered  as a patient  with  a general  medical  practice  in 
England  or Wales, 
(i) the person  has a clear,  settled  and informed  wish  to end their  own life, 
and 
(j) the person  made  the first declaration  and the application  under  this 
section  voluntarily  and has not been  coerced  or pressured  by any other 
person  into making  that declaration  or application. 
(4) The Tribunal— 
(a) may hear  from  and question,  in person,  the person  who made  the 
application  for the declaration; 
(b) must  hear  from  and may question,  in person,  the coordinating  doctor 
or the independent  doctor  (or both); 
(c) for the purposes  of paragraph  (b), may require  the coordinating  doctor 
or the independent  doctor  (or both)  to appear  before  the tribunal. 
(5) For the purposes  of determining  whether  it is satisfied  of the matters  mentioned 
in subsection  (3)(g)  and (h), the Tribunal  may also— 
(a) hear  from  and question  any other  person; 
(b) ask a person  to report  to the Tribunal  on such matters  relating  to the 
person  who has applied  for the declaration  as it considers  appropriate. 
(6) In considering  an application  under  this section,  the panel  must  consist  of— 35 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
a sitting  judge, (a) 
(b) a medical  practitioner,  and 
(c) a lay person. 
(7) In subsection  (4)— 
(a) in paragraph  (a), the reference  to the person  who made  the application 
includes,  in a case where  the person’s  first declaration  was signed  by a 
proxy  under  section  15, that proxy,  and 
(b) “in person”  includes  by means  of a live video  link or a live audio  link.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  replace  the role of the High  Court  with  the tribunal  system. 
_NC3 Dr Ben Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Tribunals  in Wales 
(1) For the purposes  of this Act, the First-tier  Tribunal  and the Upper  Tribunal,  in 
exercising  functions  under  or arising  from  this Act in relation  to Wales,  are to 
be treated  as devolved  tribunals  within  the meaning  of paragraph  9 of Schedule 
7A to the Government  of Wales  Act 2006. 
(2) The Welsh  Ministers  may by regulations  make  provision  relating  to the 
procedure  to be followed  by the First-tier  Tribunal  and the Upper  Tribunal  in 
exercising  functions  under  this Act in relation  to Wales. 
(3) Statutory  instruments  containing  regulations  made  under  this section  may not 
be made  unless  a draft  of the instrument  has been  laid before  and approved 
by resolution  of Senedd  Cymru. ” 
_NC4 Dr Ben Spencer 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Assisted  Dying  Agency 
(1) There  shall  be a body  known  as the Assisted  Dying  Agency  (“The  Agency”). 
(2) The purpose  of the body  is to coordinate  requests  from  people  to be considered 
for assisted  dying,  including  assigning,  at the appropriate  junctures,  a 
coordinating  doctor  and independent  doctor  for a person  seeking  assistance 
to end their  own life. 
(3) Where  a person  has previously  been  referred  to the Agency,  no future  referral 
relating  to that person  can be proceeded  with  by the Agency  unless  it considers 
there  has been  a material  change  in the person’s  circumstances. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  make  regulations  setting  out— 
(a) the staffing  and remuneration  of such staff, COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 36 
(b) the procedures  of the Agency,  and 
(c) the means  by which  the Agency  can pay coordinating  doctors  and 
independent  doctors  for services  rendered  under  this Act. 
(5) The Agency’s  expenditure  is to be paid out of money  provided  for by 
Parliament. 
(6) The Agency  must,  for each  financial  year,  prepare  accounts  in accordance  with 
directions  given  to it by the Treasury. 
(7) The Agency’s  chief  executive  is its accounting  officer. 
(8) As soon  as reasonably  practicable  after  the end of each  financial  year,  the 
Agency  must  prepare  a report  about  the performance  of its functions  during 
that year and lay that report  before  both  Houses  of Parliament. 
(9) Regulations  under  subsection  (4) are subject  to the affirmative  procedure. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  create  a new body  that was principally  responsible  for coordinating  and 
recording  statements  and declarations  in relation  to a person’s  request  for assistance  to end their 
own life. 
_NC5 Rebecca  Paul 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Encouragement 
(1) For the purposes  of this Act, “encouraged”  means  an act capable  of 
encouraging  suicide  which  would  constitute  an offence  under  section  2 
(Criminal  liability  for complicity  in another’s  suicide)  of the Suicide  Act 1961. 
(2) A person  is not rendered  ineligible  to request  assistance  to end their  own life 
on the basis  of— 
(a) an act of encouragement  that they were  unaware  of when  requesting 
and going  through  assisted  dying,  or 
(b) an act of encouragement  which  was not specifically  directed  at that 
person. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  provides  a definition  of encouragement  is consequential  on Amendments  82 to 
92. 37 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_NC6 Dr Neil Shastri-Hurst 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Advance  decision  of no effect 
An advance  decision,  made  pursuant  to sections  24 to 26 of the Mental  Capacity 
Act 2005,  which  stipulates  that the maker  of the decision,  having  become 
incapacitated,  wishes  to be provided  with  assistance  to end their  own life in 
accordance  with  this Act, shall  be null and void and of no legal  effect. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
The new clause  prohibits  an individual  from  making  an advanced  directive  for voluntary  assisted 
death  in the eventuality  he or she were  to become  incapacitated  at a future  date. 
_NC7 Juliet  Campbell 
. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Register  of Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must,  by regulation,  establish  a Register  of Assisted 
Dying  Medical  Practitioners. 
(2) A medical  professional  may only carry  out the role of co-ordinating  doctor  or 
independent  doctor  under  this Act may if they are listed  on the Register  of 
Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners. 
(3) Initial  discussions  under  section  4 may only take place  with  a registered  medical 
practitioner  if they are listed  on the Register  of Assisted  Dying  Medical 
Practitioners. 
(4) Regulations  made  under  subsection  (1) must  provide  that the Register  of 
Assisted  Dying  Medical  Practitioners  includes  all registered  practitioners  other 
than  those  to whom  the conditions  in subsections  (5) and (6) apply. 
(5) The condition  in this subsection  is that only medical  practitioners  who have 
completed  such training  as required  by the Secretary  of State  by regulation 
must  be listed  on the Register. 
(6) The condition  in this subsection  is that only medical  practitioners  who wish  to 
provide  assistance  under  the Act must  “opt  in” to be listed  on the Register. 
(7) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) and subsection  (5) are subject  to the 
affirmative  procedure. 
(8) Before  making  regulations  under  subsection  (1) and subsection  (5), the Secretary 
of State  must  consult  such persons  as they consider  appropriate. 
(9) Regulations  under  subsection  (5) must  be laid within  six months  of the passing 
of this Act. 
(10) Regulations  under  subsection  (1) must  be laid within  twelve  months  of the 
passing  of this Act.” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 38 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  requires  the Secretary  of State,  by regulation,  to create  a Register  of Assisted  Dying 
Medical  Practitioners.  Only  those  who are on the register  would  be able to hold  initial  discussions 
or act as a co-ordinating  or independent  doctor,  or hold  initial  discussions  under  section  4 of the 
Act. Only  those  who have  had training  as specified  by the Secretary  of State  in regulations  can be 
on the Register.  Registered  medical  practitioners  would  only appear  on the register  if they had 
“opted  in”. 
_29 Sarah  Bool 
. Schedule  1, page  25, line 22, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_88 Rebecca  Paul 
. Schedule  1, page  25, line 22, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_118 Juliet  Campbell 
. Schedule  1, page  25, line 22, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  adds  a requirement  to the first declaration  for the person  to declare  they have  not 
been  manipulated.  It is linked  to Amendment  113. 
_100 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Schedule  1, page  25, line 22, at end insert— 
“3A I am doing  so for my own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_45 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Schedule  2, page  26, line 36, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability  to make  a decision" 39 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_30 Sarah  Bool 
. Schedule  2, page  27, line 11, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_89 Rebecca  Paul 
. Schedule  2, page  27, line 11, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_119 Juliet  Campbell 
. Schedule  2, page  27, line 11, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the coordinating  doctor  to sign a declaration  that to the best of their 
knowledge  they believe  that the person  has not been  manipulated.  It is linked  to Amendment  113. 
_101 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Schedule  2, page  27, line 12, at end insert  “, and 
(c) the patient  is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of 
others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_46 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Schedule  3, page  28, line 1, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability  to make  a decision" 
_31 Sarah  Bool 
. Schedule  3, page  28, line 9, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 40 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_90 Rebecca  Paul 
. Schedule  3, page  28, line 9, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_120 Juliet  Campbell 
. Schedule  3, page  28, line 9, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  adds  a requirement  to the declaration  that independent  doctor  has to sign,  that 
they to the best of their  knowledge  they believe  that the person  not been  manipulated.  It is linked 
to Amendment  113. 
_102 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Schedule  3, page  28, line 10, at end insert  “, and 
(c) the patient  is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of 
others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_67 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Schedule  4, page  28, line 32, leave  out from  “The”  to “has”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_32 Sarah  Bool 
. Schedule  4, page  29, line 5, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 41 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
_91 Rebecca  Paul 
. Schedule  4, page  29, line 5, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_121 Juliet  Campbell 
. Schedule  4, page  29, line 5, after  “coerced”  insert  “, manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  adds  a requirement  to the second  declaration  for the person  to declare  they have 
not been  manipulated.  It is linked  to Amendment  113. 
_103 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Schedule  4, page  29, line 5, at end insert— 
“7A I am doing  so for my own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_68 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 6, leave  out from  “the”  to “made”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_69 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 10, leave  out from  “the”  to end of line and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
_47 Sarah  Olney 
Rachael  Maskell 
Neil Coyle 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 14, leave  out "capacity"  and insert  "the  ability  to make  a decision" COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 42 
_33 Sarah  Bool 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 22, after  “coerced”  insert  “, unduly  influenced” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  23. 
_92 Rebecca  Paul 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 22, after  “coerced”  insert  “, encouraged” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  82. 
_122 Juliet  Campbell 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 22, after  ‘coerced’  insert  “manipulated” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  adds  a requirement  to the declaration  that coordinating  doctor  has to sign,  that 
they to the best of their  knowledge  they believe  that the person  not been  manipulated.  It is linked 
to Amendment  113. 
_104 Mr James  Cleverly 
. Schedule  5, page  30, line 22, at end insert  “, and 
(d) the patient  is acting  for their  own sake rather  than  for the benefit  of 
others. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on Amendment  94. 
_70 Dr Ben Spencer 
. Schedule  6, page  32, line 3, leave  out from  “of” to “declaration”  and insert  “First-tier  Tribunal” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is consequential  on NC2 and NC3. 
Order  of the Committee 43 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
[21 January  2025,  as amended  28 and 29 January  2025] 
That— 
1. the Committee  shall  (in addition  to its first meeting  at 2.00 pm on Tuesday  21 
January)  meet— 
(a) at 9.25am  and 2.00pm  on Tuesday  28 January; 
(b) at 9.25am  and 2.00pm  on Wednesday  29 January; 
(c) at 11.30am  and 1.00pm  on Thursday  30 January; 
2. during  further  proceedings  on the Terminally  Ill Adults  (End  of Life) Bill, the 
Committee  do meet  on Tuesdays  and Wednesdays  starting  on 11 February  2025 
while  the House  is sitting  at 9.25am  and 2.00pm. 
3. the Committee  shall  hear  oral evidence  in accordance  with  the following  Table: 
Witness Time Date 
Sir Chris  Whitty  (Chief  Medical  Officer 
for England),  Duncan  Burton  (Chief 
Nursing  Officer) Until  no later  than 
10.05am Tuesday  28 January 
The British  Medical  Association,  The 
General  Medical  Council Until  no later  than 
10.45am Tuesday  28 January 
Association  of Palliative  Care  Social 
Workers,  Royal  College  of Nursing Until  no later  than 
11.25am Tuesday  28 January 
Dr Rachel  Clark,  Dr Sam Ahmedzai 
(Emeritus  Professor  at the University  of Until  no later  than 
3.15pm Tuesday  28 January 
Sheffield),  Sue Ryder,  Association  of 
Palliative  Medicine 
Sir Max Hill KC, Alex Ruck  Keene  KC 
(Hon),  Sir Nicholas  Mostyn Until  no later  than 
4.15pm Tuesday  28 January 
Dr Ryan  Spielvogal  (Senior  Medical 
Director  for Aid in Dying  Services,  Sutter Until  no later  than 
5.00pm Tuesday  28 January 
Health,  USA),  Dr Jessica  Kaan  (Medical 
Director,  End of Life Washington) 
Dr Greg  Mewett  (Specialist  Palliative 
Care  Physician,  Australia),  Dr Clare Until  no later  than 
10.25am Wednesday  29 January 
Fellingham  (Deputy  Director  of Medical 
Services,  Royal  Perth  Hospital,  Australia), 
Dr Cam McLaren  (Oncologise,  Australia 
and New  Zealand) 
Professor  Tom Shakespeare  CBE FBA 
(London  School  of Hygiene  and Tropical Until  no later  than 
11.25am Wednesday  29 January 
Medicine),  Dr Miro  Griffiths  (University COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 44 
Witness Time Date 
of Leeds),  Yogi  Amin  (Partner,  Irwin 
Mitchell),  Chelsea  Roff (Eat Breathe 
Thrive) 
Hourglass,  Dr Alexandra  Mullock 
(University  of Manchester),  Professor Until  no later  than 
3.00pm Wednesday  29 January 
Allan  House  (University  of Leeds), 
Professor  Aneez  Esmail  (University  of 
Manchester),  Disability  Rights  UK 
Dr Lewis  Graham  (University  of 
Cambridge),  Baroness  Falkner  (EHRC), 
Lord  Sumption Until  no later  than 
4.00pm Wednesday  29 January 
Hospice  UK, Dr Jamilla  Hussain  (Bradford 
Teaching  Hospitals  NHS Trust  and Hull Until  no later  than 
5.00pm Wednesday  29 January 
York  Medical  School),  Dr Jane  Neerkin 
(Consultant  Physician  in Palliative 
Medicine),  Marie  Curie 
Dr Chloe  Furst  (Geriatrician  and 
Palliative  Care Physician,  Adelaide),  Alex Until  no later  than 
12.30pm Thursday  30 January 
Greenwich  MP (MP for Sydney, 
Parliament  of New  South  Wales), 
Professor  Meredith  Blake  (University  of 
Western  Australia) 
Dr Amanda  Ward,  Professor  Gareth 
Owen  (Kings  College  London  and South Until  no later  than 
2.00pm Thursday  30 January 
London  and Maudsley  NHS Trust), 
Professor  Laura  Hoyano  (Professor  of 
Law,  Oxford  University  and Red Lion 
Chambers) 
Professor  Nancy  Preston  (Lancaster 
University),  Dr Naomi  Richards Until  no later  than 
3.00pm Thursday  30 January 
(University  of Glasgow),  Claire  Williams 
(Head  of Pharmacovigilance  and 
Regulatory  Services,  North  West  eHealth 
DipHE  Adult  Nursing,  MSc 
Pharmacovigilance,  and Chair,  Greater 
Manchester  Central  Research  Ethics 
Committee) 
People  and families  of those  with 
relevant  experience Until  no later  than 
4.00pm Thursday  30 January 
Mencap,  Professor  Emyr  Lewis  (Emeritus 
Professor,  Department  of Law and Until  no later  than 
5.00pm Thursday  30 January 45 COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 
Witness Time Date 
Criminology,  University  of Aberystwyth), 
Royal  College  of General  Practitioners, 
Royal  College  of Psychiatrists COMMITTEE  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 46



Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
The amendments  have been marshalled  in accordance  with the Instruction  of 7th January  2025,  as follows— 
Clauses  13 to 34 Clauses  1 to 4 
Schedule  4 Schedules  1 and 2 
Clauses  35 to 38 Clauses  5 to 12 
Title Schedule  3 
[Amendments  marked  ★ are new or have been altered ] 
Before  Clause  1 Amendment 
No. 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
1_ Before  Clause  1, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Purpose:  protection  of premises  from  terrorism 
(1) The purpose  of this Act is to protect  premises  from  terrorism. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must,  in taking  any actions  under  the provisions  of this Act, 
have  regard  to this purpose. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to have regard  to the purpose  of the 
Act, namely  to protect  premises  from  terrorism. 
Clause  2 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
LORD  DE MAULEY 
2_ Clause  2, page  2, line 7, leave  out from  ““building””  to end of line 8 and insert  “means 
“building”  as defined  in section  121 of the Building  Act 1984” 
59/1 HL Bill 53—I 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  brings  the definition  of a “building”  in line with other  areas  of legislation. 
LORD  HOPE  OF CRAIGHEAD 
3_ Clause  2, page  2, line 7, after  ““building””  insert  “means  any permanent  or temporary 
building  and” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  which  is taken  from  the definition  of “building”  in section  30 of the Building 
Safety  Act 2022,  would  make  it clear  that the public  protection  requirements  extend  to buildings 
of a temporary  nature  such as those  erected  solely  for events  such as a Christmas  Market  or other 
temporary  event. 
LORD  SANDHURST 
4_ Clause  2, page  2, line 11, leave  out “from  time  to time”  and insert  “not  less than  once  a 
month” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  and the other  in the name  of Lord  Sandhurst  to Clause  2 seek to remove  the 
reference  to “from  time to time”  and provide  a benchmark  by which  the attendance  at a premises 
may be measured. 
LORD  FROST 
5★_ Clause  2, page  2, line 11, leave  out “200”  and insert  “300” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  raise  the minimum  threshold  for a premises  to be a “qualifying  premises” 
to 300. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
6★_ Clause  2, page  2, line 11, leave  out “200”  and insert  “400” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  raise  the minimum  threshold  for a premises  to be a “qualifying  premises” 
to 400. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
7★_ Clause  2, page  2, line 11, leave  out “200”  and insert  “500” Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 2 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  raise  the minimum  threshold  for a premises  to be a “qualifying  premises” 
to 500. 
LORD  MURRAY  OF BLIDWORTH 
8_ Clause  2, page  2, line 13, at end insert— 
“(ca) the premises  have  a capacity  of more  than  300 people  or, if smaller,  the 
Secretary  of State  determines  that the premises  are at heightened  risk of a 
terrorist  threat. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  aims  to protect  small  businesses  from  disproportionately  burdensome  security 
requirements  while  maintaining  adequate  protection  against  terrorism  threats. 
LORD  SANDHURST 
9_ Clause  2, page  2, line 17, leave  out “from  time  to time”  and insert  “not  less than  once  a 
month” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  and the other  in the name  of Lord  Sandhurst  to Clause  2 seek to remove  the 
reference  to “from  time to time”  and provide  a benchmark  by which  the attendance  at a premises 
may be measured. 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
10_ Clause  2, page  2, line 21, at end insert— 
“(3A) In determining  the number  of individuals  who  may  reasonably  be expected  to be 
on the premises  of a railway  station  from  time  to time,  no account  is to be taken 
of the capacity  of any railway  vehicle  used  or intended  to be used  for the 
conveyance  of passengers. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  make  clear  that the capacity  of railway  vehicles  is not included  when 
calculating  the number  of people  who may be present  at a railway  station. 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
LORD  SANDHURST 
11★_ Clause  2, page  2, line 30, at end insert— 
“(6) Premises  assessed  as low risk by an independent  safety  assessor  are exempt  from 
the duties  imposed  under  this Act.” 3 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to prevent  unnecessary  compliance  burdens  for premises  with minimal 
security  risks,  acknowledging  the limited  threat  to smaller  events  and facilities. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
_ Lord  Udny-Lister  gives  notice  of his intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  2 stand  part of 
the Bill. 
Schedule  1 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
12_ Schedule  1, page  29, line 38, leave  out from  “terminal”  to “whether”  in line 40 and insert 
"(excluding  tracks  and trains)” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to ensure  that the Bill applies  to buildings  only,  not to the entire  railway 
estate. 
Schedule  2 
LORD  MOYNIHAN 
13_ Schedule  2, page  36, line 20, leave  out sub-paragraph  (d) 
LORD  DE MAULEY 
14_ Schedule  2, page  36, line 33, at end insert— 
“(4A) Premises  are within  this paragraph  if they  are a venue  for open  air sporting 
and cultural  activities  in a rural  area. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  specify  venues  for cultural  and sporting  activities  conducted  in rural  areas 
as excluded  premises. 
LORD  MOYNIHAN 
15_ Schedule  2, page  36, line 33, at end insert— 
“(4A) Premises  are within  this paragraph  if they  are a sports  ground  which  is not a 
designated  sports  ground. ” Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 4 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
16_ Schedule  2, page  37, line 17, at end insert  “or the premises  are stations  shared  by heritage 
railways  operated  under  a Light  Railway  Order,  or subject  to a Transport  and Works  Act 
1992  order,  not subject  to an instruction  under  section  119 of the Railways  Act 1993.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  clarify  the position  of joint  stations  with the national  rail network. 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
17_ Schedule  2, page  37, line 20, at end insert— 
“(ca) the railway  is operated  under  the provisions  of the Transport  Act (Northern 
Ireland)  1967  (c. 37 (N.I.)), ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  avoid  the inclusion  of Translink  (Northern  Ireland  Railways). 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
18_ Schedule  2, page  37, line 27, at end insert— 
“Railway  stations 
4A Premises  are within  this paragraph  if they  are railway  station  or train  operated 
pursuant  to a Light  Railway  Order  made  under  the Railways  Act 1993  or an 
order  made  under  the Transport  and Works  Act 1992  where— 
(a) stations  or halts  are wholly  in the open  air or consist  of a partly  roofed 
building  with  not less than  25% of its supporting  walls  being  open  and 
unobstructed, 
(b) the station  consists  of premises  designed  or used  for the operation  of a 
railway  or tramway  between  that station  and one or more  other  railway 
stations. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  make  clear  that the Bill applies  to buildings,  and not to open  platforms  or 
those  covered  by canopies  with open  sides. 
LORD  DE MAULEY 
19_ Schedule  2, page  37, line 32, leave  out “or 4” and insert  “, 4 or 4A” 5 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment,  connected  to another  in the name  of Lord  De Mauley,  would  specify  cultural 
and sporting  activities  conducted  in rural  areas  as excluded  events. 
Clause  5 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
20_ Clause  5, page  4, line 7, leave  out from  “premises”  to end of line 8 and insert  “or at the 
event” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to probe  the meaning  of “immediate  vicinity” 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
LORD  SANDHURST 
BARONESS  FOX  OF BUCKLEY 
21_ Clause  5, page  4, line 19, leave  out subsections  (4) to (6) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This would  remove  a Henry  VIII Clause  which  will otherwise  give the Minister  power  by regulation 
to alter (including  by making  more  onerous)  the range  of public  protection  procedures  in subsection 
(3) which  were  decided  upon  after full consultation  and will after passage  of the Bill have been 
endorsed  by Parliament. 
After  Clause  5 
LORD  DE MAULEY 
22_ After  Clause  5, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Waiving  of public  protection  procedures 
(1) The person  responsible  for qualifying  premises  or events  may  apply  to the 
Secretary  of State,  or the Security  Industry  Authority,  for a waiver  of one or all of 
the public  protection  procedures. 
(2) A waiver  must  be granted  if the Secretary  of State  or the Security  Industry 
Authority  are satisfied  that the applicant  has proven  that— 
(a) the cost of implementing  one of the public  protection  procedures  would 
be unreasonable,  or 
(b) the public  protection  procedures  would  not have  a benefit  in reducing  the 
threat  of terrorism. ” Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 6 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  oblige  the Secretary  of State  or the Security  Industry  Authority  to waive 
rules  if the applicant  can prove  that the cost of implementing  public  protection  procedures  would 
be unreasonable  or they would  not have a benefit  in reducing  the threat  of terrorism. 
Clause  6 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  SANDHURST 
BARONESS  FOX  OF BUCKLEY 
23_ Clause  6, page  5, line 12, leave  out subsections  (4) to (6) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This would  remove  a Henry  VIII Clause  which  will otherwise  give the Minister  power  by regulation 
to alter (including  by making  more  onerous)  the range  of public  protection  measures  in subsection 
(3) which  were  decided  upon  after full consultation  and will after passage  of the Bill have been 
endorsed  by Parliament. 
Clause  8 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
24★_ Clause  8, page  6, line 14, leave  out subsections  (5) and (6) 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to probe  the impact  of Clause  8 in relation  to commercial  agreements, 
as highlighted  by the Independent  Reviewer  of Terrorism  Legislation’s  Note  on the Bill, published 
on 9th December  2024. 
After  Clause  11 
LORD  FAULKNER  OF WORCESTER 
BARONESS  RITCHIE  OF DOWNPATRICK 
LORD  PARKINSON  OF WHITLEY  BAY 
25_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Training 
The Secretary  of State  may  provide  resources  to support  the provision  of initial 
training  and advice  to support  persons  with  control  of relevant  premises  to 
establish  the skills  required  to implement  the provisions  of this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  permit  the Secretary  of State  to make  provision  for training  and advice  to 
support  relevant  person  meet  their  obligations  under  the Act. 7 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
26_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Developing  and implementing  training  on public  protection  procedures 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  take such  steps  as they  consider  appropriate  to ensure 
that— 
(a) adequate  training  provision  is made  available  for persons  responsible  for 
qualifying  premises  or qualifying  events  in respect  of public  protection 
procedures  that includes— 
(i) the monitoring  of premises  or events  and the immediate  vicinity 
of premises  or events, 
(ii) evacuation  procedures  and the movement  of individuals  into,  out 
of and within  a premises  or event, 
(iii) physical  safety  and security  of occupants  in a premises, 
(iv) provision  of security  information  to individuals  on a premises  or 
at an event,  and 
(v) other  measures  related  to terrorism  protection  training; 
(b) a training  implementation  plan  is put in place  to ensure  all organisations 
and persons  to which  the provisions  of this Act apply  are encouraged  to 
undertake  training  related  to public  protection  procedures. 
(2) Functions  of the Secretary  of State  under  this section  may  be exercised  by any 
organisation  or persons  authorised  to do so by the Secretary  of State. 
(3) The Secretary  of State  must,  within  6 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed, 
lay before  Parliament  a report  setting  out the steps  they  have  taken  in relation  to 
subsection  (1).” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to develop  and implement  a training  plan in 
respect  of qualifying  premises  and events. 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
27_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Requirements:  public  awareness 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  provide,  or direct  the Security  Industry  Authority  to 
provide,  information  and material  to assist  in the understanding  of, and compliance 
with,  requirements  under  this Act, including  by way  of a public  awareness 
campaign. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  provide  such  resources  as required  to implement  the 
duty  under  subsection  (1).” Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 8 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is designed  to probe  what  information,  resources  and tools  will be available  to 
ensure  compliance  with the Act. 
LORD  MURRAY  OF BLIDWORTH 
28_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Private  sector  engagement  in counter-terrorism  measures 
(1) The responsible  person  for any qualifying  premises  may  fulfil  their  duties  under 
sections  5 or 6 by contracting  with  an accredited  private  security  provider  to 
conduct  risk assessments  and provide  ongoing  security  services. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  maintain  a list of certified  private  security  firms 
authorised  to provide  such  services. 
(3) Security  providers  must  comply  with  the national  guidelines  for counter-terrorism 
risk assessments  and be subject  to regular  audits  by the Security  Industry 
Authority. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This is a probing  amendment  which  seeks  to explore  reducing  the burden  on public  sector  resources 
by encouraging  the engagement  of qualified  private  security  companies.  It leverages  private  expertise 
to enhance  the resilience  of high-risk  premises  against  terrorism  threats  while  maintaining 
government  oversight  to ensure  quality  and compliance. 
Clause  12 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
29_ Clause  12, page  8, line 25, at end insert— 
“(d) establish  a scheme  for the approval  of persons  offering  training  in 
compliance  with  the requirements. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to ensure  that any person  who provides  training  in compliance  with 
the requirements  under  the Act is of a high and competent  standard. 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
30_ Clause  12, page  8, line 25, at end insert— 
“(2A) In preparing  guidance  and providing  advice  under  subsections  (2)(a)  and (b), the 
Security  Industry  Authority  must,  in particular,  take account  of existing  duties, 
controls  or other  legal  requirements  on qualifying  premises,  including  existing 
licensing  requirements. ” 9 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to probe  how the requirements  of this Act will complement  and 
enhance  existing  legal  requirements  on qualifying  premises. 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
31_ Clause  12, page  8, line 27, at end insert— 
“(aa) must,  before  submitting  the guidance  to the Secretary  of State  under 
paragraph  (b), consult  such  persons  as it considers  appropriate  with  regard 
to the requirements  of this section  including— 
(i) particular  considerations  applying  to different  sectors,  and 
(ii) particular  considerations  relating  to contiguous  premises,  premises 
within  other  premises  and areas  in the vicinity  of buildings. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  requires  the SIA to consult  appropriately  with the sectors  affected  by the Act and 
to consider  the needs  of different  types  of premises  when  producing  guidance  under  the Act. 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
32_ Clause  12, page  8, line 29, at end insert— 
“(ba) must  notify  all local  authorities  that the guidance  has been  published, ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  introduces  a requirement  that the Security  Industry  Authority  alert local 
authorities  when  the guidance  has been published. 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
LORD  SANDHURST 
33★_ Clause  12, page  8, line 32, at end insert— 
“(3A) The Secretary  of State  must  establish  an advisory  board  for the Security  Industry 
Authority,  comprising  experts  from  industry,  local  authorities,  and civil  society, 
to guide  the implementation  and enforcement  of this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to create  an advisory  board  for the SIA with the intention  of ensuring  a 
more  collaborative  approach  to regulation,  promoting  balanced  and informed  decision-making. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
_ Lord  Udny-Lister  gives  notice  of his intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  12 stand  part 
of the Bill. Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 10 
Schedule  3 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
_ Lord  Udny-Lister  gives  notice  of his intention  to oppose  the Question  that Schedule  3 be the 3rd 
Schedule  to the Bill. 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This is intended  to probe  concerns  over powers  of entry  and clarify  what  body  will be responsible 
for enforcement. 
After  Clause  16 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
BARONESS  FOX  OF BUCKLEY 
34★_ After  Clause  16, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the role of the regulator  in oversight  of public  protection  requirements 
(1) Within  18 months  of the day on which  section  12 (role  of the security  industry 
authority)  takes  effect,  the Secretary  of State  must  lay before  each  House  of 
Parliament  a report  reviewing  the role of the Security  Industry  Authority  as the 
regulator. 
(2) The report  must  include  a cost-benefit  analysis  comparing  the respective  situation 
for each  of the matters  listed  in subsection  (3) on how— 
(a) these  have  been  carried  out by the Security  Industry  Authority,  and 
(b) they  might  be carried  out by local  authority  teams  if the regulatory  duties 
were  transferred  to them. 
(3) The issues  which  must  be included  in the analysis  contained  in the report  laid 
under  subsection  (1) are— 
(a) effectiveness  in performing  investigation  and enforcement  functions, 
(b) relationship  with  other  locally-based  enforcement  regimes, 
(c) relationship  and interaction  with  existing  statutory  licensing  regimes,  and 
(d) effectiveness  of provision  of guidance  as part of oversight,  adherence  and 
awareness  of the new  public  protection  requirements. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  would  require  a report  reviewing  the role of the Security  Industry  Authority, 
including  a comparative  cost-benefit  analysis  of the regulatory  functions  being  carried  out by the 
Security  Industry  Authority  with those  functions  being  provided  alternatively  at a local authority 
level. 11 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
Clause  17 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
35_ Clause  17, page  13, line 10, leave  out “28”  and insert  “42” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  amends  the grace  period,  where  a person  who has received  a penalty  notice  is 
given  a short  amount  of time to pay, to avoid  excessive  penalisation. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
_ Lord  Udny-Lister  gives  notice  of his intention  to oppose  the Question  that Clause  17 stand  part 
of the Bill. 
Clause  20 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
36_ Clause  20, page  15, line 19, at end insert— 
“(d) the views  of the local  authority  in which  the premises  are located. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  introduces  a requirement  that the Security  Industry  Authority  must  take into 
account  the views  of the local authority  in which  the premises  are located,  when  determining  the 
amount  of a penalty  to be imposed  on a person  by a penalty  notice. 
Clause  28 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  HAMWEE 
37_ Clause  28, page  21, line 2, leave  out from  “Part”  to end of line 3 and insert  “do prevail” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  is intended  to probe  how information  provided  to the regulator  will be safeguarded. 
Clause  32 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
BARONESS  SUTTIE 
BARONESS  FOX  OF BUCKLEY 
38_ Clause  32, page  23, line 18, at end insert— 
“(2) Regulations  under  subsection  (1)(a)  and (b) may  reduce  the figures  specified  in 
section  2(2)(c),  2(3)(a)  or 3(1)(d)  only  if the Secretary  of State  is satisfied  that the 
reduction  is justified  by a change  in the threat  from  terrorism. ” Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 12 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to be satisfied  that any reduction  by 
regulations  of the thresholds  for qualifying  premises  and qualifying  events  is justified  by a change 
in the terrorist  threat. 
LORD  ANDERSON  OF IPSWICH 
LORD  SANDHURST 
39_ Clause  32, page  23, line 18, at end insert— 
“(2) Before  making  regulations  under  this section  the Secretary  of State  must  consult 
anyone  that appears  to the Secretary  of State  to be appropriate. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to consult  before  making  regulations  under 
this section.  The wording  is adapted  from  the Fire Safety  Act 2021  section  2, which  is advanced 
in the Delegated  Powers  Memorandum  para 46 as a precedent  for taking  similar  powers. 
After  Clause  34 
LORD  MURRAY  OF BLIDWORTH 
40_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Tax relief  incentives  for security  investments 
(1) The Secretary  of State,  in consultation  with  HM Treasury,  must  establish  a tax 
relief  scheme  for qualifying  investments  made  by businesses  to reduce  the 
vulnerability  of premises  to acts of terrorism  at premises  covered  by this Act. 
(2) Qualifying  investments  include  but are not limited  to— 
(a) surveillance  and monitoring  equipment, 
(b) physical  barriers  and access  control  systems, 
(c) staff  training  on counter-terrorism  measures,  and 
(d) cyber-security  infrastructure  for venue  security. 
(3) The scheme  may  provide  tax deductions  of up to twenty-five  per cent for eligible 
security  expenditures. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  incentivises  businesses  to voluntarily  strengthen  their  security  infrastructure 
to reduce  the vulnerability  of premises  to acts of terrorism  by offsetting  the financial  burden  through 
tax deductions.  It encourages  innovation  and investment  in counter-terrorism  technologies  while 
reducing  reliance  on public  funding. 13 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
41★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Local  authority  support  and coordination 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  provide  funding  and resources  to local  authorities  to 
support  their  expanded  role in overseeing  compliance  with  this Act’s  security 
requirements. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  outline  clear  guidelines  for local  authority  coordination 
with  the Security  Industry  Authority  (SIA). ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  addresses  concerns  about  placing  additional  burdens  on councils  and the need 
for greater  clarity  in local authority  responsibilities  and coordination. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
42★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Financial  support  for businesses 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  establish  a financial  support  scheme  to assist  businesses 
with  the cost of implementing  the security  measures  required  under  this Act. 
(2) The scheme  must  include  low-interest  loans,  grants,  or tax relief  for businesses 
facing  costs  of between  £3,000  and £52,000. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to provide  financial  relief  to businesses  facing  high implementation  costs, 
ensuring  that security  measures  do not place  undue  strain  on businesses  already  grappling  with 
rising  costs. 
LORD  UDNY-LISTER 
43★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Counter-terrorism  measures  in planning  law 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  consult  with  local  authorities  on integrating 
counter-terrorism  measures  into the planning  and design  of new  buildings  which 
are likely  to be designated  “qualifying  premises”  for the purposes  of this Act. 
(2) Following  that consultation,  the Secretary  of State  must  introduce  measures  to 
ensure  the incorporation  of anti-terrorism  design  principles  in new  building 
projects,  particularly  those  in high-risk  areas,  where  the buildings  in question  are 
likely  to be designated  “qualifying  premises”  for the purposes  of this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  encourages  the integration  of counter-terrorism  measures  into architectural 
design,  promoting  safer  urban  environments  from  the outset. Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 14 
LORD  FROST 
44★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Independent  review  panel  to monitor  the Security  Industry  Authority 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  establish  an independent  review  panel  to monitor  the 
role of the Security  Industry  Authority  (SIA)  as the regulator. 
(2) The panel  must  produce  annual  reports  for Parliament. 
(3) The reports  must  address  the risk of regulatory  overreach  by the SIA. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to address  concerns  about  the risk of regulatory  overreach  by the SIA 
through  establishing  an independent  review  panel  to monitor  the role of the SIA. 
LORD  MURRAY  OF BLIDWORTH 
45★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Financial  support  for voluntary  and community  organisations 
The Secretary  of State  must  provide  grants  or funding  schemes  for voluntary  and 
community  organisations  to cover  the costs  associated  with  compliance  under 
this Act.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This probing  amendment  seeks  to respond  to concerns  about  increased  costs  for small  organisations, 
including  village  halls,  which  could  deter  community  engagement  and lead to closures. 
LORD  DAVIES  OF GOWER 
LORD  SANDHURST 
46★_ After  Clause  34, insert  the following  new  Clause— 
“Review  of the impact  on the night-time  economy 
(1) Within  18 months  of the day on which  this Act is passed,  the Secretary  of State 
must  lay before  Parliament  a report  reviewing  the impact  of the provisions  in this 
Act on the night-time  economy,  jobs and growth. 
(2) The report  must  include  an assessment  of the impact  of this Act on— 
(a) public  houses, 
(b) nightclubs, 
(c) bars, 
(d) restaurants, 
(e) cinemas,  and 
(f) any other  late-opening  venues  that the Secretary  of State  considers  to be 
part of the night-time  economy. ” 15 Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new Clause  seeks  to require  the Secretary  of State  to produce  a report  reviewing  the impact 
this Act on the night-time  economy,  jobs and growth. 
Clause  37 
LORD  SANDHURST 
47_ Clause  37, page  25, line 32, leave  out paragraphs  (a) and (b) and insert  “no sooner  than 
six months  after  the day on which  this Act is passed,  and not before  draft  guidance  on 
the application  of the Act has been  issued  to businesses  affected  by the provisions  of the 
Act and a consultation  with  those  businesses  has taken  place.” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This amendment  seeks  to delay  the commencement  of parts  1 and 2 of the Act to ensure  that 
businesses  have been properly  consulted  before  the Act’s  provisions  come  into place  and the draft 
guidance  has been published. Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 16 
Terrorism  (Protection  of Premises)  Bill 
MARSHALLED 
LIST  OF AMENDMENTS 
TO BE MOVED 
IN COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE 
30 January  2025 
PUBLISHED  BY AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 53—I



Report  Stage:  Monday  3 February  2025 
Tobacco  and Vapes  Bill, As Amended 
(Amendment  Paper) 
This document  lists all amendments  tabled  to the Tobacco  and Vapes  Bill. Any withdrawn  amendments 
are listed  at the end of the document.  The amendments  are arranged  in the order  in which  it is expected 
they will be decided. 
★ New  Amendments. 
New  Amendments:  NC1 
_NC1 Wera  Hobhouse 
★. To move  the following  Clause— 
“Review  of contaminated  e-liquid 
(1) Within  six months  of the passage  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must  conduct 
a review  into the prevalence  of contaminated  e-liquid  in England,  Wales, 
Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) The review  required  under  subsection  (1), must  include,  but is not limited  to 
an assessment  of— 
(a) the awareness  of the issue  of contaminated  e-liquid, 
(b) the extent  of e-liquids  found  spiked  with  illegal  substances, 
(c) the measures  in place  to tackle  the importation  of contaminated 
e-liquid, 
(d) measures  used  by other  jurisdictions  to combat  the importation  and 
prevalence  of contaminated  e-liquid,  and 
(e) options  for further  regulating  e-liquid  to limit  the dangers  of 
contamination. 
(3) In conducting  the review  required  under  subsection  (1), the Secretary  of State 
may consult  with  whoever  they see fit. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  report  to Parliament  following  the conclusion  of 
the review. 

(5) The Secretary  of State  has the power  to make  regulations  under  this section 
including  the power  to make— 
(a) offences  relating  to the contamination  of e-liquid,  including  the 
distribution,  importation,  supply  and merchandising  or tampering  of 
such products, 
(b) offences  relating  to the online  sale of e-liquid  containing  illegal 
substances, 
(c) provisions  to improve  the ability  to identify,  test and intercept 
contaminated  e-liquid,  and 
(d) provisions  recommended  in the review  implemented  by subsection  (1). 
(6) For the purposes  of this section, 
“contaminated  e-liquid”  means  e-liquid  which  has been  mixed  with  or 
includes  an illegal  substance. ” 
Member's  explanatory  statement 
This new clause  would  require  the Secretary  of State  to conduct  a review  and publish  a report  on 
the impact  of contaminated  e-liquid  and ways  to reduce  its prevalence.  It would  give the Secretary 
of State  the powers  to make  regulations  in relation  to curbing  the harm  caused  by contaminated 
e-liquid. 
Order  of the House 
[26 November  2024] 
That  the following  provisions  shall  apply  to the Tobacco  and Vapes  Bill: 
Committal 
1. The Bill shall  be committed  to a Public  Bill Committee. 
Proceedings  in Public  Bill Committee 
2. Proceedings  in the Public  Bill Committee  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded) 
be brought  to a conclusion  on Thursday  30 January  2025. 
3. The Public  Bill Committee  shall  have  leave  to sit twice  on the first day on which  it 
meets. 
Consideration  and Third  Reading 
4. Proceedings  on Consideration  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  one hour  before  the moment  of interruption  on the day on which 
those  proceedings  are commenced. 
5. Proceedings  on Third  Reading  shall  (so far as not previously  concluded)  be brought 
to a conclusion  at the moment  of interruption  on that day. 
6. Standing  Order  No. 83B (Programming  committees)  shall  not apply  to proceedings 
on Consideration  and Third  Reading. REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025 2 
Other  proceedings 
7. Any other  proceedings  on the Bill may be programmed. 3 REPORT  STAGE Monday  3 February  2025



Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health 
Services)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Trade  agreement  conditions 
2 National  Health  Services  requirements  condition 
3 Legislatures  condition 
4 Independent  reports 
5 Interpretation 
6 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 109 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exclude  requirements  relating  to National  Health  Services  procurement, 
delivery  or commissioning  from  international  trade  agreements;  to require 
the consent  of the House  of Commons  and the devolved  legislatures  to 
international  trade  agreements  insofar  as they  relate  to the National  Health 
Services  of England,  Scotland  and Wales  and Health  and Social  Care  in 
Northern  Ireland;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Trade  agreement  conditions 
Her Majesty’s  Government  must  not sign an international  trade  agreement 
unless— 
(a) the National  Health  Services  requirements  condition;  and 
5 (b) the legislatures  condition  are both  met. 
2 National  Health  Services  requirements  condition 
(1) The National  Health  Services  requirements  condition  is that the international 
trade  agreement— 
(a) 
10places  no requirements  on a health  service  body  relating  to the 
procurement  of goods  or services; 
(b) explicitly  excludes  any health  service  body  from  any additional  future 
such  requirements;  and 
(c) contains  no provisions  relating  to the delivery  or commissioning  of 
health  and care services  by a health  service  body. 
15 (2) In this section,  “requirements”  include— 
(a) investor  protection  mechanisms; 
(b) investor-state  dispute  resolution  mechanisms;  and 
(c) provisions  relating  to the pricing,  selection  and listing  of 
pharmaceuticals. 
59/1 Bill 109 1 Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health  Services)  Bill 
3 Legislatures  condition 
(1) The legislatures  condition  is that a Motion  of the form  in subsection  (3) has 
been  passed  by— 
(a) the House  of Commons, 
5 (b) the Scottish  Parliament, 
(c) Senedd  Cymru,  and 
(d) the Northern  Ireland  Assembly. 
(2) A Minister  must  move  a Motion  in their  respective  legislature  of the form  in 
subsection  (3)— 
10 (a) within  14 days  of the publication  of an independent  report  under 
section  4; or 
(b) if there  are no sitting  days  over  that period,  at the earliest  opportunity. 
(3) The form  of the Motion  is— 
(a) 
15in the House  of Commons,  “That  this House  consents  to the trade 
agreement  [details  of the trade  agreement]  insofar  as it affects  the 
National  Health  Service  in England”; 
(b) in the Scottish  Parliament,  “That  the Parliament  consents  to the trade 
agreement  [details  of the trade  agreement]  insofar  as it affects  the 
National  Health  Service  in Scotland”; 
20 (c) in Senedd  Cymru,  “That  Senedd  Cymru  consents  to the trade 
agreement  [details  of the trade  agreement]  insofar  as it affects  the 
National  Health  Service  in Wales”; 
(d) in the Northern  Ireland  Assembly,  “That  this   Assembly  consents  to 
25the trade  agreement  [details  of the trade  agreement]  insofar  as it affects 
Health  and Social  Care  in Northern  Ireland”. 
4 Independent  reports 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  commission  an independent  report  on any trade 
agreement  for which  it is seeking  the consent  of the devolved  legislatures 
under  this section. 
30 (2) Each  report  under  subsection  (1) must  be laid before— 
(a) Parliament  by the Secretary  of State; 
(b) the Scottish  Parliament  by the Scottish  Ministers; 
(c) Senedd  Cymru  by the Welsh  Ministers;  and 
(d) the Northern  Ireland  Assembly  by a Northern  Ireland  department. 
35 (3) Each  report  under  subsection  (1) must  contain  an assessment  of the effects 
and potential  effects  of the trade  agreement  on the National  Health  Services. 
(4) In this section,  “an independent  report”  means  a report  prepared  by a person 
who  is independent  of the Government  of the United  Kingdom. 
5 Interpretation 
40 In this Act— Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health  Services)  Bill 2 
“free  trade  agreement”  means  an agreement  that is or was notifiable 
under— 
(a) paragraph  7(a) of Article  XXIV  of GATT,  or 
(b) paragraph  7(a) of Article  V of GATS; 
5 “GATS”  means  the General  Agreement  on Trade  in Services,  part of 
Annex  1B to the WTO  Agreement  (as modified  from  time  to time); 
“GATT”  means  the General  Agreement  on Tariffs  and Trade,  part of 
Annex  1A to the WTO  Agreement  (as modified  from  time  to time); 
10“health  service  body”  has the same  meaning  as in section  204 of the 
Data  Protection  Act 2018; 
“international  trade  agreement”  means— 
(a) a free trade  agreement,  or 
(b) an international  agreement  that relates  to trade,  other  than  a 
free trade  agreement; 
15 “the National  Health  Services”  means  the National  Health  Services  of 
Scotland,  Wales,  and England  and Health  and Social  Care  in Northern 
Ireland; 
“the WTO  Agreement”  means  the agreement  establishing  the World 
Trade  Organisation  signed  at Marrakesh  on 15 April  1994. 
20 6 Commencement,  extent  and short  title 
(1) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(2) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health 
Services)  Act 2025. 3 Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health  Services)  Bill 
Trade  Agreements  (Exclusion  of National  Health 
Services)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Exclude  requirements  relating  to National  Health  Services  procurement,  delivery  or 
commissioning  from  international  trade  agreements;  to require  the consent  of the House 
of Commons  and the devolved  legislatures  to international  trade  agreements  insofar 
as they  relate  to the National  Health  Services  of England,  Scotland  and Wales  and 
Health  and Social  Care  in Northern  Ireland;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Seamus  Logan 
supported  by Stephen  Flynn , Pete Wishart , 
Bob Blackman , Dave  Doogan , Stephen  Gethins , 
Chris  Law, Graham  Leadbitter , Brendan  O'Hara , 
Claire  Hanna  and Ben Lake. 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   22nd  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 109



Treatment  of Terminal  Illness  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Liability  of medical  practitioners 
2 Import,  storage  and use of equipment  and unlicensed  medicines  for treatment 
of people  who  are terminally  ill 
3 Regulations 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 139 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the liability  of practitioners,  and of the organisation 
which  employs  the practitioner,  where  a practitioner  prescribes  an unlicensed 
medicine  to or carries  out a non-standard  treatment  on a person  who  is 
terminally  ill; to make  provision  about  the import,  storage  and use of 
equipment  and unlicensed  medicines  for the purpose  of such  prescriptions  or 
such  treatment;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Liability  of medical  practitioners 
(1) No person  shall  be liable  to any civil  or criminal  proceedings  in respect  of 
any action  (the relevant  action)  where  the conditions  in subsection  (2) are 
met. 
5 (2) The conditions  are that— 
(a) the person  is a medical  practitioner  (A) or A’s employer, 
(b) A prescribes  an unlicensed  medicine  to, or carries  out a non-standard 
treatment  on, a person  who  is terminally  ill (B), 
(c) 
10the relevant  action  is carried  out in connection  with  A’s conduct  under 
paragraph  (b) above, 
(d) B has given  informed  consent  to the relevant  action, 
(e) A acts in good  faith  and has a reasonable  belief  that the relevant  action 
may  benefit  B. 
(3) 
15For the purposes  of this section,  a person  is “terminally  ill” at any time  if at 
that time  the person  suffers  from  a progressive  disease  and the person's  death 
in consequence  of that disease  can reasonably  be expected  within  12 months. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulation  make  provision  for the definition 
of the following  terms  for the purposes  of this section— 
(a) unlicensed  medicine, 
20 (b) non-standard  treatment, 
(c) informed  consent. 
59/1 Bill 139 1 Treatment  of Terminal  Illness  Bill 
(5) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  make  provision  which  is 
consequential  on this section. 
2 Import,  storage  and use of equipment  and unlicensed  medicines  for treatment 
of people  who  are terminally  ill 
5 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  by regulations  make  provision  to permit  and 
facilitate  the import,  storage  and use of equipment  and unlicensed  medicines 
for treatment  of people  who  are terminally  ill. 
(2) Regulations  made  under  this section  must— 
(a) 
10permit  the import  and storage  of unlicensed  medicines,  where  that 
import  or storage  is for the purpose  of treating  someone  who  is 
terminally  ill; 
(b) permit  the import  and storage  of equipment  where  that import  or 
storage  is for the purpose  of treating  someone  who  is terminally  ill. 
3 Regulations 
15 (1) Regulations  made  under  this Act may  amend  or repeal  provision  made  by— 
(a) an Act passed  before  this Act; 
(b) an Act passed  later  in the same  session  of Parliament  as this Act. 
(2) Regulations  under  this Act are to be made  by statutory  instrument. 
(3) 
20A statutory  instrument  containing  regulations  under  this Act may  not be 
made  unless  a draft  instrument  has been  laid before  and approved  by 
resolution  of each  House  of Parliament. 
4 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
25 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Treatment  of Terminal  Illness  Act 2025. Treatment  of Terminal  Illness  Bill 2 
Treatment  of Terminal  Illness  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Make  provision  about  the liability  of practitioners,  and of the organisation  which 
employs  the practitioner,  where  a practitioner  prescribes  an unlicensed  medicine  to or 
carries  out a non-standard  treatment  on a person  who  is terminally  ill; to make  provision 
about  the import,  storage  and use of equipment  and unlicensed  medicines  for the 
purpose  of such  prescriptions  or such  treatment;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Dame  Siobhain  McDonagh 
supported  by Jim Shannon , Uma  Kumaran , 
Peter  Lamb , Luke  Murphy , Rachael  Maskell , 
Tonia  Antoniazzi , Valerie  Vaz, Mary  Glindon , 
Sorcha  Eastwood , Helena  Dollimore  and 
Natasha  Irons . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   26th  November  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2025 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 139



Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by the Home  Office  with the consent  of Linsey  Farnsworth, 
are published  separately  as Bill 24—EN. 
59/1 Bill 24 
Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Offence  of unauthorised  entry  to designated  football  matches 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 24 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of unauthorised  entry  at football  matches  for which  a football 
banning  order  can be imposed  following  conviction. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Offence  of unauthorised  entry  to designated  football  matches 
In the Football  (Offences)  Act 1991,  after  section  1 (designated  football  matches) 
insert— 
“1A Unauthorised  entry 
5 (1) A person  (“P”)  commits  an offence  if— 
(a) P enters,  or attempts  to enter,  premises  for the purpose  of 
attending  a designated  football  match,  and 
(b) at the time  of entry,  or attempted  entry,  P does  not have  a 
match  ticket  for the match  that P is eligible  to use. 
10 (2) It is a defence  to prove  that P had lawful  authority  or lawful  excuse 
for entering,  or attempting  to enter,  the premises. 
(3) It is a defence  to prove  that— 
(a) P entered,  or attempted  to enter,  the premises  through  an entry 
point  normally  used  by spectators, 
15 (b) at the time  of entry  or attempted  entry,  P had something  that 
they  reasonably  believed  was a match  ticket  for the match,  and 
(c) the thing  that P had— 
(i) was not a match  ticket  for the match,  or 
(ii) 
20was a match  ticket  for the match  but P was not eligible 
to use it. 
(4) In this section— 
“match  ticket”  means  a ticket  or other  thing  (whether  in physical 
or electronic  form)  which  authorises  a person  to enter  premises 
for the purpose  of attending  a designated  football  match; 
25 “premises”  includes  any place. ” 
59/1 Bill 24 1 Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Bill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales  only. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on such  day as the Secretary  of State  may  by 
regulations  made  by statutory  instrument  appoint. 
5 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Act 
2025. Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Bill 2 
Unauthorised  Entry  to Football  Matches  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Create  an offence  of unauthorised  entry  at football  matches  for which  a football  banning 
order  can be imposed  following  conviction. 
Presented  by Linsey  Farnsworth 
supported  by Danny  Beales  and Mr Jonathan  Brash . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   16th  October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 24



HOUSE OF LORDS
  Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform 
Committee
  2nd Report of Session 2024–25
Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill
Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL]
Water (Special Measures) Bill [HL]
Property (Digital Assets etc) Bill [HL]
Asylum Support (Prescribed Period) Bill [HL]
Consumer Products (Control of Biocides) Bill [HL]
Education (Assemblies) Bill [HL]
Environmental Targets (Public Authorities) Bill [HL]
Mortgage Prisoners Inquiry Bill [HL]
Public Authority Algorithmic and Automated Decision-Making 
Systems Bill [HL]
Refugees (Family Reunion) Bill [HL]
Universal Credit (Standard Allowance Entitlement of Care 
Leavers) Bill [HL]
Complications from Abortions (Annual Report) Bill [HL]
Imprisonment for Public Protection (Re-sentencing) Bill [HL]
Listed Investment Companies (Classification etc) Bill [HL]
Non-Consensual Sexually Explicit Images and Videos (Offences) 
Bill [HL]
Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill [HL]  
Women, Peace and Security Bill [HL]  
 Ordered to be printed 9 October 2024 and published 15 October 2024 
  Published by the Authority of the House of Lords
  HL Paper 17
  The Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  The Committee is appointed by the House of Lords each session, most recently on 29 July 
2024, and has the following terms of reference:
  (i) To report whether the provisions of any bill inappropriately delegate legislative power, 
or whether they subject the exercise of legislative power to an inappropriate degree of 
parliamentary scrutiny;
  (ii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) sections 14 and 18 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006,
  (b) section 7(2) or section 19 of the Localism Act 2011, or
  (c) section 5E(2) of the Fire and Rescue Services Act 2004;
  and to perform, in respect of such draft orders, and in respect of subordinate provisions orders 
made or proposed to be made under the Regulatory Reform Act 2001, the functions performed 
in respect of other instruments and draft instruments by the Joint Committee on Statutory 
Instruments; and
  (iii) To report on documents and draft orders laid before Parliament under or by virtue of:
  (a) section 85 of the Northern Ireland Act 1998,
  (b) section 17 of the Local Government Act 1999,
  (c) section 9 of the Local Government Act 2000,
  (d) section 98 of the Local Government Act 2003, or
  (e) section 102 of the Local Transport Act 2008.
  Members
  Baroness Bakewell of Hardington Mandeville   Lord Goodman of Wycombe 
  Lord Carlile of Berriew   Baroness Humphreys 
  Baroness Chakrabarti   The Earl of Lindsay 
  Lord Cunningham of Felling   Lord McLoughlin  (Chair)
  Baroness Finlay of Llandaff   Lord Rooker 
  Registered Interests
  Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register of Lords’ 
Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also be inspected in the 
Parliamentary Archives. 
  Publications
  The Committee’s reports are published by Order of the House in hard copy and on the internet 
at www.parliament.uk/hldprrcpublications.
  Committee Staff
  The staff of the Committee are Jen Mills (Clerk) and Anisa Rashid (Committee Operations 
Officer).
  General Information
  General information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to 
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is on the internet at  
 http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/ .
  Contacts for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
  Any query about the Committee or its work should be directed to the Clerk to the Delegated 
Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee, Legislation Office, House of Lords, London, 
SW1A 0PW. The telephone number is 020 7219 3103. The Committee’s email address is 
 hldelegatedpowers@parliament.uk.
Second Report
 PASSENGER RAILWAY SERVICES (PUBLIC OWNERSHIP) BILL
1. Th
is Bill amends the Railways Act 1993 (“the 1993 Act”) to remove the
presumption in favour of private sector operation of franchised passenger
services. It is intended to facilitate the Government’s commitment tobring such train operations back into public ownership when the currentfranchise agreements end. The Bill contains two delegated powers, and theDepartment for Transport has provided a delegated powers memorandum(“the memorandum”).
1 We draw the attention of the House to one of those
powers.
2. Th
e Bill operates by generally prohibiting both the extension of existing
private sector franchise agreements and the entering into of new suchagreements. However, the Bill also inserts two new sections into the 1993Act (sections 30A and 30B) which will allow the continuation of the existingprivate sector franchise arrangements, where the Secretary of State is thefranchising authority and is satisfied that it will not be reasonably practicableto provide passenger rail services by a public sector company when theexisting private sector franchise agreement comes to an end.
3.
Su
bsection (4) of section 30A enables the Secretary of State by regulations
to repeal that section and section 30B. Despite being a Henry VIII power,the regulations are subject only to the negative resolution procedure. Theuse of the negative resolution procedure is explained in paragraph 16 of thememorandum on the basis of the limited scope of the power and the fact thatthe power is intended only for the purpose of removing the provisions oncethey become obsolete.
4.
We c
onsider that the negative resolution procedure would be appropriate if
the power could only be exercised once sections 30A and 30B are spent (whichwill be the case when all the existing private sector franchising arrangementshave come to an end). However, that limitation does not appear in section30A(4) as drafted; instead it simply confers a power on the Secretary of Stateto repeal sections 30A and 30B, without limiting the circumstances in whichthe power may be exercised.
5.
Ac
cordingly, we recommend that the House seeks clarification from
the Minister as to:
• whether the Government intend that the power to repeal sections30A and 30B should only be exercised once all the existing privatesector franchising arrangements have come to an end; and
• why, if that is the intention, the power is not limited so that itmay only be exercised in those circumstances.
We also take the view that, in the absence of such a limitation, the affirmative resolution procedure should apply.
1 Memorandum on the Passenger Railway Services (Public Ownership) Bill from the Department for 
Transport to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (5 September 2024): https://
bills.parliament.uk/publications/56125/documents/5043
2
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 PRODUCT REGULATION AND METROLOGY BILL [HL]
6. T
his Bill was introduced in the House of Lords on 4 September. Its Second
Reading took place on 8 October.
7. T
he Bill makes provision with respect to:
• the marketing and use of products;
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether
of goods or other things); and
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed.
8. T
he Bill contains 14 clauses and one schedule.
9. T
he Department for Business and Trade has provided a Delegated Powers
Memorandum (“the Memorandum”)2 for the Bill.
10. W
e draw the following powers to the attention of the House.
 Clause 1, 2, 3 and 9—powers to make product regulations
11. T
hese clauses make provision with respect to the regulation of the marketing
and use of all products3 (both consumer products and industrial products)
in the UK save only for the “excluded products” listed in the Schedule tothe Bill. The excluded products include food, products of animal origin,aircraft, military equipment, medicines and medical devices.
12.
C
lause 1 gives the Secretary of State power to make provision by regulations
in relation to the marketing or use of products in the UK (“productregulations”), for the purpose of:
• reducing or mitigating risks presented by products;
• ensuring that products operate efficiently or effectively; or
• ensuring that products designed for weighing or measuring operateaccurately.
13.
C
lause 1 also gives the Secretary of State power to include in product
regulations provision which corresponds, or is similar, to a provision of EUlaw
4 for the purpose of reducing or mitigating the environmental impact of
products.
14. C
lause 2 sets out matters in relation to which product regulations may impose
“product requirements”. It also specifies categories of persons on whom suchrequirements may be imposed. Clause 2(7) allows product regulations toprovide that “product requirements” are to be treated as met if requirementsof EU law specified in those regulations are met.
2 Memorandum on the Product Regulation and Metrology Bill [HL] from the Department for Business 
and Trade to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee (30 August 2024): https://
bills.parliament. uk/publications/56126/documents/5044
3 “Product” is broadly defined in clause 1(5) as “a tangible item that results from a method of 
production”.
4 The provision must correspond, or be similar, to a provision of “relevant EU law”, which means EU 
law that has the purpose of harmonising the conditions for the marketing or use of products in the EU.
3
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
15. Clause 3 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of product 
regulations.
16. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by product regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by Parts 
2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof Acts 
1868 to 1978 and section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights Act 
2015.
17. The power to make product regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised:
• to create or widen the scope of a criminal offence;
• to create powers of entry, inspection or search;
• to disapply or modify product regulations in cases of emergency;
• to make provision about the disclosure of information by or to a relevant 
authority5 carrying out functions under product regulations;
• to make provision for a relevant authority to impose fees in respect of 
costs incurred by the authority in carrying out its functions; or
• to amend or repeal primary legislation.
 Skeleton legislation
18. Clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill are an example of what the Committee refers 
to as “skeleton legislation”. They contain almost no substance about the 
marketing and use of products but instead give Ministers very broad powers 
which confer considerable discretion to legislate in that area by statutory 
instrument. Almost all of the substance of the regulatory regime that is to 
govern the marketing and use of products (including product safety) is to 
be left to regulations. Even existing provision in primary legislation may 
be replaced by provision in regulations. And the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied.
19. The concern with “skeleton legislation” is its compatibility with the 
established principle that the principal aspects of policy should be on the face 
of a bill and only its detailed implementation left to delegated legislation. As 
we stated in our Democracy Denied Report6: “Skeleton legislation signifies 
an exceptional shift in power from Parliament to the executive and entails 
the Government, in effect, asking Parliament to pass primary legislation 
which is so insubstantial that it leaves the real operation of the legislation to 
be decided by ministers”7.
20. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee8 states that “Skeleton legislation should only be used in the most 
exceptional circumstances”. It adds that, if a Bill contains a skeleton clause, 
5 Under clause 3, product regulations may designate a person as a “relevant authority” with powers to 
enforce product regulations.
6 12th Report  (Session 2021–22, HL Paper 106)
7 At para 66.
8 Guidance for Departments (December 2023): https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/42694/
documents/212126/default/
4
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
the Delegated Powers Memorandum that a department must prepare to assist 
the Committee with its scrutiny of the Bill should provide a full justification 
for this approach, including why no other approach was reasonable to adopt 
and how the scope of the skeleton provision is constrained.
21. We consider that the Memorandum fails to meet this requirement in respect 
of clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 of the Bill.
22. The first respect in which the Memorandum falls short is in its explanation 
of the existing legislation that could be amended and indeed replaced by 
regulations made under the powers in those clauses.
23. Both the Memorandum and the Explanatory Notes to the Bill have little to 
say about that existing legislation beyond high-level statements such as the 
following:
• the sale and supply of the “huge number” of products to which the Bill 
applies is “underpinned by an extensive body of law”9;
• “the legal landscape is complex and technical, primarily set out in 
secondary legislation and based on assimilated law”10 (the body of UK 
domestic law derived originally from EU obligations); and
• “The product regulatory framework in the UK covers most consumer 
products, for example toys and cosmetics, and a significant number 
of industrial products too, such as lifts and pressure equipment. The 
overwhelming majority of this legislation is assimilated law, transposed 
into UK law while the UK was part of the EU and then assimilated 
following the EU exit process”11.
24. The Memorandum fails to identify the legislation in question or to explain 
what it does or its significance in policy terms. It even fails to explain in any 
detail the content and significance in policy terms of the primary legislation 
that could be replaced by regulations made under the Bill.
25. This scarcity of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make. This gives rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might be considered 
sufficiently important in policy terms to instead merit inclusion in the 
Bill itself, where they would be subject to the much greater Parliamentary 
scrutiny afforded to primary legislation.
26. This most obviously applies to those aspects of the existing regulatory 
regime that are contained in primary legislation that the Bill allows to be 
replaced and repealed by product regulations12. The fact that the Bill allows 
this merits a full explanation and a compelling justification. Yet although the 
Memorandum states that the repeal of that primary legislation by regulations 
is sufficiently important to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny, it offers no 
explanation as to why matters that have hitherto been considered sufficiently 
9 At para 2 of the Memorandum.
10 At para 13 of the Memorandum. “Assimilated law” includes (a) post-EU Exit UK versions of EU 
Regulations, and (b) UK statutory instruments made to give effect to EU obligations.
11 At para 5 of the Explanatory Notes.
12 Consumer Protection Act 1987, parts  2, 4 and 5; Gun Barrel Proof Acts 1868 to  1978 ; Consumer 
Rights Act 2015, section 77  and schedule 5 .
5
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in primary legislation should be 
left to regulations at all.
27.  It is also unclear whether there may be aspects of the regulatory regime that 
are currently contained in assimilated law (the body of UK domestic law 
derived originally from EU obligations) that might be considered sufficiently 
important in policy terms to merit inclusion in the Bill rather than in 
regulations.
28. Even where that assimilated law is contained in subordinate legislation, 
that is not by itself a good reason for any replacement provisions also to be 
contained in subordinate legislation. This is a point that we have made in 
several previous reports, including our report on the Medicines and Medical 
Devices Bill13, where the Government sought to justify wide skeleton powers 
on the basis that it was replacing one set of regulations with another. In that 
case, we emphasised14 that the existing regulations had been made under the 
special power in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972, the 
purpose of which was to allow EU law requirements to be implemented in 
UK domestic law by subordinate legislation - and that the power in section 
2(2) was subject to “a critical constraint”: it gave Ministers “power to make 
laws giving effect to EU law–not simply power to make laws that Ministers 
may wish to make”.
29. In our report on the Energy Bill, we stated that:
“the fact that provisions governing a subject area are currently contained 
in regulations made under section 2(2) of the European Communities 
Act 1972 does not by itself make it appropriate to use a regulation-
making power to amend and extend the provisions in that subject area. 
Instead, the proposal to confer regulation-making powers needs to be 
justified on its own merits, particularly where, as in these cases, they are 
framework powers which are therefore capable of providing a very broad 
scope of regulation-making powers to the Secretary of State.”15
30. The justification given in the Memorandum for the powers in clauses 1, 2, 3 
and 9 is that:
• aspects of the regulatory regime for products may need to be updated 
swiftly and frequently (for example “to respond to emerging hazards 
and risks, and developments in technology and scientific or technical 
understanding”16); and
• the powers will give Ministers the flexibility to legislate to align UK law 
with EU rules or to diverge from those rules.
31. We consider that, whilst these may be reasonable arguments for the Bill 
conferring powers that allow some aspects of the regulatory regime for 
products to be provided for in delegated legislation, the Government have 
not explained why the Bill goes so much further and instead provides for 
almost all of the substance of that regulatory regime to be provided for by 
Ministers in regulations under the new powers, with little or nothing to be 
settled under the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions.
13 19th Report  (Session 2019–21, HL Paper 109).
14 At para 20.
15 11th Report  (Session 2022–23, HL Paper 66), para 44.
16 At para 38.
6
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
32. The concern with powers of this kind is that they give Ministers maximum 
flexibility to choose the direction that the law will take. Ministers could, 
should they so wish, use these powers as a mechanism for ensuring that 
UK domestic law on product regulation is completely aligned with EU law. 
Alternatively, they could use the powers to provide for UK domestic law to 
diverge in significant respects from EU law. Whatever direction Ministers 
may choose to take the law in - and however significant in policy terms that 
may be–it is to be done by means of delegated legislation that will be subject 
only to a relatively low level of parliamentary scrutiny.
33. The Memorandum also fails to explain why  the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirements for consultation, for criteria to be met or for 
meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied - and it fails to say whether this 
represents a divergence from the existing regulatory regime. We note with 
interest that at least one existing regulation-making power that the powers to 
make product regulations are designed to replace (the power of the Secretary 
of State under section 11 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 to make 
“safety regulations” with respect to goods) is, unlike the new powers, subject 
to consultation requirements.
 Power to set the ingredients of criminal offences
34. Clause 3(9)(a) is particularly worthy of mention. It provides that product 
regulations may create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences for such 
things as non-compliance with product regulations or obstruction of, or 
failure to assist or co-operate with, a product safety inspector.
35. Our Guidance for Departments on the role and requirements of the 
Committee states as follows17:
“Where the ingredients of a criminal offence are to be set by delegated 
legislation, the Committee would expect a compelling justification”.
The Memorandum explains18 why it considers the power in clause 3(9)(a) to 
be sufficiently significant to merit affirmative procedure scrutiny but it fails 
to provide a justification for taking the power in the first place.
36. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for products; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 1, 2, 3 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
 Clauses 5, 6 and 9—powers to make metrology regulations
37. Clause 5 gives the Secretary of State power to make “metrology regulations”, 
about:
17 Guidance for Departments (November 2021), para 12: https://committees.parliament.uk/
publications/8225/documents/84262 /default/
18 At para 54.
7
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
• the units of measurement that are used to express quantities (whether 
of goods19 or other things), including how such units of measurement 
must or may be calculated;
• the quantities in which goods must or may be marketed; and
• the units of measurement that must or may be used to express such 
quantities.
38. Metrology regulations may impose requirements in relation to matters 
including:
• the marketing or packaging of goods;
• the monitoring, assessment and verification of the quantities in which 
goods are marketed and the units of measurement used to express such 
quantities; and
• the retention of documents and information.
39. Clause 6 makes provision with respect to the enforcement of metrology 
regulations. The provision made is identical in all material respects to that 
made in clause 3 with respect to the enforcement of product regulations.
40. Clause 9 provides that, in consequence of any provision made by the Bill or 
by metrology regulations, such regulations may repeal provision made by 
Parts 2, 4 and 5 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, the Gun Barrel Proof 
Acts 1868 to 1978, section 77 of, and Schedule 5 to, the Consumer Rights 
Act 2015 and the Weights and Measures Act 1985.
41. The power to make metrology regulations is subject to the negative procedure 
save where it is exercised for purposes equivalent to those specified in 
paragraph 17 above with respect to the power to make product regulations.
42. Clauses 5, 6 and 9 are another example of “skeleton legislation”. They 
contain almost no substance about units of measurement and the quantities 
in which goods must or may be marketed. Instead, they confer very broad 
powers to make such provision by regulations.
43. We consider that the concerns set out above with respect to the powers to 
make product regulations apply equally to the powers to make metrology 
regulations, namely that:
• almost all of the substance is left to regulations;
• skeleton legislation is only justifiable in the most exceptional 
circumstances and the Memorandum fails to provide the full 
justification that we expect where a Bill takes this approach;
• the Memorandum fails to adequately explain the content—and 
significance in policy terms—of the existing legislation that could be 
amended and indeed replaced by metrology regulations;
• this lack of explanation makes it difficult to understand the significance 
of the changes that the powers could be used to make, giving rise to 
uncertainty as to whether there may be aspects of the existing regulatory 
19 “Goods” are broadly defined in clause 5(4) as “tangible items (including packaging or labels)”.
8
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
regime that the Bill leaves to be provided for in regulations which might 
be considered sufficiently important to merit inclusion in the Bill;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace and repeal primary 
legislation merits a full explanation and a compelling justification but 
the Memorandum fails to provide this;
• the power to use metrology regulations to replace all aspects of the 
existing regulatory regime that are currently contained in assimilated 
law merits a full explanation and justification but the Memorandum 
fails to provide this;
• the Government argues that aspects of the regulatory regime may need 
to be updated swiftly and frequently but they have not explained why 
the Bill provides for almost all of the substance of that regime to be 
provided for in regulations, with little or nothing to be settled under 
the fuller scrutiny given to Bill provisions;
• the Memorandum fails to explain why the exercise of the powers is 
unfettered by any requirement for consultation, for criteria to be met or 
for meaningful pre-conditions to be satisfied; and
• the Memorandum fails to provide a justification for the power in clause 
6(9)(a) to create, or widen the scope of, criminal offences.
44. We consider that:
• the Government have failed to provide a convincing justification 
for the inclusion of skeleton clauses in the Bill that give Ministers 
such wide powers to re-write in regulations the substance of the 
regulatory regime for metrology; and
• accordingly, the delegations of power in clauses 5, 6 and 9 are 
inappropriate and should be removed from the Bill.
9
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 WATER (SPECIAL MEASURES) BILL [HL]
45. There is nothing in this Bill which we would wish to draw to the attention of 
the House.
 PROPERTY (DIGITAL ASSETS ETC) BILL [HL]
46. This Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 ASYLUM SUPPORT (PRESCRIBED PERIOD) BILL [HL]
47. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 CONSUMER PRODUCTS (CONTROL OF BIOCIDES) BILL [HL]
48. There is nothing in the private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 EDUCATION (ASSEMBLIES) BILL [HL]
49. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS (PUBLIC AUTHORITIES) BILL 
[HL]
50. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 MORTGAGE PRISONERS INQUIRY BILL [HL]
51. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 PUBLIC AUTHORITY ALGORITHMIC AND AUTOMATED 
DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS BILL [HL]
52. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 REFUGEES (FAMILY REUNION) BILL [HL]
53. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
 UNIVERSAL CREDIT (STANDARD ALLOWANCE 
ENTITLEMENT OF CARE LEAVERS) BILL [HL]
54. There is nothing in this private member’s Bill which we would wish to draw 
to the attention of the House.
10
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
 COMPLICATIONS FROM ABORTIONS (ANNUAL REPORT) 
BILL [HL]
55. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 IMPRISONMENT FOR PUBLIC PROTECTION (RE-
SENTENCING) BILL [HL]
56. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 LISTED INVESTMENT COMPANIES (CLASSIFICATION ETC) 
BILL [HL]
57. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 NON-CONSENSUAL SEXUALLY EXPLICIT IMAGES AND 
VIDEOS (OFFENCES) BILL [HL]
58. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 PALESTINE STATEHOOD (RECOGNITION) BILL [HL]
59. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
 WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY BILL [HL]
60. This private member’s Bill contains no delegations of legislative power.
11
DELEGATED POWERS AND REGULATORY REFORM COMMITTEE
APPENDIX 1:  MEMBER’S INTERESTS
Committee Members’ registered interests may be examined in the online Register 
of Lords’ Interests at https://www.parliament.uk/hlregister . The Register may also 
be inspected in the Parliamentary Archives.
Attendance
The meeting was attended by:
Lord Carlile of Berriew, Baroness Chakrabarti , Baroness Finlay of 
Llandaff, Lord Goodman of Wycombe, the Earl of Lindsay, Lord 
McLoughlin (Chair) and Lord Rooker.
Declarations of interest
For the business taken at the meeting on 9 October 2024, Members declared the 
following interests:
Lord Carlile of Berriew
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Chakrabarti
No relevant interests to declare
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff
Ex-member of the stakeholder board for First Great Western
Lord Goodman of Wycombe
No relevant interests to declare
Earl of Lindsay
Chairman, United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS)
President, Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI)
Lord McLoughlin (Chairman)
Chair, Transport for North
Lord Rooker
No relevant interests to declare



Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act (Review)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Review:  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 85 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to review,  and publish  a report  on, the 
merits  of increasing  the relevant  statutory  sum  under  the Vaccine  Damage 
Payments  Act 1979  for all claims  since  1 January  2020  by an amount 
representing  the amount  of inflation  since  2007. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Review:  Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  carry  out a review  of the merits  of increasing  the 
relevant  statutory  sum  under  the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979  (“the 
51979  Act”)  for all claims  since  1 January  2020  by an amount  representing  the 
amount  of inflation  since  2007. 
(2) In making  an assessment  of the amount  representing  the amount  of inflation 
since  2007  for the purposes  of carrying  out the review,  the Secretary  of State 
must  have  regard  to the general  index  for consumer  prices  published  by the 
Statistics  Board. 
10 (3) In carrying  out the review,  the Secretary  of State  must  consult— 
(a) people  who  have  made  claims  under  the 1979  Act and their  families; 
(b) persons  representing  those  who  have  made  claims  under  the 1979  Act; 
(c) UKCVFamily; 
(d) patient  safety  groups;  and 
15 (e) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  relevant. 
(4) Within  six months  of the passing  of this Act, the Secretary  of State  must— 
(a) publish  a report  of the review,  and 
(b) lay a copy  of the report  before  Parliament. 
(5) 
20For the purposes  of this section,  “relevant  statutory  sum”  has the same 
meaning  as in section  1 (payments  to persons  severely  disabled  by vaccination) 
of the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979. 
59/1 Bill 85 1 Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act (Review)  Bill 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) 
5This  Act may  be cited  as the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act (Review)  Act 
2024. Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act (Review)  Bill 2 
Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act (Review)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on the Secretary  of State  to review,  and publish  a report  on, the merits  of 
increasing  the relevant  statutory  sum  under  the Vaccine  Damage  Payments  Act 1979 
for all claims  since  1 January  2020  by an amount  representing  the amount  of inflation 
since  2007. 
Presented  by Sir Christopher  Chope 
supported  by Sir Jeremy  Wright . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   21st October  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 85



Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 
EXPLANA TORY NOTES 
Explanatory  notes  to the Bill, prepared  by Rt Hon Philip  Dunne  MP, are published  separately 
as Bill 16-EN. 
58/1 Bill 16 
Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
CONTENTS 
1 Amendment  of the Water  Industry  Act 1991 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
58/1 Bill 16 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on water  companies  to ensure  that untreated  sewage  is not 
discharged  into rivers  and other  inland  waters;  and for connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the Queen’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice 
and consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Amendment  of the Water  Industry  Act 1991 
(1) The Water  Industry  Act 1991  is amended  as follows. 
(2) After  Chapter  I (appointment  of undertakers)  insert— 
“CHAPTER 1ZA 
5 DUTY ON WATER COMPANIES: UNTREATED SEWAGE 
17ZA Duty  on water  companies:  untreated  sewage  (England) 
(1) A water  company  in England  must  take all reasonable  steps  to ensure 
that untreated  sewage  is not discharged  into inland  waters. 
(2) 
10 The Secretary  of State,  the Authority  and the Environment  Agency 
must  exercise  their  respective  functions  under  this and any other  Act 
to seek  to secure  compliance  with  that duty. 
(3) In this Chapter,  “water  company”  means  any company  holding  an 
appointment  under  Chapter  I of this Part (appointment  of undertakers). 
17ZB Requirements  in connection  with  section  17ZA  duty 
15 Reasonable  steps  to be taken  by water  companies  in accordance  with 
the duty  under  section  17ZA  include,  but are not limited  to— 
(a) maintaining  and publishing  a register  of combined  sewer 
overflows  (CSOs)  and any other  sewer  catchment  assets  from 
20 which  discharges  of treated  or untreated  sewage  may  be made 
to inland  waters; 
(b) publishing  biannual  reports  on the operational  status  of those 
assets; 
58/1 Bill 16 1 Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 
(c) progressively  installing  capacity  to monitor  continuously  all 
discharges  of treated  or untreated  sewage  into inland  waters 
from  those  assets  and publishing  the data  so obtained; 
(d) 
5 monitoring  and publishing  reports  on the quality  and duration 
of discharges  made  from  CSOs; 
(e) as part of drainage  and wastewater  management  plans,  setting 
out steps  to ensure  that— 
(i) biological  or nature-based  treatments  are progressively 
10 installed  where  practicable  and made  operational  at 
wastewater  treatment  works  discharging  to inland  waters 
that do not otherwise  provide  for the tertiary  treatment 
of effluent;  and 
(ii) reliance  upon  CSOs  is progressively  reduced;  and 
(f) 
15 any requirements  specified  by the Secretary  of State  under 
section  17ZC(2)(b). 
17ZC Report  on measures  to assist  water  companies  in fulfilling  section 
17ZA  duty 
(1) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a report  on measures 
to assist  water  companies  in fulfilling  the duty  in section  17ZA— 
20 (a) within  one year  of this section  coming  into force;  and 
(b) in every  calendar  year  after  the year  in which  that first report 
is published. 
(2) Each  report  under  subsection  (1) must,  for each  of the measures  listed 
in subsections  (3) to (7) set out— 
25 (a) the Secretary  of State’s  assessment  of the contribution  that 
measure  could  make  to reducing  treated  and untreated  sewage 
discharges  to inland  waters  in England;  and 
(b) what  steps,  if any,  the Secretary  of State  intends  to take in 
30 connection  with  that measure,  including  any specific 
requirements  on water  companies  in relation  to their  duty  under 
section  17ZA. 
(3) Measures  intended  to separate  surface  water  and sewage  collection 
including— 
(a) 
35 requiring  all new  developments  of more  than  two residential 
or commercial  buildings  to have  separate  surface  water  and 
sewage  collection  systems; 
(b) bringing  Schedule  3 of the Flood  and Water  Management  Act 
2010  into force  for England; 
(c) 
40 requiring  all new surface  water  collection  systems  to incorporate 
sustainable  urban  drainage  systems  (SUDS); 
(d) requiring  all major  retrofitting  or redevelopment  projects  of 
buildings  where  practicable  to incorporate  SUDS  and separate 
surface  water  and sewage  collection  systems;  and 
(e) 
45 amending  strategic  guidance  to the Authority  to require  it to 
facilitate  capital  expenditure  on— Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 2 
(i) nature-based  drainage  systems,  such  as integrated 
constructed  wetlands,  and 
(ii) SUDS. 
(4) 
5 Measures  intended  to reduce  the volume  of sewage  produced  by 
domestic  properties,  including— 
(a) requiring  by 2025  all domestic  properties  to have  a metered 
water  supply  when  being  leased,  rented  or sold; 
(b) requiring  the Environment  Agency  to maintain  a register  of all 
private  sewage  treatment  systems; 
10 (c) amending  Building  Regulations  to require  efficient  processing 
of grey  water  (sullage); 
(d) requiring  all new domestic  and commercial  outside  ground-level 
surfaces  where  practicable  to be made  from  permeable  materials; 
and 
15 (e) introducing  water  efficiency  labelling  on household  appliances. 
(5) Measures  to reduce  the polluting  content  of sewage,  including— 
(a) establishing  a regulatory  standard  for flushable  products; 
(b) prohibiting  the use of plastics  in sanitary  products  and wet 
wipes; 
20 (c) reducing  the use of microplastics  in flushable  products;  and 
(d) prohibiting  the disposal  of fats and oils into sewers  by food 
service  establishments. 
(6) Measures  intended  to reduce  the impact  of CSO  discharges,  including— 
(a) 
25 requiring  the Environment  Agency  to work  with  water 
companies  in reducing  harmful  discharges  from  CSOs;  and 
(b) directing  the Environment  Agency  to research  the effects  of 
CSO  discharges  on water  quality  in inland  waters  and water 
bodies. 
(7) 
30 Measures  intended  to promote  improvements  in bathing  water  quality 
in inland  waters,  including— 
(a) setting  statutory  targets  for the increase  in the number  of bathing 
waters  classified  as “good”  or “excellent”; 
(b) designating  a minimum  of two inland  bathing  waters,  to include 
35 one in-river  inland  bathing  water,  in each  water  company  area 
for each  year  of any price  review  period;  and  
(c) amending  strategic  guidance  to the Authority  to require  it to 
facilitate  capital  expenditure  on the improvement  of water 
quality  in inland  bathing  waters. 
17ZD Reports  on performance  against  section  17ZA  duty 
40 (1) The Secretary  of State  must  lay before  Parliament  a report  on the 
performance  of water  companies  against  the duty  in section  17ZA— 
(a) within  one year  of this section  coming  into force;  and 3 Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 
(b) in every  calendar  year  after  the year  in which  that first report 
is published. 
(2) Reports  under  this section  must  include  assessments  of— 
(a) 
5 the performance  of the sewerage  assets  of each  water  company; 
and 
(b) the quantities  of treated  and untreated  sewage  discharged  into 
inland  waters  from  those  assets.” 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales. 
10 (2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
(3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Act 2020. Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 4 
Sewage  (Inland  Waters)  Bill 
[AS INTRODUCED] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Place  a duty  on water  companies  to ensure  that untreated  sewage  is not discharged 
into rivers  and other  inland  waters;  and for connected  purposes. 
Presented  by Philip  Dunne 
supported  by Theo  Clarke , Fay Jones , 
Caroline  Lucas , Scott  Mann , Mr Andrew  Mitchell , 
Anne  Marie  Morris , Stephanie  Peacock , 
Julian  Sturdy , Derek  Thomas , Sir Charles  Walker 
and Bill Wiggin . 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,  5th February  2020 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2020 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
58/1 Bill 16



Water  (Special  Measures)  Bill [HL] 
COMMONS  AMENDMENTS 
[The page and line references  are to Bill 141, the Bill as first printed  for the Commons ] 
Clause  1 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  1 
1_ Clause  1, page  2, leave  out lines  4 to 8 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  2 
2_ Clause  1, page  4, line 33, leave  out subsections  (5) and (6) 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  3 
Clause  10 
3_ Clause  10, page  15, leave  out lines  6 and 7 and insert— 
“(a) sections  205A  and 205B  of the Water  Industry  Act 1991  (pollution  incident 
reduction  plans  and implementation  reports), ” 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  4 
After  Clause  11 
4_ After  Clause  11, insert  the following  Clause— 
“Consumer  charges 
Special  provision  in charges  schemes 
(1) The Water  Industry  Act 1991  is amended  as set out in subsections  (2) and (3). 
59/1 HL Bill 66 
(2) In section  143A(3)(b),  after  “regulations”  insert  “or, in the case of regulations  made 
by the Secretary  of State  (rather  than  the Welsh  Ministers),  by which  that 
entitlement  is otherwise  to be established”. 
(3) After  section  143A  insert— 
“143AA Special  provision  under  section  143A:  financial  arrangements 
(1) Subsection  (2) applies  if regulations  under  section  143A  impose  on relevant 
undertakers  whose  areas  are wholly  or mainly  in England  requirements 
of the sort described  in subsection  (2)(d)  of that section. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations  establish  a scheme  for the 
purpose  of distributing  among  the relevant  undertakers  that are subject 
to the requirements  all or part of the costs  incurred  by them  in complying 
with  the requirements  (with  the distribution  to be on such  basis  as is 
provided  for in the regulations). 
(3) The scheme  may  operate  by way  of— 
(a) direct  payments  between  relevant  undertakers,  or 
(b) payments  into and out of a fund  established  and maintained  under 
the regulations. 
(4) Subsections  (5) and (6) apply  if a scheme  is established  under  subsection 
(2). 
(5) If the Secretary  of State  or the Authority  makes  price  control  provision, 
they  must  design  the provision  with  a view  to not preventing  the 
passing-on  of costs  as described  in subsection  (7). 
(6) The Secretary  of State  may  by regulations— 
(a) make  provision  about  how  the Authority  is to comply  with 
subsection  (5); 
(b) modify  the effect  of any price  control  provision  made  by the 
Authority  with  a view  to enabling  the passing-on  of costs  as 
described  in subsection  (7). 
(7) The passing-on  of costs  occurs  when  a relevant  undertaker  is able to recoup 
its relevant  net costs  by charging  additional  amounts  under  section  142(1). 
(8) An undertaker’s  relevant  net costs  are the total  of its costs  incurred  in— 
(a) complying  with  the requirements  referred  to in subsection  (1), and 
(b) complying  with  the requirements  of the scheme, 
less any payments  it receives  under  the scheme. 
(9) In this section,  “price  control  provision”  means  provision  made  by or 
under— 
(a) regulations  under  section  143A, 
(b) rules  under  section  143B,  or 
(c) a condition  of a relevant  undertaker's  appointment  under  Chapter 
1 of Part 2, 
that restricts  the amount  that may  be charged  by a relevant  undertaker 
under  section  142(1). Water  (Special  Measures)  Bill [HL] 2 
(10) Where  a determination  within  section  12(3)  (determination  by CMA 
provided  for by undertaker’s  appointment)  involves  the making  of price 
control  provision,  subsections  (5) and (6) apply  in relation  to the CMA  as 
they  apply  in relation  to the Authority. 
143AB Special  provision  under  section  143A:  consultation 
(1) This  section  applies  to— 
(a) regulations  under  section  143A  that,  in relation  to relevant 
undertakers  whose  areas  are wholly  or mainly  in England,  make 
provision  of the sort described  in subsection  (2)(d)  of that section, 
and 
(b) regulations  under  section  143AA . 
(2) Before  making  regulations  to which  this section  applies,  the Secretary  of 
State  must  (subject  to subsection  (3)) consult— 
(a) the Authority, 
(b) the relevant  undertakers  to which  the regulations  would  apply, 
and 
(c) such  other  persons  as the Secretary  of State  considers  appropriate. 
(3) But the Secretary  of State  does  not have  to consult  if— 
(a) the regulations  only  amend  earlier  regulations,  and 
(b) the Secretary  of State  considers  that the amendments  are sufficiently 
minor  that consultation  is unnecessary. ” 
(4) The Digital  Economy  Act 2017  is amended  as set out in subsections  (5) and (6). 
(5) In section  38 (disclosure  of information  to water  and sewerage  undertakers)— 
(a) in subsection  (2), for “people  living  in water  poverty”  substitute  “eligible 
people”; 
(b) after  subsection  (9) insert— 
“(9A) A person  is “eligible”  for the purposes  of this section  and section 
39— 
(a) if the person  is living  in water  poverty,  or 
(b) in the application  of the sections  to a water  or sewerage 
undertaker  for an area which  is wholly  or mainly  in 
England,  if the person  is among  those  for whom  special 
provision  is required  to be made  by regulations  within 
subsection  (3)(a). ” 
(6) In section  39 (disclosure  of information  by water  and sewerage  undertakers),  in 
subsection  (2), for “people  living  in water  poverty”  substitute  “eligible  people  (see 
section  38(9A) )”.” 3 Water  (Special  Measures)  Bill [HL] 
Clause  15 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  5 
5_ Clause  15, page  21, line 24, at end insert— 
“(aa) section  1 (rules  about  remuneration  and governance); ” 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  6 
6_ Clause  15, page  21, line 34, leave  out paragraph  (a) 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  7 
7_ Clause  15, page  22, line 7, leave  out paragraph  (a) 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  8 
8_ Clause  15, page  22, line 21, at end insert— 
“(aa) section  (Special  provision  in charges  schemes); ” 
COMMONS  AMENDMENT  9 
9_ Clause  15, page  22, line 40, leave  out subsection  (11) Water  (Special  Measures)  Bill [HL] 4 
Water  (Special  Measures)  Bill [HL] 
COMMONS  AMENDMENTS 
29 January  2025 
© Parliamentary  copyright  2025,  House  of Lords 
This  publication  may  be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at www  .parliam 
ent.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF LORDS 
59/1 HL Bill 66



Women,  Peace  and Security  Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
CONTENTS 
1 Duty  to have  regard  to national  action  plan  on women,  peace  and security 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
59/1 Bill 154 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Support  women  in UK-sponsored  and supported  conflict  prevention,  peace 
processes,  mediation  and diplomatic  delegations;  to ensure  systematic  gender 
consideration  and responsiveness  in UK foreign  and defence  policy;  and for 
connected  purposes. 
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by and with  the advice  and 
consent  of the Lords  Spiritual  and Temporal,  and Commons,  in this present 
Parliament  assembled,  and by the authority  of the same,  as follows:— 
1 Duty  to have  regard  to national  action  plan  on women,  peace  and security 
(1) In this Act, the “national  action  plan”  means  the action  plan  that has been 
for the time  being  adopted  by the United  Kingdom  for meeting  commitments 
5under  Resolution  1325  adopted  by the Security  Council  of the United  Nations 
on 31 October  2000  and which  relates  to the following  resolutions  of the 
Security  Council  on women,  peace  and security— 
(a) resolution  1820  adopted  on 19 June  2008; 
(b) resolution  1888  adopted  on 30 September  2009; 
(c) resolution  1889  adopted  on 5 October  2009; 
10 (d) resolution  1960  adopted  on 16 December  2010; 
(e) resolution  2106  adopted  on 24 June  2013; 
(f) resolution  2122  adopted  on 18 October  2013; 
(g) resolution  2242  adopted  on 13 October  2015; 
(h) resolution  2467  adopted  on 23 April  2019; 
15 (i) resolution  2493  adopted  on 29 October  2019; 
(j) any future  related  resolutions. 
(2) The Secretary  of State  must  annually  lay a report  before  Parliament  on progress 
made  in relation  to the national  action  plan  (the “NAP  annual  report”),  which 
must  refer  to the Preventing  Sexual  Violence  in Conflict  Initiative. 
20 (3) The Secretary  of State  must  have  regard  to the national  action  plan,  the NAP 
annual  report,  and resolutions  mentioned  in subsection  (1), when  formulating 
or implementing  the policy  of the Government  of the United  Kingdom  in 
relation  to foreign  affairs,  defence  or related  matters. 
(4) The Secretary  of State  must  in particular  have  regard  to the need  for— 
59/1 Bill 154 1 Women,  Peace  and Security  Bill [HL] 
(a) commitment  to systematic  gender  consideration  and responsiveness 
in all foreign  policy,  including  diplomacy,  development,  security, 
humanitarian  aid and international  presence, 
(b) 
5the inclusion  of an appropriate  number  of women  in the formulation 
and implementation  of such  policy  so as to ensure  gender  equality 
and the empowerment  of women  and all individuals  impacted  by 
gendered  violence  in decision-making, 
(c) commitment  to gender  equality  and the guarantee  of women's  human 
10rights,  and to protecting  the defenders  of such  rights  in line with  the 
obligations  in the Convention  on the Elimination  of All Forms  of 
Discrimination  against  Women, 
(d) justice  and reparation  for survivors  of conflict-related  sexual  violence, 
including  criminal  accountability  for perpetrators  of such  violence, 
(e) 
15systematic  recognition  and participation  of sufficient  women  in 
delegations  to support  peace  processes  that are supported  by the 
United  Kingdom  including  processes  led by the United  Nations, 
including  women  from  minority  ethnic  groups,  women  with  disabilities 
and women  who  may  be discriminated  against  on the basis  of their 
sexual  orientation  or gender  identity, 
20 (f) gender  and inclusion  mediation  experts  to be included  in diplomatic 
missions  relating  to peace  processes, 
(g) appropriate  pre-deployment  training  for all staff  on peace-keeping 
missions  including  on human  rights,  women’s  rights  and gender-based 
rights, 
25 (h) commitment  to support  local  women’s  peacebuilding  organisations 
through  funding,  and 
(i) responding  to the needs  of survivors  of conflict-related  sexual  violence 
in a survivor-centred  manner. 
(5) 
30Where  the United  Kingdom  is participating  in a multi-national  organisation, 
including  the United  Nations,  the Secretary  of State  must  seek  to ensure  that 
that organisation  has regard  to the matters  set out in subsection  (4). 
2 Extent,  commencement  and short  title 
(1) This  Act extends  to England  and Wales,  Scotland  and Northern  Ireland. 
(2) This  Act comes  into force  on the day on which  it is passed. 
35 (3) This  Act may  be cited  as the Women,  Peace  and Security  Act 2024. Women,  Peace  and Security  Bill [HL] 2 
Women,  Peace  and Security  Bill [HL] 
[AS BROUGHT  FROM  THE  LORDS] 
A 
BILL 
TO 
Support  women  in UK-sponsored  and supported  conflict  prevention,  peace  processes, 
mediation  and diplomatic  delegations;  to ensure  systematic  gender  consideration  and 
responsiveness  in UK foreign  and defence  policy;  and for connected  purposes. 
Brought  from  the House  of Lords  on 
16th December  2024 
Ordered,  by The House  of Commons , to be 
Printed,   17th  December  2024 . 
© Parliamentary  copyright  House  of Commons  2024 
This publication  may be reproduced  under  the terms  of the Open  Parliament  Licence,  which  is published  at 
www  .parliament.uk/site-information/copyright 
PUBLISHED  BY THE  AUTHORITY  OF THE  HOUSE  OF COMMONS 
59/1 Bill 154